



















































Hansard: February 28, 1957


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

11th Day 

 

Thursday, February 28, 1957 
The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

Debate on Address-In-Reply 
 

The House resumed from Wednesday, February 27, 1957, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion 

of Mr. Wood (Swift Current) for the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. F.E. Foley (Turtleford: — Mr. Speaker, I would first of all like to congratulate you, sir, upon your 

election to your high office. The fact that you have received the good wishes of all previous speakers 

indicates their confidence in your integrity and ability. I would also like to congratulate the mover and 

the seconder of the Address-in-Reply, and all members of the Legislature, especially the new members, 

who like myself, are speaking for the first time, this year. 

 

I would like to take just a few moments to comment on some rather surprising statements that were 

heard in this Assembly yesterday. The hon. member from The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) waxed loud and 

long in his regret at the administration of two very fine movements in this province, namely, the 

P.F.R.A. and the P.F.A.A. I want to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that any action of our Federal Liberal 

Government in which the total expenditures to the farmers in Saskatchewan in the year ending March 

31, 1956, were $49, 758,000 is not something to be taken lightly. I wonder if the hon. member from The 

Battlefords is aware that the total P.F.A.A. payment in the province of Saskatchewan until the end of 

May, 1956 totalled very close to $1 million. Certainly while the administration of these two great 

assistances to the farmer may not be all that he desires, I feel sure that the farmers of The Battlefords, as 

well as the farmers of many areas in Saskatchewan, appreciate that great assistance. 

 

I am sure the hon. Minister sitting opposite representing the Kelsey constituency (Hon. Mr. 

Brockelbank) appreciated $139,057 in this constituency last year. I am also confident that the hon. 

member from Elrose (Mr. M.J. Willis) certainly appreciated the amount of $108,622 last year. And I 

could go on. Now, there may be some reason for this gentleman’s grievances, since upon looking at The 

Battlefords, I find they received none; but I want to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if that has been the 

attitude of this hon. 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
2 

gentleman for some time, then possibly it is not hard to understand why they received none. 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Is that right? 

 

Mr. Foley: — Seriously, Mr. Speaker, I believe the hon. member, along with many of us, should be 

thankful that the farmers in his area were prosperous enough not to require these payments. I also want 

to point out that, under the P.F.R.A., 120,000 acres in 47 Saskatchewan communities have been irrigated 

since 1935, and the total acreage irrigated in this province in this 22-year period was 235,785 acres. 

Dugouts, small dams and community projects number 32,000 were built. Finally, 56 community 

pastures with a total acreage of 1,571,506 acres, were given assistance. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a word about the remarks of the hon. Minister of Agriculture 

(Hon. Mr. Nollet) yesterday, in respect to the farm problem in Saskatchewan. I want to suggest that we 

certainly are all aware, very much aware, of the serious problems facing the farmers in Saskatchewan 

today. There is no question about it. We are in a very critical period, and our actions here in the province 

of Saskatchewan will be watched very closely in the next few years, because the economy of Canada 

depends a great deal on the farm economy of this province. I will have more to say to the hon. Minister 

in a few moments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the time devoted to me on the radio today, having associated myself in my 

congratulations to you, sir, to all the members of the Legislature, and to the new members, I would like 

at this time to express my sincere thanks and appreciation to the good people of the Turtleford 

constituency, who have given me the honour and the privilege of representing them in our Legislative 

Assembly. After listening to the debate thus far, I am beginning to realize the heavy responsibilities that 

a member assumes when he enters this Assembly, and I want to assure all my constituents in Turtleford 

that I will discharge my duties to them to the very best of my ability. 

 

We are very proud of the area which I have the privilege of representing. Last year, you may recall that 

Margaret George, a young lady and a school teacher from the little town of Mervin, was successful in 

throwing a javelin 145 feet seven inches for a new Canadian record, and was one of three find 

Saskatchewan girls who represented us, with dignity, at the Olympic Games in Australia. While she was 

not successful in winning her event, I am sure that she did more the province of Saskatchewan and the 

Dominion of Canada than a whole host of ambassadors. 

 

I am fortunate in living in an area with many tourist attractions. We have two very fine fishing lakes in 

my area – Turtle Lake and Chitek Lake – both lakes well stocked with whitefish and game fish. I would 

just like to suggest to the members of the Assembly, after the rigors of 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
3 

Government of over this spring, I would like on behalf of my constituents, to extend to all a very cordial 

invitation to come up and catch some of our very fine fish. I would also like to point out that, in the 

northern portion of my constituency we have big game hunting – moose, deer and elk – unparalleled by 

anything in northern Canada. I am sure that many of you already have joined with thousands who have 

come from all parts of western Canada to visit our game area. 

 

No. 4 Highway enters my constituency in the thriving little community of Glaslyn, which is more or less 

the hub of my constituency. From there we proceed north to the historic area of Midnight Lake, where, I 

might point out, was one of the first Royal Northwest Mounted Police posts in northern Saskatchewan. 

And on through our beautiful northern forests of spruce and jack pine to the community of Meadow 

Lake, and thence north to Beauval, Lac La Plonge, Uranium City and all that beautiful and unexplored 

area. 

 

I would at this time like to commend the Meadow-Lake-Uranium-City Freightways who, in spite of the 

many difficulties, both financially and topographically, have proceeded to build a winter road to that 

great mining centre which, we hope, will improve the economy of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would be amiss if I did not at this time say a word about a man who has ably represented that area in 

Ottawa for a number of years – my good friend, Mr. ‘Jack’ Harrison, member of Parliament for the 

constituency of Meadow Lake. He has done a great deal to sell our northern country, to boost our 

northern country, and while we know the fortunes of politics are often strange, I am very pleased to have 

this opportunity on behalf of his many friends of wishing him great success and good health for many 

years to come. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Foley: — I have suggested a few of the tourist attractions which you can find in my area. I want at 

this time to suggest to the hon. members opposite when consideration is being given to tourist bureau, to 

increasing our tourist administration, that our town of Glaslyn would be an excellent spot for a bureau, 

because it lies on the Junction of No. 4 Highway and No. 55 Highway at the cross-roads of that area, and 

on the doorstep of our great north. I am sure a bureau located there could do great service to our 

travelling public. 

 

I would like to say just one word further. We, over the years in our area, in spite of distance, difficult 

winter roads and problems of finance, have managed to maintain a high level of sporting activity, and I 

want to pay tribute this afternoon to the people, especially in the communities of Turtleford and Glaslyn, 

who have succeeded in building very fine hockey arenas and have succeeded in playing an important 

part in the Big Six Hockey League. 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
4 

True, it doesn’t rank in the headlines with many others, but they do have an excellent league, and the 

Turtleford Tigers and the Glaslyn Eskimos are names very familiar in my area. 

 

Finally, before leaving my constituency I would like to pay tribute at this time to my predecessors of all 

political creeds for the good work they have done, over the years, in promoting this area to the rest of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to say a word or two about some of the problems which the people of my constituency are 

faced with. Roads are still a problem in many areas in Saskatchewan. It is hoped that this Government, 

in the near future, will find it possible to extend No. 55 Highway through Paradise Hill, Frenchman’s 

Butte, Fort Pitt through to the Alberta highways, in order to give those people access that they now lack 

so badly. Another access road which is badly needed in my area is a road from the community of 

Turtleford through to the Maidstone ferry, to handle the very heavy flow of tourist traffic from Highway 

No. 5. Under the present system where these roads have been referred to the municipal grid, I contend 

that the municipalities in my area are far from being in the financial positions necessary to participate in 

a road-building scheme such as the Government suggests. One thing further. I think the time is soon 

approaching when a transportation system from east to west, from Prince Albert through Spiritwood, 

joining up with our north-south run at Glaslyn, would be much appreciated. 

 

One of the most pressing problems in the north is that of rural, or the lack of rural, telephones. I note that 

in the province to the west, the Government is now making special loans to rural telephone companies. I 

want to suggest that, in the areas throughout my constituency where there are practically no rural 

telephones at all, in spite of the fact that the area has been settled for 30 or 40 years and the people there 

are now pressing, and trying to organize, this Government, particularly the Department of Telephones, 

give them this much-needed assistance. 

 

In the field of public health we are fortunate in having four hospitals in my area – at Paradise Hill, 

Turtleford, Spiritwood and Leoville. I am very pleased that the good people of Speech from the Throne. 

Walburg, after a great many years of effort, are now on the verge of building their own hospital. I want 

to congratulate them for it. I would also ask the Government to consider some assistance for the hospital 

at Leoville which is badly overcrowded, and is attempting to handle a large Indian population. 

 

One last problem, that of flooding. The thriving community of Medstead has for 20 years attempted to 

get assistance in flooding problems. In the year 1948 the town was under water for several months, and 

again in 1955. Now, the village councils cannot possibly handle this problem, and they have been 

approaching the Conservation and Development Branch of this Government for sometime now for 

tangible assistance. I want to urge that 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
5 

some assistance be given in the near future. They cannot afford to pay large survey fees and large 

ditching and dredging fees. 

 

I want to say a word or two, this afternoon, coming back to the remarks of the hon. Minister of 

Agriculture, concerning the farm situation, and I want to suggest to the hon. Minister that we need to 

solve our farm problems, and we need to solve them now. We don’t want regrets about the Federal 

situation. We want the job done, and we want to have a concrete program. 

 

Opposition Members: —Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Foley: — The hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. McDonald) suggested a 16-point program which 

the Minister saw fit to scoff at – he never even mentioned it. Well, I have here just a two-point program; 

possibly he will consider this. I want to suggest that this Government enact legislation immediately to 

assist the young people of this province to buy farms for themselves. 

 

Opposition Members: —Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Foley: — It is all very well for the members opposite to suggest that we have two Federal agencies; 

but they know as well as I do that those agencies were never meant to assist young men who have very 

little, if any, capital. They were never meant for that purpose. I want to call his attention to what is 

happening in the province of Alberta this year . . . 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Or Manitoba . . . 

 

Mr. Foley: — . . . where a Board has been set up to give access . . . 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Any farmers in Manitoba? 

 

Mr. Foley: — . . . to a considerable sum of . . . I’m glad you mentioned that; just one moment and I will 

deal with Manitoba; . . . a considerable sum of long-term credit at low-interest rates. The farm purchase 

measure will be of great assistance to the young farmers of Alberta, and furthermore, the Farm Loan 

Board, which has been set up in the province of Alberta, will mean a new future for many young men 

who are being forced to leave our province every year. 

 

The hon. member opposite mentioned the province of Manitoba. I am very, very pleased that he did, 

because I have here a clipping which I cut out of ‘The Financial Post’ dated February 23, and this is 

what it says – (I want you to note carefully): 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
6 

“Manitoba farm income upped. The average net production per Manitoba farm last year was $4,600, a 

good average year.” 

 

Note that. This also I want you to note carefully: 

 

“This was in spite of a $20 million hailstorm, the worst in the province’s history, and estimated 

additional loss of about the same amount, another $20 million, caused by bad harvest weather.” 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

“This figure includes only the initial payment on grain. Only twice in recent years has it been 

exceeded.” 

 

There we have it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Opposition Members: —Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Foley: — Is the province of Manitoba under a different Federal Government than the province of 

Saskatchewan? I don’t think so. I think the difference is that Socialist Saskatchewan is not handling the 

agricultural problem as successfully as it is being handled in many other parts of Canada. 

 

Opposition Members: —Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Put that in your pipe and smoke it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — No smoking! 

 

Mr. Foley: — I want to say a word about farm electrification. I was hoping that the Throne Speech 

reference would contain some help for our hard-pressed farm population in rural electrification, but 

again nothing is said. I would like the hon. Minister of the Power Corporation to travel through some of 

our rural constituencies and note the great number of farm homes where there is no pole in the yard, 

although the line may be passing a few yards from the buildings. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — You should have seen it in 1944! 

 

Mr. Foley: — I would like to call his attention to the fact that a great many farmers today simply cannot 

afford rural electrification much as they would like to have it. I would like to call their attention once 

more to our Liberal platform. You have a little card, and I have a 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
7 

little card; and I want to assure the hon. members opposite that this little card would have placed our 

province in a much more enviable position economically today, than the little card of the gentleman 

opposite . . . 

 

Opposition Members: —Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Foley: — . . . because we promised the farmers in Saskatchewan extension to farms without initial 

cost. We meant it. It could have been done; and I want to assure you there wouldn’t be 40,000 farms 

electrified today; there would be more like 70,000. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown (Provincial Secretary): — My friend, there is only 60,000 in the province that you 

can take electricity to. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I have been discussing some of the problems we are faced with in this 

Legislature in the year 1957, but I have yet to come to what I consider to be the most serious one. We 

have reached a very critical period in the field of education in this province. Last year, we lost 597 

qualified (I might say, highly qualified) teachers in this province. It is true, the hon. Minister of 

Education (Hon. Mr. Lloyd) mentioned that in the same period we got back 200 teachers, but I want to 

suggest that the qualifications of the teachers we got back were certainly and (while I don’t have any 

specific figures) probably not qualified in the way that the teachers were whom we lost; and why would 

that be so? We are losing teachers in this province for two reasons . . . 

 

Mr. Kramer: —Make it one more. 

 

Mr. Foley: — For two reasons . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Don’t let the auctioneer upset you. 

 

Mr. Foley: — I’m sure that the hon. member from The Battlefords, after what he said yesterday, should 

have had very little to say today. 

 

Some Opposition Member: — Auction that one off! 

 

Mr. Foley: — To come back to what I was saying . . . we lost 597 highly qualified teachers. Why? 

Because we still stand fourth in the Dominion in average salary paid, and because our superannuation 

scheme still leaves much to be desired. I am not mentioning this for any other reason than that I feel that 

the Throne Speech should have dealt more specifically, and to a greater extent, with these two problems 

facing education today. School boards find themselves in the unenviable position of being unable to pay 

the salaries that they would like – and why are they unable to pay? Because the grants that this 

Government has made to education over the years have been highly inadequate. 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
8 

I want to say a word about this year. The hon. Premier told us at the Provincial-Municipal Conference 

that the education grant would be increased from $12.2 million to $16.6 million – an increase of $4.4 

million. This is a very substantial amount of money, I am fully aware. But what does this increase of 

$4.4 million do to the financial structure of our educational finance in this province? Does it places on a 

particular with other provinces in Canada? I want to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that in the year 1956, the total 

payments will be $65 million; operating payments will be $43 million approximately. In other words, 

this grant will still pay just 28.6 per cent of the operating costs. If we are to project these figures in the 

same ratio that they had increased in the last four or five years – and this is only an estimate – my own 

estimate, by the way; but if we are able to project those figures, what do we get? We get $16.6 million in 

1957 paid out for grants. In the same period of time, operating payments will be $46 ½ million. True, it 

raises the percentage to 35.6 per cent, but this is a long way from the amount which has been requested 

from our municipalities and our larger units. 

 

I just want to quote an excerpt from the Baker Commission report: 

 

“Although annual school grants have nearly tripled since 1941-42, grants as a proportion of 

Government disbursements for education have shown a net decline from the 1942-43 average.” 

 

At the recent Provincial-Local Government Conference, the school trustees asked that grants be 

increased to cover half the operating and capital costs of education. What should that increase have 

been, Mr. Speaker? Not $4.4 million, I want to suggest. Far from it. That increase should have been in 

the neighbourhood of $11 million, if this Government was to pay half the operating costs for our 

schools. While I realize that the economy of this province is such that grants of that nature may be 

difficult, I want to tell the members on the opposite side that, to meet the threat of lost teachers and meet 

it very firmly, the extra $7 million necessary to bring those grants up to 50 per cent of the operating 

costs, be found by this Government. If you don’t know where to find it, I would like to suggest that you 

examine the hosts of civil servants which you employ, the vast fleets of automobiles which are driven by 

this Government. I believe that some economy could be put into force, and that more money could be 

found to solve the problems of education in this province for generations to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see that my time is up. In conclusion I would like to say that if the hon. members 

opposite will adopt – I don’t care if it is a two-point program, or a nine-point program; but if they will 

just adopt a program, that’s all I ask them to do. Just adopt a program. Give 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
9 

our young farmers a little assistance; bring up our grants to education; bolster this sagging economy; 

forget about Ottawa – let them run their affairs and let you run your affairs here. That’s what counts. 

 

Some Opposition Members: —Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Foley: —It is true that Saskatchewan is progressing, but I would like to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that a 

great deal of credit for this progress is due to the vigorous efforts and the unswerving vigilance of your 

Liberal opposition . . . Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Hurrah! 

 

Some Hon. Member: — When did they wake up? 

 

Mr. Foley: — . . . under the courageous and imaginative leadership of ‘Hammy’ McDonald, the next 

Premier of Saskatchewan. I will not support the motion. 

 

Mr. Isaak Elias (Rosthern): —Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate, I would like to join in 

congratulating the mover and the seconder of the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

I would also like to acknowledge the friendliness and the courtesy and certainly the valued assistance we 

have received so readily from the Premier, the Clerk of the House, and the Library staff. 

 

I would also like to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on assuming your high office. I can assure you that I 

will try to conduct myself in such a way as to be of little difficulty to you. I might sometimes go beyond 

my right, but as a school teach for 16 years, I know that offenders must be dealt with, and I do hope that 

your patience will not wear out during my period of learning. 

 

In these first comments, Mr. Speaker, I will be very brief, because I don’t want to have the experience 

the young Minister had, who at the beginning of his first sermon said, “At the end of my sermon, we 

will have a meeting of the Board members.” At the end of his sermon a stranger walks up, and the 

Minister said, “It was the members of the Board that should meet.” “Well,” said the stranger, “if there 

was anyone more bored than I, I would like to meet him.” 

 

Now, I wish to more or less introduce myself and let this Assembly know why the people of the 

Rosthern constituency voted Social Credit, quite contrary to predictions uttered most confidently in 

these halls several years ago. I heard, not so long ago, a speaker claim that the people of western 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
10 

Canada are today more politically mature than ever before. It is complimentary to us that, at just such a 

time of political maturity, Social Credit is the only political movement that is gaining most envied 

popularity. This is due to many reasons, but I would like to mention two at this time: 

 

First, because Social Credit is guided by principles that are sound and honourable, and they are in true 

harmony with the principles of real democracy. 

 

Secondly, because the application of these principles, even in a restricted measure, has brought to the 

people of Alberta and British Columbia, most unexpected results. These results are not just accidental 

happenings, but they are the result of efficient administration. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I had agreed not to discuss the affairs of Alberta and British 

Columbia in this House, because we felt we had been elected to discuss our own affairs, and because we 

wanted to spare our Government a great deal of embarrassment. But, because three of our C.C.F. 

members have (most uncalled for) made insinuating and misleading statements about the Alberta 

administration and their highway and rural electrification programs, and also because the Premier 

attributed the election of us three to the fact that the Liberals had said so much about the prosperity of 

Alberta, I thought a few more comparisons would be quite in place. 

 

Nature has endowed both Saskatchewan and Alberta with an abundance of natural resources, according 

to D.H. Black, Director of the Industrial Development Office. In his opening remarks to the Provincial 

Conference, he said: “We (that is in Saskatchewan) have been blessed with perhaps more than our share 

of natural resources.” 

 

Although I share with the Government the satisfaction of witnessing of late, the industrial face-lifting 

our fair province is getting, but we are suffering from undue punishing and prolonged growing pains of 

this entrance into the industrial field, and are lagging far behind some other provinces. I would like to 

compliment this Government that they now acknowledge that inducement does bring good results. It is 

significant that the momentum of industrial growth in Saskatchewan accelerated as the climate for 

private enterprise became more favourable. 

 

Now, a few brief comparisons of the industrial developments of the two twin provinces of Alberta and 

Saskatchewan will show that we are trailing far behind. The results of this lag are most disturbing to the 

economic stability of our province, and they are causing a feeling of anxiety and insecurity amongst our 

citizens. According to the Dominion Bureau of Statistics, we notice that the personal incomes per capita 

in 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
11 

Alberta from 1950 to 1955 were, respectively: $1,009; $1,256; $1,292; $1,275; $1,169; and $1,244. The 

difference from the highest to the lowest being only $283. In Saskatchewan for the same years, the per 

capital incomes were: $892; $1,303; $1,405; $1,292; $882 and $1,147. The difference here from the 

highest to the lowest being $523. The significant thing about these fluctuations in average personal 

income is that these two lows of $892 and $882 occurred in the years 1950 and 1954, when, according 

to the same source, the net farm income per operator dropped to an all-time low for this period under 

consideration. Therefore, in Saskatchewan, where we are still operating on a basically agricultural 

economy, the average income per capita is very directly affected by agricultural conditions, and not so in 

Alberta where they have a more substantial income from industry. 

 

That our industrial development did not keep pace with that of Alberta can also be seen from 

comparative contributions to our national mineral output. According to the Canada Year Book of 1955, 

Alberta’s share of Canada’s total mineral output rose from 11 per cent to 18 per cent in the ten-year 

period between 1944 and 1954. Saskatchewan’s share of Canada’s total mineral output dropped from 5 

per cent to 4 per cent in the same period. In 1955, the value of mineral production of Alberta was 

roughly twice that of Saskatchewan, and ten years later it was roughly five times as much. On page 16 

of the Alberta Budget Address, we noted that the estimated revenue from minerals and natural resources 

for 1956-57 would represent 47 per cent of their total revenue, or $97 million, which, by the way, was 

greater than our entire expenditure on revenue account. then, on page 29, of the Saskatchewan Budget 

Address for the same year, we noted that the estimated revenue from the same sources, namely minerals 

and natural resources, would represent 14 per cent of our total revenue, or $12 million. Now just 

compare $97 million to $12 million. Again I contend that the natural potential is here in Saskatchewan, 

but our Government’s Socialist policy has not been conducive to the development of these natural 

resources to the fullest possible measure. From all this, it is very evident that industry thrives better in a 

free-enterprise system, under a free-enterprise system than under Socialism. 

 

What are the results of these differences, because of these high revenues? Alberta could spend 

approximately $227.47 for each of its citizens, while Saskatchewan only about $98. Consequently, 

Government financial assistance to schools and municipalities do not compare favourably. At the recent 

Provincial-Local Government Conference, the municipalities asked for a 50 per cent refund of the 

gasoline tax collected, which is the practice in Alberta. Let’s look at school grants paid. According to the 

1956 Budget Speeches, the Alberta schools grants amounted to $119.50 per pupil, or 50 per cent of the 

total cost of school operations, but in Saskatchewan the grant averages out to $60 per pupil, or roughly 

29 per cent of the total cost of school education. This is reflected in lower salaries paid to teachers, 

which has caused an increased exodus of teachers from our province 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
12 

to other provinces. According to a report by the Trustees’ Association, Saskatchewan lost, in 1953, some 

477 teachers; 466 in 1954; 504 in 1955; and last year, 597. These losses of qualified teachers represents 

roughly the total output of our teachers’ colleges. Because of this situation, many schools are manned by 

supervisors instead of qualified teachers; and it is the children of these schools that have to sacrifice 

their right to the best education that is possible. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I had not intended to speak on the following, but I feel I owe some of this time to 

some of my people, because of the statement contained in a brief submitted to the Provincial-Local 

Government Conference. On Page 17 of the brief presented by the Department of Social Welfare, we 

read: 

 

“Another example of inconsistency is that municipalities with a concentration of Metis and 

Mennonites have been singled out for special financial consideration.” 

 

I don’t for a minute doubt the truth of this statement, but certainly it could be wrongly interpreted. We 

have in the Rosthern constituency a concentration of Mennonites, but surely only a very few of them are 

indigents. Most of them are people with vision, with courage, with noble ideals. they have a desire to 

serve, rather than to be served, and they gave a most wonderful demonstration last summer of their keen 

desire to remain a truly free people by endorsing a party with principles that uphold the rights of the 

individuals to complete freedom of choice, of action, in every sphere within the necessary limits 

imposed by respect of equal rights of others. Therefore, they could not support a program of socialized 

planning. In telling you of some of the organizations that these Mennonites have built to provide 

themselves a service, and to be of service to others, you will understand why I am taking this time to tell 

you about them. I can’t go into detail, so I will just name a few of them: 

 

(1) The Mennonite Mutual Hail Insurance Company doing a province-wide business. Its head office 
is in Hepburn. 

 

(2) The Mennonite Fire Insurance Company, with its head office in Waldheim. 
 

(3) The Rosthern Junior College, at Rosthern. 
 

(4) Several Mennonite Bible Schools – one at Rosthern and one at Hepburn. 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
13 

(5) The Old Folks Home at Dalmeny. 
 

(6) The Old Folks Home at Rosthern. 
 

(7) The Mennonite Youth Society at Rosthern. 
 

This organization has grown up fairly recently, and has been, and is a blessing to many unfortunate 

people. This Society operates a crippled children’s home, an orphan home, and three invalid homes, 

with a total of 75 beds for its patients. This work is all supported by donations and a farm that this 

Society operates. They have never accept a building grant for any of their building projects, nor for the 

operations of these homes, except $40 per bed per year for the invalid homes. The pasteurization plant 

that this Society operates has won several provincial awards for cleanliness. Certainly it is a great 

honour that has been conferred upon me to represent these my people of the Rosthern constituency. I am 

well aware of the great trust and, despite my inexperience, it is my desire to serve them well. 

 

I have also the confidence that this Government will give fair consideration to any request that I will 

make on their behalf. I do hope that the continuation of No. 11 through my constituency will top the 

road-building program for the coming summer. This road is one of the greatest needs of my constituency 

at the present. 

 

We Social Crediters have placed ourselves squarely and courageously on the side of the little fellow, on 

the side of free enterpriser, the farmer, the consumer. Whenever policies are announced by the 

Government or by the Opposition, which are for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan in that they 

will give them a greater measure of security and freedom, we want to support you. Any co-operation of 

this nature does not in any way hint at collusion, or compromise of the principles upon which we were 

elected. We have entered this struggle to help to give our citizens a better and freer way of life. 

Although we feel this can best be done by working together, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the motion. 

 

Mr. L. N. Nicholson (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, in the few minutes that I have at my disposal, I want 

first of all to congratulate you for the high office in which you now find yourself, and I want to convey 

with the others who have spoken that your integrity must have been considered of the highest standing, 

or you would not have received that offer. I want to say also, that I have no intention of causing you 

undue trouble. I want to conduct myself in a manner which will make your task easier. If I do what is 

wrong, I will not feel badly if you check me; I will appreciate it. 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
14 

I want to waste just a minute or two, Mr. Speaker, giving some idea of the impressions I got when 

coming into this House. First of all, before the session was two or three days old, I wondered why our 

constituents didn’t issue each of us with a pair of boxing gloves, because I thought there would be a real 

good battle here before it ended. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — There might be yet. 

 

Mr. Nicholson: —Then, after it had gone on a few days, it reminded me of a story a friend of mine told 

in Winnipeg one time. He is a man who believes that we are over-governed, and that, instead of having 

Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta, we should only have two provinces instead of three. He was 

speaking to this gathering in Winnipeg, and he was promoting the idea that we didn’t need three 

provinces. Someone asked him what they would do with the Legislative Buildings in Regina if they did 

away with the province of Saskatchewan. “Well,” he said, “make an Old Men’s Home out of it.” So, the 

question asked: “Why an Old Men’s Home?” “Well,” he said, “it’s been full of old women long 

enough.” Mr. Speaker, actually I don’t think we will need boxing gloves; but the tongue lashings that 

take place form side to side would almost make us agree that it should be an Old Men’s Home before we 

are finished with it. 

 

I want to take this opportunity – mind you, I didn’t realize until the other day, that the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. McDonald) had worked so hard for the Social Credit; I want to congratulate him here, 

and now for down that work on our behalf, and when I have time and can get him to one side, I will 

scold him for not working a little harder. 

 

I want also to congratulate the members of the Government. In the political campaign of last June, 

apparently Social Credit was to get the silent treatment. But just a few days before the climax, we began 

to get in the news, and that is what I wanted. Now, I came here to do my best to represent the people of 

the Nipawin constituency – our needs are many; but I didn’t come here to sell Alberta, nor Manitoba, 

nor Ottawa, nor the American Government, nor anyone else. We are here, in my opinion, to administer 

the affairs of this province, fairly, honestly and to the best of our ability. I am not going to ask this 

Government to resign and let someone get in there that can run it. The people of this province gave them 

a mandate last June, and I am perfectly willing to abide by that mandate, because in four years, there 

will be another chance for the people to speak, and at that time, I will be happy to accept the results of 

their vote. 

 

As a child, I lived at Herbert, Saskatchewan, on the mainline between Moose Jaw and Swift Current. 

That area dried out first in 1917, and continued to dry out, and in 1919 with my parents, I moved to the 

northern part of the province. I have often thought what a blessing an irrigation system would have been 

to that area. Apparently it had been hit as hard, if 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
15 

not harder than most other areas of the province for a number of those drought years. I campaigned in 

the north part of the province on the basis that we were for the South Saskatchewan Dam. I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that this Government should disassociate itself publicly with the ‘Regina Manifesto’ and say to 

capital, to risk capital, “come on in, we want you.” as long as they in doing so, retain a fair share of 

production for the people, and take that money and build the South Saskatchewan Dam without the 

Federal Government. I believe that eventually it cold be done. There is just one little hitch, and that is, 

after you get the money to build it, you want to watch that the federal Government doesn’t see where it 

might trickle across to the American border and declare it an international waterway. 

 

I want to speak just a few moments about highways in the north. The hon. member from The Battlefords 

(Mr. Kramer) yesterday spoke about seven beautiful highways going into Battleford. Mr. Speaker, in the 

town of Nipawin, we have No. 35 Highway coming in from the south, No. 55 from the west, and that is 

it. The town of Carrot River, 24 miles to the east, the towns of Whitefox and Choiceland and so on to the 

west – those towns are towns that are good towns, and they haven’t the proper services. I am going to 

appeal to this Government to check carefully the needs of my constituency. 

 

I was very pleased to hear the hon. member for Turtleford (Mr. Foley) mention the lack of telephones. 

The town of Carrot River has a population of about 800 or 900 people, and it hasn’t even 24-hour 

telephone service. The town of Choiceland is equally in the same position. Those people have pioneered 

the area; they have worked hard, and although the Provincial Treasurer on a number of occasions has 

denied that our people are leaving, I want to assure him that they are leaving the north of our province. 

In one area, according to the official census of 1951, there were 493 people. In this same area, according 

to the official census of 1956, there were 284. Now, Mr. Speaker, we have had too much moisture, it has 

been difficult for people to stay on those homesteads, which they still are; it is a ‘fringe’ area, a lot of it, 

and they have left for a number of reasons. One is that they haven’t been able to get off-season 

employment. I don’t believe there is a member on the Government side of the House who will disagree 

with that statement. Therefore, we are very interested in getting development in our area, some type of 

development that will ensure that our people may be employed. 

 

I have heard a lot from both sides of the House about taxes. I realize the Provincial Government cannot 

solve all of the ills of the farmers. I have heard the hon. member from Lumsden (Mr. Thurston) speak of 

taxes being from $50 to $90 on a quarter-section. Mr. Speaker, I have in my hand a 1956 Tax Notice of 

a farmer who has three quarter-sections of land. This land is situated 7 ½ miles southeast of Nipawin, on 

a dirt road. The total taxes for these three quarter-sections is $821.16. Now, we are talking about the 

burden of taxation, Mr. Speaker. In our area, it is a terrific burden, and although I am not pretending to 

say that the Provincial 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
16 

Government can alleviate all of the ills of agriculture, I do maintain that we in the Nipawin constituency 

are getting a rough break as far as educational costs are concerned. On each of these quarter-sections, 

Mr. Speaker, the school tax is $114.70. I have heard of total taxes in the Lumsden area, near Regina, of 

$50.00 to $90.00 a quarter section. 

 

The point I want to make, Mr. Speaker, is that I have here in my hand a book put out by the School 

Trustees’ in 1956. Here I have the uncollected arrears of school taxes in the school units. The highest 

amount of uncollected school tax arrears in any unit of the province happens to be in the unit of 

Nipawin: a total of $497,600 of school tax arrears in our unit. Now, I am not complaining. I want to try 

to explain to the members present why that situation exists. That situation exists for one reason, and that 

is that Nipawin municipality is an older settled area, and is in quite a fair financial position, I think; but 

bordering it to the north is the fringe area of the R.M. of Torch River, and to the east is the fringe area 

which takes in Carrot River and the country to the east of that. Those are fringe areas, Mr. Speaker, and I 

am convinced that the educational equalization grant system is not as it should be, otherwise we couldn’t 

be penalized to quite that extent. 

 

I see my time is nearing its end, and I am just beginning to get warmed up, so I don’t know what I am 

going to do about it. Before I sit down, if I can steal about two minutes of time from the hon. member 

for Pelly, I want to bring to the attention of this Government one very sad state of affairs, in my opinion. 

I am surprised that it hasn’t been mentioned before, but possibly none of the members here are familiar 

with the situation. I refer now to the veterans on leased land in our area. These veterans are human 

beings, most of whom put in five or six years in uniform. They came back and went on land that was 

non-productive and non-revenue bearing, and after putting in ten years, they have the opportunity of 

buying the land that they have earned. I am speaking from experience when I say that on two different 

occasions, I have personally bought land and in one crop year, in one case, I more than paid for it, and in 

the other case I half paid for it with 48-pound per bushel of frozen wheat. What I want to ask of this 

Government is that they give serious consideration to making a deal with the veterans in some manner 

that will give them ownership when they have paid so many shares of crop. I would suggest that that 

when they have paid two full crops, that they should be given title. If you stop and think it over, a man 

spends five or six years in uniform and another ten years breaking up land, and then someone comes 

along and says you can buy it and be in debt for the next twenty or twenty-five years. I know several 

people who went east and worked in the war factories during the war years, and saved their money and 

came back with enough to buy, and pay cash for, the same type of land. 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
17 

Now, I am very sorry that I have run over a little, but the Speech from the Throne in my opinion said 

nothing about veterans. I wanted to speak on old-age pensions too, but I haven’t the time. It missed the 

boat in enough cases that I am very sorry, Mr. Speaker, but I cannot support the motion. 

 

Mr. J. R. Barrie (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, in rising for the first time in this House to take part in this 

debate, I do so with a certain amount of misgiving and a certain amount of mixed feelings. I fully 

appreciate my lack of experience and knowledge as compared to the older members in this Assembly, 

but at the same time I feel very highly honoured and privileged to have this opportunity of representing, 

in this Legislature, the many fine people in the Pelly constituency. I want to take this opportunity of 

saying to them, while I am on the air, that I appreciate very, very much the confidence that they have 

placed in me. I sincerely hope that during the time that I am privileged to remain as their representative, 

both in this House and outside, that my conduct will be one that will merit their confidence. 

 

I wish to associate myself at this time with all the previous speakers in this debate in extending to you 

my most sincere congratulations on your election, unopposed, to the important and responsible position 

that you now hold. From what I have heard and from what I have observed since attending this Session 

of the Legislature, I feel quite satisfied that a good choice was made. I also believe that you will conduct 

the affairs of this Assembly in a most impartial and dignified manner. I hope that at no time will my 

conduct in this Assembly give you reason to censure or criticize me. 

 

I also want to extend my congratulations, to the mover and the seconder of the motion that is now under 

debate, and to all the previous speakers who have taken part in this debate, particularly those who, like 

myself, spoke for the first time. I think the majority of them did a very good job. I hope that I can do as 

well. 

 

I want to take just a few minutes to congratulate my Leader, the Leader of the Official Opposition, for 

the part he took in this particular debate and for the very find presentation he made of the 16 points that 

we of the Liberal party stand behind and sincerely believe would have been to the advantage of the 

province of Saskatchewan had we had an opportunity to put them into effect. I want to say, too, that we 

of the Liberal party are very proud of our leader – a young man, a native son of this province, with a 

record that very few people can equal in the province, both in war and at peace. Another thing is that he 

is a man, a son of the land, raised on a farm, and it is not all theory with him. He has had the practical 

experience of an agricultural person in this province, and I think that that is very important at this 

particular time. And when he is discussing in this House and outside of this House matters pertaining to 

agriculture he is a man who has the knowledge, and again, I would say, has the practical 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
18 

experience to know what he is talking about. 

 

Mr. McDonald, I know, in addition to the support that he has amongst the members of the Official 

Opposition, has thousands of friends and supporters in the province of Saskatchewan, and he certainly 

has a large majority of the people of the constituency of Moosomin supporting him, ad was indicated on 

20th June last. He had done in the past, and is doing at present, a very good job as Leader of the Official 

Opposition. He has a position to fill that is part of our democratic system. We who are sitting on this 

side of the House have a very definite duty to perform in the functions of this House, and I, as one of 

those members, appreciate and accept the particular duty that I have to perform - that is, of criticism of 

the administration; and I hope that it will always be constructive criticism. 

 

I would like to pass on to a subject that is very dear to me, and to say a few words in connection with the 

part of the province of Saskatchewan which I have the honour to represent, the constituency of Pelly. 

This particular part of the province is located, as possibly many of you know, in the parkland area in east 

Central Saskatchewan, lying along the Manitoba-Saskatchewan boundary. It is a very old settled district 

in some respects – not probably as old a settled district in the way of agriculture as many other parts of 

the province, but it is a very picturesque part of Canada, with the mountains, rivers, lakes, valley, 

streams and wooded areas that we have in Pelly constituency. I may be going pretty far, but I think it is 

one of the finest places in Canada in which to live. We have many acres of fertile land and we have 

many areas of forest in this constituency that all adds up to being, as I said before, a very fine place to 

live in; and it is populated by a very fine group of people. I don’t want to take up too much of time on 

this particular subject, but I do want to dwell a little further in connection with the historical background 

of that part of the province, the Pelly constituency. 

 

It may surprise some here this afternoon to know that the first seat of government of the Northwest 

Territories was in the constituency I represent. Situated on the banks of the Swan River, just a few miles 

north of where I make my home in the village of Pelly, is the site of Fort Livingstone, where Lieutenant-

Governor Laird and his Council in 1876 and 1877 conducted the first Northwest Council sittings. Due to 

a disastrous fire in the late fall of 1877 which destroyed the buildings and institutions that had been set 

up thee to take care of those functions, the seat of government was moved into the northwest part of the 

province, to Battleford. This particular site is one that is visited each year by a great number of people 

who are interested in the historical background of western Canada, and it has been very suitably marked 

by the Historic Sites and Monuments Commission of Canada with a stone cairn and bronze plaque. 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
19 

Not far from Fort Livingstone – a little south and west – we have another site of interest located on the 

banks of the Assiniboine River, Fort Pelly, one of the oldest fur-trading posts in western Canada. This is 

the place from which the village of Pelly, where I reside, and my constituency, derive their name. 

 

In the same locality or area there are two other very important historical monuments – one is Speech 

from the Throne. Andrews Anglican Indian Mission, one of the very early Indian Missions established 

in the Northwest Territories; and not far from it, just a few miles north of the town of Kamsack, is 

another Mission that was established in the early part of the last century by the Oblate Fathers – St. 

Philip’s Mission. I am glad to be able to tell you today that both St. Andrew’s Anglican Mission and St. 

Philip’s Roman Catholic Mission are even today active in carrying on and helping to provide for the 

spiritual and educational needs of our native population on the Kesseekoose and Key Indian 

Reservations. 

 

I would be remiss to my constituents if I did not, in passing, mention a point of interest in my 

constituency, one of the finest summer resorts in the province of Saskatchewan – Madge Lake. This lake 

is situated in the Duck Mountain Reserve and has all the modern conveniences of a modern summer 

resort; but at the same time it is situated in a forested area, in a natural setting of our natural forest, and, 

in keeping with other members of this House who have summer resorts in their constituencies I want to 

extend to the members of this Legislature, a hearty invitation to come to the Pelly constituency and visit 

the Madge Lake summer resort. I can assure you that you will receive a very fine welcome, and every 

hospitality that is possible from the people surrounding that resort. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in recent years we have heard a great deal about a slogan, a very fine slogan – 

“Humanity First”. I want to make a little bit of reference to that particular slogan, because it happens to 

be the slogan of those people situated on the opposite side of the House. And I want to join with the hon. 

member for Redberry (Mr. Korchinski) in offering what I consider constructive criticism, to try and 

arouse the present Government to do something more for those unfortunate people, the widows and 

orphans that we have in our province. 

 

The other afternoon there was some discussion in connection with this particular matter, and the hon. 

Minister of Social Welfare (Hon. Mr. Bentley) quoted a lot of figures, and gave what I would say was 

possibly a fair explanation. Nevertheless, there are placed that are doing much more for those who have 

lost the bread-winner, the father or the husband, and it doesn’t change the facts; explanations don’t 

change in any respect the situation or plight that these women and children find themselves in today. So 

I make an appeal to the Government to give every possible consideration, even if they have to do away 

with some other service, that we in Saskatchewan will not have to hand our head in shame for the 

manner in which that particularly small group of people in our midst, is treated. I can say much the same 

about 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
20 

supplementary allowances for our old people, but one thing that puzzles me about the supplementary 

allowances is that we hear that there are allowances paid up to $20 a month. I am sorry that, in my part 

of the province, there may be people receiving that amount, but as yet I have not discovered one; and I 

am just going to make mention, in passing, of a case, not to publicize these particular individuals, but 

just to serve as an indication of what has happened and what is taking place in the province, and while I 

consider that the Government has to accept the full responsibility for, and I hope that they will make 

some move and do something in order to remedy these particular cases. 

 

In my constituency there is an elderly gentleman, 82 years of age, who has a wife 75 years of age. I am 

sorry to say that this elderly woman is paralysed; she hasn’t spoken for a number of years. She is a bed 

patient, an invalid, and requires constant care, and this particular couple have not much of this world’s 

goods, and the elderly man, the husband, enjoys very poor health. Some months ago they made 

application to get into some nursing home or institution, and to date that hasn’t been possible. I know 

there are great demands made on the existing institutions, and possibly there is some explanation for 

that; but in the meantime, a son-in-law and a daughter with a family of four children in their home 

(which is not a very large home) have to take care of this elderly man and this invalid woman, and I 

would think that under those circumstances something might be done. I know the hon. member of 

Parliament for the constituency of Mackenzie who is not of the same political faith as myself, has 

endeavoured to do something for this couple. I think it is only fair that I should say so now. But, in these 

circumstances such as I have described, I would imagine that if there is anyone entitled to $20 a month 

supplementary pension, these people should be, and should get it. It will be a surprising thing, possibly, 

to members of this House to know that the total supplementary pension provided this couple is $6.50 a 

month. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Mineral Resources): — That is more than they get in Manitoba. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — Very recently I had occasion to have a reply from one of the officers in the Department 

of Social Welfare and they advised me that they couldn’t see where any increase cold be made. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am prepared, if the hon. Minister of Social Welfare is interested, to advise him of 

this couple at any time that I have an opportunity to speak to him. I don’t think it should be publicized 

insofar as the names are concerned in this Legislature, but I would be only too pleased to give the 

Minister this information, and I certainly hope that he will be able to do something that those who have 

tried to help them thus far have not been able to accomplish. 

 

As I look across the floor of this House, I notice an outstanding thing, that of the representation of the 

C.C.F. party elected 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
21 

members in this House, 60 per cent of them, roughly, are Cabinet Ministers; 60 per cent of their 

representation are members of the Cabinet. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker (Attorney General): — What is wrong with your arithmetic. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — And as I look over their faces . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, will the hon. gentleman explain that 

statement, please? 

 

Mr. Barrie: — Well, I may be wrong . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, will the hon. gentleman explain the statement, please? 

 

Mr. Barrie: — I may be a little wrong in my arithmetic. I am very sorry. But I am afraid that what I am 

going to say in the next few minutes will probably startle some of the members sitting on the opposite 

side of the House . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: —We are already started. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — . . . because, as I look over these members, particularly the Cabinet members, I find an 

explanation for something that exists, I believe, at the present time. Most of these gentlemen are 

gentlemen (who, during their lifetime with no disrespect) have been salaried men. They have taught 

school; they have worked for railroads; they have worked for organizations; they have been in certain 

professions, and so on and so forth, and there are some of them, a few of them, who I believe were 

farmers. I am sorry to say that I think that possibly most of them, if they weren’t urban people before, 

have been so long in an urban centre that they have absorbed an urban complex, and that possibly 

explains, Mr. Speaker, the reason for the lack of interest in the rural parts of the province, and in the 

rural people. 

 

Another matter that strikes me (and I stand to be corrected if I made any mistake in the statement) is that 

these gentlemen never had it better in their lives. 

 

Some Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Barrie: — There is a matter that I feel very strongly about, Mr. Speaker, something that I am going 

to bring to the attention of this House at this time, and that is that these people have probably lost sight 

of the problems that people less fortunate than themselves can have. As I dwelt a little in connection 

with Mothers’ Allowances and Supplementary Allowances, they haven’t been too generous, and the 

slogan “Humanity First” has not been carried out to too great a degree. But there is something else that 

should be added to that slogan — “Humanity First — after us.” 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
22 

Now, ladies and gentlemen, . . . pardon me, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Get off the soapbox! 

 

Mr. Barrie: — In the year 1954, I don’t know what happened, whether these gentlemen were not too 

certain of the future, and were going to make certain that if anything happened to their political positions 

when the next election came along, they made provision in Chapter 4 of the 1954 Statutes of 

Saskatchewan, for a very handsome pension for themselves, which will be substantially paid, in spite of 

the contribution that they are going to make by the taxpayers of this province. A substantial amount of 

this pension will have to be paid by the taxpayers of this province. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — You voted for it. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — I didn’t vote for it. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — He wasn’t here. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — I feel very deeply about this matter, because this particular legislation has not been very 

well publicized in this province. 

 

Premier Douglas: — He’ll never qualify for it. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — It hasn’t been given the publicity of other social welfare projects, and I think that the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan have every right to be highly incensed that the gentlemen of this 

Legislature should have the audacity, in view of the treatment that is given to the people who 

unfortunately have to draw old-age assistance pensions, social welfare and so on, to ask these people, 

through taxation that has to come from the people of the province of Saskatchewan, to pay them a 

pension that they qualify for at the age of 55, of $3,000 a year. 

 

Hon. J.H. Sturdy (Minister without Portfolio): — What did the Liberals do in Ottawa? 

 

Mr. Barrie: — They will have to answer for that in Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Barrie: — But as I said before, I feel very strongly about this, and I would be ashamed to ask the 

people of Saskatchewan, if I ever did qualify – which one gentleman over here said I might not; I might 

surprise him. If I ever did qualify I would be ashamed, particularly the members of the Government, 

drawing very handsome salaries, as I said before never as well off in their lives as they have been in the 

last few years . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Bunkum! 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
23 

Mr. Barrie: — . . . drawing a good salary and most of them, I believe, supplied with an automobile for 

their use; but if those people will that kind of an income and that kind of a salary can’t provide for their 

old age, can’t provide for the future by themselves, then it doesn’t speak very well for them to 

administer the affairs of this province. There is one other feature that wrankles me considerably, and that 

is the feature that even though I oppose this pension – I am going to repeat again, that I feel very 

strongly on this matter, and as long as I am in this House, whenever the occasion arises, I will certainly 

oppose this particular legislation, and would be very pleased to see it wiped out; but the fact still remains 

that with no consideration at all, as far as I am concerned, I have to be a party to it. I am compelled to be 

a party to it, and I resent that, and resent it very much; and in spite of what the members across the way 

have to say about the Liberals at Ottawa, or the Government in Ottawa, or any aspersions that they 

handed out to some of the members here, I want to say to those members opposite that the fact that they 

were the Government and that there was 40 out of them sitting there, and are responsible for the 

legislation that is brought down in this House, of this nature, they cannot escape accepting the full 

responsibility for the Statute I just quoted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. gentleman a question? 

 

Some Opposition Members: — No, sit down! 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — May I ask the hon. gentleman a question? Does he realize that his own party 

supported this Bill in this House? 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — You wouldn’t let me ask one. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — Mr. Speaker, I guess I had better pick something a little less contentious. I don’t want 

them to get too excited. 

 

Premier Douglas: — No, no! Go on. It’s not contentious, it’s just . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — It’s hypocritical. 

 

Some Opposition Member: — Oh, settle down. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — I am not a hypocrite. I resent being called a hypocrite. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Withdraw that statement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, I think I should withdraw it. I certainly don’t want to attribute any 

statement I have made to the hon. gentleman that he is hypocritical. What I do say though is that the 

party is very hypocritical, because they officially supported this legislation in this House. 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
24 

Mr. Danielson: — You know it’s true. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — A member has the right to express his own opinion, whether he is in the Liberal 

party, or where he is; that is our viewpoint. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Barrie: — Mr. Speaker, I rather resent interruptions. During the time I have been in this House, 

which has only been a short time, I have tried to act as a gentleman, and not interrupt the members 

opposite when didn’t agree with many of the things they said. I certainly hope, Mr. Speaker, that I will 

be accorded the same treatment that I hope to continue to give to them. 

 

The greatest asset of any country is its people, and I would like to deal with the greatest asset that we 

have in the part of the country where I live, the Pelly constituency, that is its people. In the Pelly 

constituency we have a very mixed population insofar as racial and national and religious groups are 

concerned. The racial and national origins of practically all the people represented in the province of 

Saskatchewan are located in the Pelly constituency, and they live there in harmony; there is a lack of any 

prejudice, and the community spirit that exists in most of the small communities and the larger centres is 

most desirable. A large portion of the people that live in the Pelly constituency are people who 

emigrated from the continent of Europe around the turn of this century and these people left Europe and 

came to this country for certain reasons. It is not easy, I imagine, to get up and leave all your family ties, 

leave the customs, leave the country where your language is spoken, and travel thousands of miles to a 

foreign land. But thousands of people from Europe, many of them still alive and living in the part of the 

country that I come from, and many of their descendants, are farmers and businessmen and professional 

men in that part of the country, and I am pleased to say that in this Legislature are some members who 

are descendants of the people I am going to talk about. 

 

They came to this country and they brought with them little in the way of wealth; but they brought with 

them a desire for freedom and liberty, and above all, the desire to own and operate a piece of land as 

they see fit. They knew all about the feudal system, certain socialistic systems and so on and so forth 

that had existed in Europe for years. They are certainly not Socialists – the majority of them. They know 

only too well what Socialism may eventually lead to, and these people have, above all other things, a 

very great love for the soil and the land. There is nothing in the way of wealth that they prize more than 

their own home and a piece of land, a small farm. When these people came to this country from Europe, 

as I said before, they didn’t bring much in the way of wealth with them; but they brought with them 

certain arts and skills and certain culture and traditions. I think that, if we have a look around 

Saskatchewan and Canada today, we will find that, woven into the fabric 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
25 

of our Canadian way of life, are many fine contributions made by these people, and I don’t think any 

national group, or any person who comes as an immigrant to Canada from any part of the world, came 

here without bringing with them and contributing to this country, to the wealth of this country, a very 

great contribution. 

 

The majority of these people are very grateful for the welcome, the opportunity and the measure of 

liberty that they have enjoyed since they emigrated to Canada. They have had problems in the past – all 

the problems of the pioneers; and they have been very successful. Today a great number of them are 

engaged in agriculture, and we have plenty of problems in the field of agriculture, I will admit; but these 

people I find in my constituency, and I believe I can safely say the majority of the people in my 

constituency, are very grateful for what the Almighty has done for them in Saskatchewan and in Canada, 

in the past few years, in the way of crops. They are very pleased to have full granaries instead of empty 

ones. 

 

In connection with the problems they are confronted with, like all other people in this province, they 

expect some assistance and some help to solve these problems, and they expect that assistance and help, 

some from the Federal Government and some from this Provincial Government, but they, at the same 

time, are not sitting down – not calamity-howling and so on and so forth, of which I have heard so much 

since I came here, and it makes a person feel very pessimistic and blue indeed. But they have gone out 

and, of their own resources and in their own way and by hard work and initiative, they are trying to help 

themselves. On many of those small farms they are producing a certain amount of livestock, poultry, 

dairy products and grain, and they probably are not getting all they would like to get for it – I don’t 

believe they are; but most of them are enjoying a very good living, and they are very grateful and happy, 

even with what they have. I have no doubt that, all of us here would like to see both these people I am 

talking about and the people in the rest of Saskatchewan and in the rest of Canada have an even better 

standard of living than they have today. We should be very glad to do anything we can to help them. 

 

In looking over the Speech from the Throne (I examined it fairly accurately, I believe), I was very 

disappointed with the lack of consideration of the agricultural problems, as set out in that particular 

Speech from the Throne. I am new, as you know, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know just how far this Speech 

from the Throne is a barometer or thermometer of what the Government is going to do; but I understand 

it forecasts fairly accurately what we can expect in this Session of the Legislature, and I am assuming 

that. The only thing I can find is one item in the Speech from the Throne that I can see really amounts to 

some assistance to the agricultural people of this province. That is paragraph No. 4; and I am very 

surprised that the Government, if they were guided by the ‘blue ruin’ and such like that I have heard 

here, would even embark, this year, on this particular program of breaking up more land, clearing more 

land and irrigation and raining other lands, because it says here: 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
26 

“The Government will again submit for your approval clearing and breaking, irrigation and drainage 

programs designed to further develop the diversification and stability of our farm economy.” 

 

That would be all right, and I believe possibly it is all right. But if you were to listen to the crepe-

handing speeches about the condition of agriculture and about the exodus of farmers from 

Saskatchewan, and about farming as a business being such a bankrupt institution, the question would 

arise – why break up more land? Why drain more acreage, if it is so bad? Just leave it alone for the time 

being. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — They are all against us! 

 

Mr. Barrie: — So far as the . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That’s true. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — So far as the Speech from the Throne is concerned, I will say again (and I think the 

Government has to accept the responsibility) that they have failed and failed miserably in making any 

provision, if the Speech from the Throne is the barometer or indication we have to go by, for agriculture. 

Possibly the Minister of Agriculture (Hon. Mr. Nollet) hasn’t given the Government the proper advice. I 

don’t know. He is very voluble in expression and so on. We listened to him, yesterday; but I think that 

possibly if he was a little better aware of the conditions that exist he would have impressed on his 

colleagues of the Cabinet to bring down a few more items in that Speech from the Throne. 

 

Now I want to mention something that I feel deeply about, and, of course, when I talk about this I will 

indicate very clearly, Mr. Speaker, that I don’t believe in all this ‘blue-ruin’ talk and so on and so forth. 

There are a great many people in the province of Saskatchewan who don’t believe in that today either. 

We have problems, serious ones, I don’t minimize them one bit. Still, at the same time, we have young 

people in this province who are desirous, for one reason or another, to be ‘sons of the soil’. Some of 

these people have inherited from their forefathers and their parents – I mentioned not long ago they 

inherited a love of the soil; some of these people have been trained and have fair to good educations. 

They have been trained to go into other vocations, and I am surprised, I will admit, at times some of 

them don’t do it; but they still have that magnetism. They have something very deep down that, as time 

goes on, many of them want to be established on a farm they can own and operate themselves. 

 

We have many of these young people in the districts and the communities from which I come. They 

have quite a problem in getting established, particularly these days, unless they have a very large amount 

of capital; and when they look around and find some elderly farmer who is probably ready to retire, or 

for some reason or other they find a piece of land they can purchase and it is suitable, they are 

confronted with a very serious problem, 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
27 

because in the vast majority of cases the vendors of this farm property insist on all cash. Now there must 

be a reason why they insist on all cash. If they go out and try and raise the cash by way of a loan, when 

they only have a very small down payment to make, they find it well-nigh impossible. The result is (and 

there is a reason for that, too, Mr. Speaker, much as I regret to have to say it) the majority of those 

young people with very little capital, who want to become engaged in agriculture, which is their own 

personal business, I regret to have to say these people find it necessary to leave this fine province of 

Saskatchewan in order to become established on land. 

 

I know of numbers in the past few year, within the region I am acquainted with around my home, who 

have been in that situation and had that problem. They journeyed a few miles to the east into the 

province of Manitoba – we are very close to the province of Manitoba in the constituency where I live. 

When they go into Manitoba they find a different condition exists there entirely. They will find – many 

people who probably want to dispose of their land, to retire and so on and so forth, and many of those 

people who are retiring or thinking about retiring and want to sell their land, when they see an up-and-

coming young farmer who is vitally interested in farming all it implies, they don’t hesitate to turn their 

farm over to these young people with a very small down payment, and are only too pleased to enter into 

an agreement for sale of the land. If these young people find a piece of land and for some reason or other 

the person who owns it wants all cash, the surprising thing is, in the province of Manitoba, with a small 

down payment, they will have numerous loan organizations competing for the privilege or the 

opportunity to place such a loan. I know many of them, people who are personal friends of mine, young 

men that I have know since they were so high, today they are farming in the districts of Swan River, 

Kenville, Durban and Benito, and further south, in the districts of Roblin and Russell and so on. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is something wrong, as I said before, that such a condition should exist and 

such a comparison be made by myself or anyone else in this province in this particular regard. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — And under the same Canadian Federal Government. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — All I have to say is that the Government of this province have to accept the 

responsibility for that condition existing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — You voted for The Farm Security Act, the other day. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — We’d have been a lot better off if you’d never put it on. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to deal for a short time with some of the men and 

women in this province who I think all of us own a great debt of gratitude to. These particular men and 

women are deserving of a great deal of sympathy from all of us, I believe, at this particular time. I refer, 

Mr. Speaker, to the municipal councillors and reeves 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
28 

and school trustees of the province of Saskatchewan. I say we should extend them sympathy, because 

most of them need it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Oh, you can do better than that, surely! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — With the kind of government we have in Saskatchewan they sure do need it. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — With the situation they are confronted with today of high taxes that are necessary to 

carry on education, the building of roads, providing of municipal services and so on, they find it a very, 

very difficult task to fulfil. We have had this Government give a certain amount of assistance by way of 

the grid-road system. I am not going into the details. All I have to say about it is that it is of little value 

to many of the municipalities in the province . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Not enough, eh? 

 

Mr. Barrie: — . . . for this reason. Those rural municipalities I refer to are in the areas of this province 

(and I think it is true in the majority of cases) where they are not in a position to take advantage of the 

offer of the Government, because they haven’t the finances to do so. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — How would they do it without our help? 

 

Mr. Barrie: — It is impossible for them to raise the level of taxation any further. It is at the saturation 

point now, and this doesn’t apply only to the rural municipalities, but the people in the small urban 

municipalities, the villages and the towns, are just becoming aware, a lot of them, of the situation they 

are confronted with, too. I know I have talked recently to many of the members of the town councils and 

village councils in the constituency of Pelly which I represent, and in the town of Kamsack men who 

supported this Government are, very much concerned about the situation they find existing at the present 

time. I am not saying this Government is all to blame for that; by no means. It is a condition which 

exists and something should be done about it. 

 

After discussions have gone on, and urging for some years, our Government made a move and last 

December several hundred municipal men, school trustees, M.L.A.s and so on and so forth gathered in 

this Chamber at the Provincial-Local Government Conference. I was very pleased to have the 

opportunity of being one of those present. I attended the session from beginning to end, and many of 

these people travelled from all parts of the province at considerable expense to themselves, in many 

cases at considerable inconvenience. They came here with very high hopes that something was going to 

be done about the basic problems they are confronted with at the present time and have been for some 

little time in the past. We heard thousands of words and we have reams and reams of paper to read; but 

the sum and substance, 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
29 

as far as I could make out from this Conference, was that there was a certain amount of promotion done 

for a larger municipal unit of administration =, and that that particular feature, if it is adapted and put 

into effect, would solve practically all the problems of the municipality men and the school boards. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Nobody said that. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — It may have its merits. It may solve some of the problems. My contention is, however, it 

has very little, if anything, to do with the basic problem confronting the people in this province today, 

namely the problem of finance. These people came here expecting there would be some, at least, a 

partial solution given by the Government, or a proposal made by the Government, to take care of a 

greater share of the cost of education, to take care of a greater share of the cost of providing roads in 

many places where they are badly needed. I know that the announcements made by the hon. Premier at 

this Conference that there was going to be some additional assistance given by way of grants was greatly 

appreciate, I believe, by the majority, if not all, of the people present; but it was entirely inadequate. I 

was rather amused when a suggestion was made that if the municipal people had to have some more 

money, the Province couldn’t furnish them with any more, but they could go home to their 

constituencies and levy two cents a gallon on the farm fuels in their municipalities, or place a frontage 

highway tax on the land. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Do you know of any way to get money without taxation? 

 

Mr. Barrie: — While we have many brave men on our municipal councils and as reeves of our 

municipalities and so on, I doubt if there is any of them brave enough to go back and suggest such a plan 

to their municipal people at the present time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — So we should do it? 

 

Mr. Barrie: — Now just in passing, I want to make mention of an item that was mentioned by several 

people in this House and I hope it augurs well. Some said it didn’t amount to very much – and that is the 

3 per cent tax on farm fuels, oil and greases. Well, I hope, it being the fact that the Government 

members in this House made the first mention of this during this session, and there have been several – I 

don’t know just how many have mentioned the thing; but I hope that is a forecast and that the people can 

expect the elimination of that particular tax on those commodities. I know, and I think so far as my 

people are concerned in the Pell constituency, if that consideration is given by the Government during 

this Session, and the Hon. Provincial Treasurer brings it down in his budget, they will appreciate it very 

much, even although it is very small as some members, such as the hon. member for Swift Current (Mr. 

Wood) has mentioned – that it didn’t amount to very much but that he was in support of it. 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
30 

There has been a lot said in this House =, Mr. Speaker, regarding rural electrification and I am certainly 

not going to take up too much time n it. But I couldn’t pass up this particular subject, because I will 

agree with speakers from both sides of the House that there is nothing more important in my opinion, 

today, nothing of much more value to the rural people of this province than to have electric power. It 

provides to the people in the rural areas the same conveniences of home life, the same labour-saving 

devices, and such like as the city and town people have. I don’t think anybody argues the fact it is one of 

the necessities in order to make farm life more attractive, particularly for some of the young people who 

would not possibly stay on the farm if they were not served with electricity. So it is a very desirable 

thing. The fact that over 43,000 farms have been served with electric power in Saskatchewan in the last 

few years is very commendable indeed; but I want to point out that, in order to supply those 43,000-odd 

farms and farm homes with the power, the farmers of this province had to either pay already, or will be 

called upon to pay, approximately $22 ½ million. They apparently have to pay for installation cost and 

then pay a very high rate for the power consumed, or used by them, as compared with the urban 

dwellers. 

 

I have never been able yet to have anybody explain to me why the fact that a man is a farmer and is 

working a farm should put him in a particular category insofar as electric power is concerned. I would 

say that I, myself, and others who are urban dwellers, should be charged a higher rate for the power that 

we consume, if that is necessary, in order to give the farmer the same level or the same opportunity that I 

have. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Is that in the Liberal platform? 

 

Mr. Barrie: — But living as I do and not only myself but the majority of the people in my constituency 

– living close along the Manitoba boundary, we know what the power situation is. We know all about it, 

because in the province of Manitoba, they must have many more clever people than we have, according 

to the story of these people. In fact, I am going to mention something about that in a few minutes, in 

regard to some remarks the Hon. Minister of Agriculture made yesterday. 

 

In the province of Manitoba every farm today, with the exception of a very small portion between Lake 

Winnipegosis and Lake Winnipeg is served with electric power, and there is no installation charge in the 

province of Manitoba. there is a deposit of prepaid power bills or instalment down payment on 

appliances of $62, $64, or $65 is the highest. The rate of power has already been discussed in this 

House. the rate of power is considerably less than we pay in Saskatchewan. Well, I contend what they 

can do in Manitoba we should also be able to do in Saskatchewan, with the wealth that we have in gas, 

oil and coal in Saskatchewan. Some of these gentlemen may try to say that the reason that Manitoba has 

been able to do this is because they have so much cheaper power. Well now, I would ask them to go to 

their Power Commission and make a statement like that and they will find the cost of producing power 

by Hydro-Electric in Manitoba is not much lower than for what it 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
31 

can be produced by modern up-to-date electric developing machinery in this province. I would say to 

them, we should be able to utilize the natural gas, the oil and the coal (and it is being utilized at the 

present time) to develop power. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Only a few kilowatt difference, that’s all, according to their own figures. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — I will admit, Mr. Speaker, this can’t be done by picking money off bushes or anything 

like that. I am not so ridiculous as to say anything like that. But in the province of Manitoba they went 

out and they borrowed against the credit of the province of Manitoba in order to provide the farmers 

with the same service, without cost, as they provided the urban fellows. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — To help the farmers. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — How I know of money that is being borrowed in this province, but I am not find too 

much fault with it; but I think this matter of rural electrification installation by the Government of Power 

Corporation is equally as important as money they are borrowing for other purposes. I certainly think 

they have not possibly done the job they could have done. It might have been they were hesitant about 

taking a chance. Now, I am of Scotch ancestry and have been accused by some people of being tight and 

close-fisted, and so on; I don’t like to see any person, or a corporation or anybody else, borrow any more 

money than they have to, unless there is some very sound and valid reason. If it was for even highway 

construction, I would be very hesitant about borrowing money; but when it is for a public utility that will 

supply so much to so many people in this province that means so much to them, not only today, but for 

years and years to come that means so much to then, not only today, but for years and years to come 

with a reasonable amount of maintenance, then I would say they should not hesitate. Whoever it may be 

that is in charge of affairs in this province, shouldn’t hesitate to use the resources and the credit of this 

province in order to bring electric power to as many people as quickly as possible. 

 

Mr. Loptson: —Spend more money to build museums, don’t they. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — The Minister of Agriculture (Hon. Mr. Nollet), yesterday – I don’t know whether he was 

just expressing his own opinion or whether he was expressing that of the Government – said he was 

surprised they have been able to bring electric power to over 40,000 farms in the province. My 

interpretation of this remark was that they have accomplished something they couldn’t even visualize or 

understand. 

 

Some Hon. Member: — The Liberals couldn’t. 

 

Mr. Barrie: —I hope, and I believe possibly there are people more farsighted in the present 

Government than the Hon. Minister of Agriculture. 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
32 

There is one other item I would like to deal with, with your permission, Mr. Speaker, and it is the matter 

of timber and lumber, and I am going to be very brief with this. I hope members of the House won’t 

expect me to deal with a lot of figures. I have been bothering the hon. Minister of Natural Resources 

(Mr. Kuziak) for the last few days with certain questions, but I am not going into that type of thing now. 

I just want to make a few observations as it affects my people in my constituency, and as it affects a 

great number of people in the province of Saskatchewan. Prior to 1944, in the northern part of my 

constituency, not far from where I reside and have resided for a good many years, we have some spruce 

timber; we haven’t as much now as we had some years ago, but we still have some spruce timber. Prior 

to 1944, the farmers in my district, the farmers in the Kamsack district and many of the farmers from the 

constituency which is now represented by the hon. Minister of Natural Resources (Canora) used to 

journey each fall and winter, into the bush on the forest reserves, on the Porcupine Forest reserve and 

there was dotted all through that reserve, or all along the southern boundary of that reserve saw-mills, 

many of them operated by farm people, and the farmer’s son and his neighbour would go into the bush 

and cut down spruce trees, after having secured a lumber permit. They would have the logs sawed up 

into lumber and they would haul them home to their farms. During the summer after it had dried out, 

they would have it planed and they had it available for their building purposes on their farms for repairs, 

and such like. They had available to them lumber of a good quality at a very low cost. 

 

With the advent of the C.C.F. Socialists in Saskatchewan, however, there was a sudden change. Those 

people were denied that particular privilege, and are today, because the Saskatchewan Timber Board is 

the institution or corporation (or whatever you like to call it) that handles all the spruce lumber and logs. 

We have the spectacle today in my district of seeing spruce logs cut 15 to 20 miles north of the village 

of Pelly by operators of the Timber Board, and the lumber is loaded up on trucks and hauled into Pelly 

15 or 20 miles, then transported by truck on the highway another 40 miles west to Sturgis to the Timber 

Board. The result is the people there who want to purchase lumber find the cost is far too high. In fact, a 

great deal of fir lumber is now shipped into the town where I live, and adjoining towns, from the 

provinces of Alberta and British Columbia and sold at a lower price than our native spruce. That’s 

something I never saw until recent years. 

 

The Timber Board has, from the records, produced a very handsome profit for the Crown Corporations. 

That profit has been made at the expense, on one hand of the producers, because Mr. Speaker, I can 

assure you the producers have never been paid any high figure for the production of lumber they sold to 

the Timber Board. In fact, the complaint has been that many of them have had to withdraw from 

operating because they could not operate on the prices paid. I hope there has been something done 

insofar as an improvement of that is concerned. It is a situation that isn’t desirable. The fact is they 

haven’t paid any ridiculous prices for the production of the lumber and they have received a very high 

price from the people who have had to purchase 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
33 

the lumber. They are making a very large profit, I would say, out of this corporation which goes a long 

way, (I notice in their financial reports) to bolster up some of the other weaker Crown Corporations. that 

is done at the expense of the producer of the lumber and at the expense of the man who has to buy it. 

This is not a matter of development of natural resources for the people ‘for use and not for profit’ which 

has been advocated for years by the gentlemen opposite. 

 

I do not hope to take up much more time, Mr. Speaker; but I have listened to all the previous speakers in 

this debate with a great deal of interest, and I would like, for the next few minutes, to make a few 

observations with respect to some of the remarkable statements of inconsistency contained in some of 

these speeches. Last Friday, the hon. lady member for Regina City (Mrs. Cooper) gave credit to the 

Federal Government of some years ago for instituting old-age pension legislation in Canada. She also 

gave credit to the Saskatchewan Government of that day for being the first provincial government to 

take advantage of such legislation. Surprisingly, both those governments she referred to happened to be 

Liberal governments. I want to thank the lady member for Regina for her fairness and for the 

compliment she has paid those governments and the Liberal Party. The hon. lady member also brought 

to our attention the overcrowding of our mental hospitals. I think that I can speak for the members of the 

Official Opposition in hastening to assure the hon. member for Regina of the support of this official 

Opposition in this connection. 

 

You know, I have just been wondering whether the fact that we have a C.C.F Government in 

Saskatchewan has any significance in regard to this particular matter. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — It might. The Liberals sure go crazy. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from Yorkton (Mr. Neibrandt) expressed his 

satisfaction . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Another half-hour of this, and I’ll be with him! 

 

Mr. Barrie: — . . . with the grants given to rural municipalities. I just wonder if the good people of the 

Yorkton constituency shared his feelings and impression in this respect. His novel suggestion of limiting 

the manufacture of automobiles, trucks, tractors and other machines to one type of model seems to me to 

savour of a system of control in existence in another pat of the world, but I am certain it is a most 

unpopular system in Canada. The hon. member for Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) (I am sorry he isn’t in his 

seat) stated . . . 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas (Minister of Highways): — He’s tired! 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
34 

Mr. Barrie: — Stated that the farmer was a ‘forgotten man.’ 

 

Government Members: — We all are! 

 

Mr. Barrie: — I agree with him wholeheartedly insofar as this Government is concerned, except when 

it comes to paying; then the farmer is a very well-remembered person. I cannot agree with the hon. 

member from Touchwood when he stated that taxes are not an issue. It is not the whole issue, but it’s an 

issue. He advocates parity prices for farm products. but I did notice the hon. member for Shellbrook 

(Mr. Thiessen) (I’m glad to see him in his seat) followed him in the debate and expressed doubts that 

parity prices could be expected or obtained. Very confusing. The hon. member from Shellbrook also 

expressed great satisfaction with the grid-road system and policy. The rural municipalities in his 

constituency must be very well off, and they are to be envied by many others, I know, if they have the 

finances to take advantage of this plan to any great extent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as time went on possible some of the members noticed I took some notes, and this is the 

result of some of the notes and writing I did during the time I have been in the House. I am very sorry to 

see the hon. member from Kinistino (Mr. Begrand) is not in his seat – maybe I’ve tired him out, too; but 

nevertheless I am going to place on the records certain observations regarding some of the things he 

said. To take some of his remarks really serious, it would appear that nothing had happened in 

Saskatchewan prior to 1944. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Nothing much. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — Well, I happened to have lived in Saskatchewan for quite a number of years prior to 

1944 – 22 to be exact. I can remember in those years in 1922, 1923, 1925 and so on right down to 1944, 

we had schools, churches, we had public institutions, we had roads (probably not as good roads as we 

have today) and we had telephones. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Farm electrification? 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — Free telephones? 

 

Mr. Barrie: — We had public buildings and institutions in various parts of the province. In fact I 

believe that these buildings we are occupying a part of, were here a long time before 1944. 

 

Some Government Member: — Any electric power? 

 

Mr. Barrie: — This is truly the old and amusing C.C.F. story, and it would be serious if it wasn’t just 

bordering on the ridiculous. There’s one thing about the hon. member from Kinistino – I think he should 

be a Minister. He seemed very disturbed . . . 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
35 

Mr. Danielson: — There’s hope yet. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — . . . over the confusion existing in connection with this Time question, and even went so 

far as to threaten those who were responsible for the confusion in upsetting things if they tried to 

introduce something that would be getting him up earlier, or making him go to bed before he wanted to. 

I have to agree heartily with one statement he made, and it was this: he said that the rural people are very 

patient . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — So are we. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — . . . but there are limitations. I am sure his party will learn the truth of this statement 

before too long. 

 

I see I have played out the hon. member from Cutknife, the Hon. Minister of Agriculture. I am sorry he 

isn’t in his seat. But in this debate, Mr. Speaker, he bemoaned the fact that the farmers were leaving the 

farms in Saskatchewan. Well, is it any wonder they leave the farms when they listen to his forecast of 

blue ruin and calamity as far as the farm people ware concerned? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — He didn’t want to be around. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — Yes, he had criticisms and condemnations in great volume; but I noticed he didn’t even 

have the trace of one practical suggestion for a solution submitted by myself or on behalf of his 

Government. 

 

Opposition Members: —Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Barrie: — He claimed that the Federal Government took credit for prosperity of industry in Canada 

today, and as a result they should be responsible for agriculture. Well, we take him at his word. If that is 

the case, I notice this Government takes a great deal of credit for industrial development in this province 

– a very commendable thing; but if his word is correct in the one case, then he certainly has to be fair 

enough to let us apply the other, and, if they take the credit for the industrial development in the 

province of Saskatchewan, well, then, they certainly have to assume some representative for a part of the 

agricultural problems in this province. 

 

He made another observation, and that was the mention he made about hydropower production in the 

centre of Pine Falls in the province of Manitoba. I think probably he made a mistake; at least I don’t 

know, or never have heard of electricity being produced at Pine Falls, Manitoba. But they have 

something in Pine Falls we unfortunately haven’t in Saskatchewan; something I would like to see 

established in this province as much as anyone else, and that is Pine Falls, Manitoba, they have one of 

the largest pulp and paper mills in Canada. 

 

Opposition Members: —Hear! Hear! 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
36 

Mr. Barrie: — I cannot pass by without making some reference to the hon. member from The 

Battlefords (Mr. Kramer). I am particularly sorry that he isn’t in his seat. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — He knew what was coming, so he got out. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — I am quite certain many of the other people of the province, many of the other 

constituencies, and many of the other members on both sides of the House envy the Battleford 

constituency and the member for Battleford, for the fine network of highways that exists in his 

constituency he told us all about yesterday. If the apparent results he has obtained are due to the tone of 

his voice and the aggressive approach he exhibited in the House yesterday, when he made his request to 

the Minister of Highways, then the old adage really holds true, “the wagon wheel that squeaks the 

loudest receives the most grease.” 

 

Premier Douglas: — How about the longest? 

 

Mr. Barrie: — However, I thoroughly enjoyed the members’ speech and performance yesterday in the 

House; he was quite entertaining. However, I doubt if many take him too seriously. Mr. Speaker, the 

hon. member from Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst) . . . They’re all deserting . . . Oh, no, pardon me! Here he 

comes. I would like to make a little remark and to mention the suggestion that he made that we of the 

Official Opposition should get out and assist the agricultural people. Well, I am of the opinion we are 

doing just that very thing, or I am trying to that very thing, in criticizing the Government for their 

inaction and neglect in trying to extend some measure of relief to the farm people. I have taken a very 

active interest in politics for many years in this province, as quite a number of those in this Assembly 

know, but I never dreamed I would see the day when any individual, to further his own personal political 

interest, would resort to quoting the alleged statement of a man in his grave who cannot substantiate or 

deny the statement or insinuation. The statement in this House, yesterday, made by the hon. member for 

Wadena concerning the late John Angus MacMillan, who happened to be a personal friend of mine, in 

my opinion was a sacrilege, and I am quite certain that the hon. members opposite were very much 

embarrassed by that spectacle. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I wish to say this: the rest of Canada have, up until this time, rejected 

the C.C.F. Socialist party and its type or brand of Socialism. 

 

Premier Douglas: — The Liberals have been rejected, too. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — I wonder if these people opposite would be so naïve as to ask us to believe that all the 

rest of Canada is wrong, and they are right. Just in closing, I want to give a little word of warning . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — How many provincial Liberal Governments have you got? 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
37 

Mr. Barrie: — Probably the Social Credit are going to be the next, or the Conservatives, or someone, I 

don’t know whom; but I want to give the members of the Government opposite a little bit of warning. I 

think they should go back and listen to what the hon. members from Kinistino had to say yesterday (and 

I referred to it already), that the people, the rural people particularly, are very patient, but there are 

limitations and I would warn them not to adopt too much of a policy of arrogance, smugness and so on, 

because they may be riding for a fall; it might come sooner than they expect. But there is one thing of 

which I am very certain, in fact, as certain as night follows day, and it is that the time will arrive in the 

province of Saskatchewan when the people will awake. I’m not going to say who may replace them; it 

may be us, or it may be someone else; but as sure as night follows day the people will rise up and will 

wipe the Socialist C.C.F. Party into oblivion, where they will remain along with Progressive, the Patrons 

of Industry and all the splinter groups of the past, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — The Progressive didn’t go into oblivion. they went into the Liberal party. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — Mr. Speaker, in their passing I would like to use the words of the poet, “As they face, 

they will go “unwept and unsung.” Mr. Speaker, from my remarks I think it must be obvious I will not 

support the motion. 

 

Mr. Kim Thorson (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I am no longer confident that “time bears all its 

suns away.” I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I join with the other members in this debate in 

congratulating you on your election as Speaker of this Assembly. I think the best compliment I can pay 

you is to assure you that I shall observe your rulings, and co-operate with you in the maintaining of 

decorum and dignity in the conduct of the affairs of this Assembly. 

 

I also want to join with other members in congratulating the mover and the seconder of the Address-in-

Reply to the Speech from the Throne. I may say that both of these men have proved worthy spokesman 

for the people they represent, and for their constituencies, and I count it as a great privilege to work with 

them as colleagues, and to know them as friends. 

 

I also want to say at the beginning, Mr. Speaker, that I approach my duties, not only in this debate but in 

this Assembly, with a good deal of humility. I may say I approach it with no misgivings. But when you 

remember that an institution is a way of doing things, and that this Legislature is an institution, a way of 

carrying out the legislative function of government according to our democratic principles; when you 

come to appreciate what democracy means and how it has evolved over many centuries, you can be 

nothing less than humble. I think it is worthwhile remembering that the first seeds of democratic thought 

can be found in some of the writings of the ancient 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
38 

Greeks some 500 years before the birth of Christ. Some of those seeds can even be found in the thought 

of the ancient Hebrews before the Christian era. In the latter days of the Roman Empire, with the fusion 

of Greco-Roman thought, and Hebraic-Christian thought; and in the Renaissance and the Reformation of 

western Europe, when the philosophers and the intellectuals at that time turned back to ancient days for 

inspiration, they found there some of the foundations which today make up democracy. Of course, in the 

last three or four hundred years we have had a good deal of thought and a good deal of experience in 

evolving a type of government which we enjoy and protect, and which we call democracy. 

 

I think it is also worthwhile saying something about what democracy is today. I think it is worthwhile 

putting on record those things on which all of us agree, for I think all of us agree that democracy first 

and primarily requires a respect for individual personality. Democracy also implies that all men have 

some interests in common, and all people who hold to democratic beliefs recognize that man’s greatest 

need is for self-expression, for the opportunity to create something lasting and worthwhile. And 

democrats also recognize that this right to self-expression for ourselves can best be preserved by 

maintaining it for others. Those of us who hold to democracy not only respect individuals and individual 

freedom, but we also believe in the rationality of mankind, in his capacity to be persuaded by reason and 

logic. We believe in the ideal of equality, in the ideal of justice, and certainly in rule by law and before 

that law all of us expect, and all of us demand, both equality and justice. 

 

Finally, one of the unique things about the democratic society is that it allows disagreement, despite 

some common ideals and common problems. I mention these things for two reasons: first of all, because 

outside of this Assembly and inside this Assembly, I hear what appears to me to be a great deal of loose 

and irresponsible talk about the meaning of democracy. And I mention it also to emphasize the point I 

was making, that one can only approach his duties here with some humility and some appreciation of the 

meaning and of the traditions of a democratic government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this debate something has been said about political parties, and I should like to make 

some observations about political parties and some observations about political philosophy. Last 

Tuesday, we had the most amazing example of mental gymnastics and perversions of history that I have 

ever witnessed in respect to political philosophies. Before I make any observation, however, on 

contemporary political parties, let me also say something else so that I will not be misunderstood. I said 

I was humble in facing my responsibilities in this Assembly, and one of the reasons I am humble is 

because I have a tremendous respect for the role of an Opposition in a democratically-constituted law-

making body. After all, there are at least two sides to every story, and as far as most of the issues in this 

House are 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
39 

concerned, there are probably more than two sides. The whole story has certainly never been told until 

we have heard from the Opposition. So if I am critical of any member of the Opposition, or any political 

party in the Opposition, I want it understood that I do not condemn their role as an Opposition group. In 

fact, it is quite the contrary. It is because I respect the role they must play that I bother to take time to 

make some observations about them. But I want to make some observations about the Liberal Party. The 

Hon. member who has just taken his seat, and who is no longer in the Assembly, said he was fond of . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — He tired himself out! 

 

Mr. Thorson: — . . . said he was fond of poetry. That being so, and certainly with the able assistance in 

the study of history from his friend from Redberry (Mr. Korchinski) I am amazed that he didn’t examine 

some of the ‘vile dust’ from whence the Liberal party has sprung in this province. 

 

I really don’t mind the members of the Liberal party saying things about the C.C.F., but I am rather 

disappointed in them that they are so ignorant of their own traditions and their own misguided efforts, 

that they can say with a free conscience that there is something evil and sinister about the motives and 

the practices of the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — There is. 

 

Mr. Thorson: — I should like to refer them to Volume 2, of the Canadian Journal of Economics and 

Political Science – On Page 27 they will an article very appropriate entitled: ‘The Saskatchewan Liberal 

Machine Before 1929’. Here is a very interesting comment. It says: 

 

“The Liberal party in Saskatchewan, like the Liberal and Conservative parties in the other provinces, 

had two sides to its organization: one formal and ineffective; the other informal and effective. The 

formal organization constituted a democratic façade which hid from the common gaze the naked 

autocracy of effective party management. 

 

“In the effective party organization which did the work, won the elections and consequently possessed 

the reality of political power, appointments were made from the top down.” 

 

I think special note ought to be taken of that term ‘naked’ autocracy. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. gentleman what he is quoting from? Who wrote it? 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
40 

Some Opposition Members: — Tim Buck! Carlyle King 

 

Mr. Thorson: — Escott Reid. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Thorson: — Mr. Speaker, it is taken from Volume 2 of ‘The Canadian Journal of Economics and 

Political Science’ and my hon. friend, I am quite sure, might find it very interesting. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: —Well, who wrote it? I’m asking whose opinion that is. 

 

Mr. Thorson: — It is my opinion. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — The article you’re quoting – who wrote it? 

 

Mr. Thorson: — You’ll find it in the volume. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — I know, but who wrote it? 

 

Mr. Thorson: — I’ve already said it once. The article was written by a man named Escott Reid. I 

understand he is employed with the Government of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think, as I was saying, that we have to take special note of that term ‘naked autocracy’. 

Some people may think it is a condition which prevails in other countries and has never existed here. 

Naked autocracy, after all, refers to complete and absolute political power. It is very much allied with 

such terms as despotism and dictatorship. 

 

Further on in the article, on Page 38, they might find this rather interesting: 

 

“The Saskatchewan Liberal machine was efficient but it was corruption which furnished it with many 

of its workers. When it could not win converts by legitimate persuasion, it did not shrink from using 

corrupt methods.” 

 

Mr. Korchinski: —You’ve been there long enough to know? 

 

Mr. Thorson: — So much, Mr. Speaker, for the Liberal party of the past. Its one virtue was it was 

efficient. It is no longer efficient. And one of the reasons it is no longer efficient is because it no longer 

knows where it is going, no longer knows what it wants or what it wants to do. Certainly, if we may 

judge from the statements made by members of the Liberal party in this debate, they cannot decide 

whether they want lower taxes or whether they want more government services. 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
41 

Mr. Speaker, the contemporary Liberal party was never better described than in an editorial in the 

‘Saskatoon Star-Phoenix’ of November 1, 1956. It is headed ‘Liberals Need a Policy’ and in part the 

editorial says this – and I am fully in agreement with it: 

 

“ . . . We are convinced that organizing cannot herd, and promises cannot entice, enough 

Saskatchewan voters into the Liberal camp to save the parts cause. The Liberals must stop their efforts 

to defy the economics of rural electrification by promising free installations for farmers. Most farmers 

realize that it is reasonable for them to pay something, and they are evidently willing to do so. 

 

“Liberals must stop blindly beating the opposition about the ears. Constructive criticism is one thing, 

but bitter tirades which often as not are wide of the mark, evoke more snickers than sympathy. 

Saskatchewan voters will be much more interested in the Liberals if the party leaves its outmoded 

past.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to say any more about the Liberal party, because after all it is really not 

of much concern to me. 

 

Government Member: — Or anybody else. 

 

Mr. Thorson: —It certainly is not my responsibility. After all, it is not up to me to attempt to remove 

the “stains” from the records and radio broadcasts of the Liberal party. It is not up to me to attempt to 

find better “gardeners” in the plots which the Liberal party calculates to cultivate. It is not up to me to 

point out that salt-coated words have their place, but . . . 

 

Mr. Gardiner (Melville): — I think there’s a ghost walking. 

 

Mr. Thorson: — . . . when we think of salt we remember that little jingle which ends by saying: “Not as 

condiment do I decry it, but as steady diet”. 

 

Some Opposition Member: — He hasn’t spoken yet. 

 

Mr. Thorson: — It is not up to me to point out that effective and responsible politicians must be 

“armed” with something more than a “river” of words. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
42 

Mr. Thorson: — This is not my responsibility. It is certainly the responsibility of the Leader of the 

Opposition, and I am sure it must bedevil him through all his waking hours. I believe that because I am 

sure he is conscientious young man, sincerely trying to do service to the Liberal party – and that’s not 

easy. I am pleased to note that he has some more delicate help, which will certainly be of some 

assistance in “battening” down the unruly elements in that monstrous political phenomenon, the 

Saskatchewan Liberal party. 

 

While I am not much concerned about the Liberals, I am somewhat concerned about the things they 

have said about the C.C.F. party. I suppose, as a young man who has some faith in democracy and who 

wants to do something about lending what few talents he has to the building of a better society, not only 

for himself but for other people, the thing that most attracts young men to the C.C.F. party is its own 

faith in democracy, and its own democratic practices. It may even surprise the Liberal party to know that 

ordinary members of society, who are also members of the C.C.F. party have worked out the policy and 

programs of the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation. I should like to refer them again to the 

‘Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science’, this time Volume 22, on Page 173 of an article 

again quite appropriately entitled ‘Membership Participation in Policy-Making in the C.C.F.’. We find 

this: 

 

“Once the qualitative and especially the quantitative limitations of the participation of lay members of 

the C.C.F. in policy-making are admitted, this rather unusual mode of policy-making remains an 

interesting and important people political phenomenon. Its importance lies in the singular experience 

in self-government which it afford the men and women who go to C.C.F. meetings, who are delegated 

to C.C.F. conventions and who work on C.C.F. policy resolutions”. 

 

And note particularly the final sentence: 

 

“This experience is shared by few people elsewhere in the democratic world.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the record of these two parties in this province proves their relative merits. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I would like to bring to the hon. members attention that it is now 5:30 o’clock. 

 

Mr. Thorson: — Tomorrow I should like to deal with some of the pressing contemporary problems of 

this province. I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 



 

February 28, 1957 

 

 
43 

BUSINESS OF THE HOUSE 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I believe it was decided that we would have finished the Speech 

from the Throne tomorrow and taken the vote. I understand the Opposition feel quite strongly that they 

want to go on with the debate into next week. I would like to point out that we have no desire to curtail 

the debate, but the debate started two weeks ago. The Speech from the Throne was introduced two 

weeks ago today, and I think, if it goes on into next week we should stop to consider whether or not we 

shouldn’t carry the debate on into evening sittings so as to let us get on with the rest of the business of 

the House. I would like to point out to Your Honour that under Standing Order 40, we cannot go into 

Committee of the Whole to discuss legislation until the Speech from the Throne is dispensed with. 

Exception has already been taken to the Standing Order being waived, and we cannot go into the 

Committee of the Whole. Therefore I feel that, probably starting next week, we ought to take the debate 

on the Speech from the Throne into consideration in the evening if we cannot wind the debate up in a 

fairly reasonable time – either tomorrow evening or Monday. I leave that to the House to give some 

thought to, and discuss. I now move the adjournment of the House. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 5:35 o’clock p.m. 


