



















































Hansard: February 15, 1957


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

2nd Day 

 

Friday, February 15, 1957 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

MOTION OF CONDOLENCE 
 

Hon. T.C. Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, it has become the custom of the Legislative Assembly at the 

commencement of the Session, each year, to pause in our deliberations and pay tribute to former 

members of this Assembly who have passed away since last we met here. 

 

This time there is a long list of former members who have gone to their reward; some eight in number; 

and I think it is rather significant that of the eight, six of them lived to ripe old ages of over 80, and one 

into the nineties, and the other two over 70 years of age; so that, while it is customary to think of 

politicians living a hard life and passing away early, they seem to enjoy remarkable longevity, judging 

by the long and useful and, I am sure, happy lives that these men had. 

 

Since the list is long, I hope the House will be patient with me while I put the history of these men on 

the records of the Assembly. I think members will appreciate the fact that it is important that we have on 

the records of the House something of the background of these men who have helped to form the 

province and to pilot it through its first 50 years of existence; men who have contributed much to the life 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

The first one I want to deal with is Senator James Alexander Calder, who died at his Ottawa home on 

July 20, 1956, at the age of 87. he was Saskatchewan’s first Provincial Treasurer and a former Minister 

of Immigration at Ottawa. Senator Calder’s passing severed a link with the great development of 

Western Canada in the generation preceding the First World War. He was one of the early settlers of the 

old North-West Territories; a pioneer in administration of education in Territorial and early Provincial 

days. His sphere of activity ranged over the area now embracing the provinces of Alberta and 

Saskatchewan. 

 

He was born at Ingersoll, Ontario, in 1869, and at an early age he moved with his family to Winnipeg, 

then merely a frontier town.  



 

February 15, 1957 

 

 
2 

Educated in the high schools of that city, he graduated with honours in science form the University of 

Manitoba in 1888, and embarked on a teaching career. In 1891, he became Principal of Moose Jaw 

Collegiate Institute, was inspector of schools for the North-West Territories from 1894 to 1900, and in 

1901, was appointed Deputy Commissioner of Education for the Territories west of Moose Jaw to the 

Rockies. He was also Secretary of the Council of Public Instruction. 

 

Mr. Calder’s career took a dramatic turn in 1905. Having decided to give up teaching and enter the legal 

profession, he was admitted to the Bar in 1906, but his career as a barrister ended virtually before it 

began. Saskatchewan had been created a Province in 1905, and in the first provincial general election of 

that year, he had successfully contested the constituency of South Regina as a Liberal, to enter the new 

Provincial Legislative Assembly. In September, 1905, he was appointed Provincial Treasurer and 

Commissioner of Education in the first Government of Premier Walter Scott, and was to contribute 

notably to the success of that Ministry in laying the foundations of provincial administration. In October 

of 1905, he was honoured by the University of Toronto with the degree of LL.D. 

 

In the 12 years he served in the provincial Cabinet, he administered almost every department of 

government, and usually was entrusted with the task of piloting the more important Government 

legislation through the House. He became Minister of Railways, Telephones and Highways, in 1912. 

during periods when ill-health forced Premier Scott to be absent from his office, the duties of the 

Premiership fell largely on Senator Calder’s shoulders. Recognized more as an administrator than as a 

legislator, his greatest achievement probably was the creation of the educational system of the province; 

but he also supplied the initiative and directive for many of Saskatchewan’s big undertakings during the 

first twelve years of its existence as a province. 

 

Perhaps the greatest tribute paid him by his Liberal associates was the offer of the Premiership to him on 

the retirement of the Hon. Walter Scott. This honour he declined in favour of the Hon. W.M. Martin, 

present Chief Justice of Saskatchewan. 

 

When Sir Robert Borden formed his Union Government at Ottawa in 1917, as a war emergency 

administration, Senator Calder promptly offered his support and was invited to join the Borden Cabinet 

as Minister of Immigration and Colonization. He entered the House of Commons for the federal 

constituency of Moose Jaw in the election of 1917. Subsequent to the Union Government’s period of 

Office, Senator Calder remained in the Meighen administration as Minister of Immigration, President of 

the Privy Council, and Minister in charge of the Department of Health. Resigning his portfolio in 1921, 

later in the same year he was appointed to the Senate of Canada in which he sat as a Progressive 

Conservative to the time of his death. Senator Calder is survived by his widow and one son. 



 

February 15, 1957 

 

 
3 

Saskatchewan lost another of its pioneer citizens and of its representatives in the Canadian Senate during 

the inter-sessional period. He was Senator John James Stevenson — “Jack” to a host of his friends 

throughout the province. He died at his Ottawa home on September 21, 1956, at the age of 84, having 

served for the last 15 years as one of Saskatchewan’s representatives in the Upper House. 

 

He was born at Russell, Ontario in 1872. Mr. Stevenson received his early education there, and later 

attended business college at Ottawa. Close association with the loggers of the Ottawa Valley led him to 

begin his career in the lumber business with the Edwards Lumber company with which he spent 14 

years. During his connection with the industry, he was sent to Labrador to conduct a survey of timber 

resources of Canada, he came west to start a lumber business of his own at Tyvan. Three years later, 

Liberals of the Francis constituency persuaded him to stand as their candidate, and in the ensuing 

provincial general election of 1908, he successfully contested the seat and entered the Legislative 

Assembly, representing Francis until 1912. 

 

Two years previously, however, he had sold his lumber business and had moved from the constituency 

he represented to the Eston district, where he took up four sections of land which he farmed from then 

on. After living in the Eston district for eight years, Mr. and Mrs. Stevenson came to Regina to give their 

growing family the advantages of better schooling. 

 

While his appointment to the Senate in 1940 carried him back to his boyhood home, he maintained to 

the end a lively interest in Saskatchewan where his pioneering ventures has prospered, and where, at 

Waskesiu, he had established a summer home. 

 

Senator Stevenson is survived by his wife, whom he married in 1899, by three sons, all graduate 

engineers, and by one daughter. 

 

Citizens of Regina were shocked when they learned, on August 4 last, that their best-known and greatly 

respected fellow-citizen, last of the original settlers of Regina, had been fatally injured in a traffic 

accident that morning, while crossing No. 1 Highway two miles east of the city, to inspect a field of 

wheat. 

 

He was Mr. James Grassick, who was 88 years old when he was struck down, and during his long 

residence he had seen Regina grown from a tent-and-shack town to the city of today. The accident which 

took his life occurred near the site of the Grassick family homestead. 



 

February 15, 1957 

 

 
4 

James Grassick has been described as the man who had helped shape Regina over a span of years from 

1898 to the day of his death; the white man the Indians called brother and named their Chief 

Strongheart; had called Regina home since the day, 75 years ago, when the Grassick family wagon, 

drawn by two slow-moving oxen, halted on the prairie grass where the city now stands. The young lad 

who arrived that day helped guide the destiny of the province and its capital city from offices of mayor, 

alderman, member of the Legislative Assembly, school trustee, and from his associations with the farm, 

the church, his business, community service organizations and sports fraternities. 

 

He was born at Fergus, Ontario March 2, 1868. He was eight years old when the family came west to 

Rapid City, Manitoba, by Red River transport in 1876, a year before the C.P.R. rails reached Winnipeg. 

He was 14 when they made the journey in the ox-cart to the then outpost of civilization that was to 

become Regina. His father staked his homestead three miles east of the site which Lieut.-Governor 

Dewdney of the North-West Territories had reserved for governmental purposes, and Mr. Grassick 

continued to farm the land on the rich Regina Plains right up until the time of his death. 

 

Mr. Grassick’s formal education was scanty. He attended Regina’s first school for four months, but 

money was scarce and his help was needed elsewhere. He took on all types of odd jobs; worked on a 

ranch, and later went into the business of carting, express hauling, and conducting, a feed and sale 

stable. In 1906, he organized the Capital Ice Company. 

 

Mr. Grassick’s first election to civic office came in 1898, when he was elected to the town council and 

served until 1903. An alderman of the city from 1915 to 1919, he was elected mayor for the years 1920 

to 1922. He served on public school boards from 1928 to 1937. He was a member of this Assembly from 

1939 to 1934, representing Regina in Conservative interests as a supporter of the Anderson Government. 

In 1939 he returned to the civic field as an alderman, and a year later, again was elected mayor for a 

two-year term. 

 

An original member of the Regina Agricultural Society, Mr. Grassick was associated with the Provincial 

Exhibition and the annual Winter Fair for half a century. When Regina Agricultural and Industrial 

Exhibition Limited was formed in 1907, he become a member of the board and was later to serve as 

president, as manager, and as a chairman of committees. At the time of his death he was chairman of the 

Women’s Committee. A devoted member of the Presbyterian and later the United Church of Canada, 

Mr. Grassick was a member of the Board of Managers of Knox Church for more than 35 years. 

 

President of the Old-Timers’ Association of which he was an original member, he was also one of the 

original members of the Canadian Order of Foresters. He was associated, over the years, with the 

Masonic Order, 



 

February 15, 1957 

 

 
5 

the sons of Scotland, the Loyal Order of Moose, the Elks, the United Order of Canadians, and with the 

Chamber of Commerce. He was an honorary life member of Regina Rotary Club and of the Riel 

Rebellion Veteran’s Association. 

 

A keen sportsman in his early days, Mr. Grassick was a member of the Regina Boxing and Wrestling 

Commission for many years, and its chairman for the five years preceding his death. 

 

One of the greatest thrills of this life came during Saskatchewan’s Golden Jubilee Year, when Indians of 

the Plains Cree tribe at Piapot Reserve made him an honorary chief – Chief Strongheart. 

 

Mr. Grassick was predeceased in 1938 by his wife, the former Bessie Beattie, whom he had married in 

1897. He is survived by one son, two daughters, a brother and two sisters, nine grandchildren and one 

great-grandchild. 

 

I would like to refer also to another former member who has passed away. Mr. John Angus MacMillan, 

who represented the Constituency of Wadena in the Legislative Assembly from 1917 to 1921 and the 

federal constituency of Mackenzie in the House of Commons from 1933 to 1940, was born at Fast Lake, 

Ainslie, N.S., on March 27, 1889. He was educated at public and high schools of his native province and 

graduated in law from Dalhousie University in 1915, and in September of that year he came West to 

Wadena where he quickly established himself. He was admitted to the Saskatchewan bar in 1918, and by 

that time had served a short term as Mayor of Wadena in 1917. In the provincial election of the same 

year, he had entered the Legislative Assembly as Liberal member for the Constituency of Wadena. 

 

Defeated in the provincial general election of 1921, he turned his thoughts to Federal politics, and after 

two unsuccessful attempts was elected to the House of Commons for Mackenzie in a by-election held in 

1933. He was re-elected in the general election of 1935 and continued to serve until 1940. 

 

He had been appointed a King’s Counsel in 1936, and in 1945 was appointed a judge, but resigned 

almost immediately. 

 

Mr. MacMillan, who was a member of the Wadena Masonic Lodge and the Wadena Shrine for many 

years, died on August 12, 1956. He is survived by his widow, the former Myrtle Margaret Quarla, of 

Moose Jaw, whom he married in 1944. Three brothers and four sisters also survive. 



 

February 15, 1957 

 

 
6 

I would like to refer also to Mr. James Arthur Smith who was 87 years old at the time of his death, 

August 21st last. Mr. Smith was born in Kingston, Ontario, in 1869. He came west to Manitoba in 1897 

and farmed at Griswold near Brandon. Moving to Saskatchewan in 1902 when the railway was pushed 

westward, he farmed for a time at Wolseley, before moving to the Pheasant Forks district, where he 

spent the greater part of his life. Inspired by a genuine concern for the welfare of Saskatchewan farmers, 

he made his first successful bid for membership of the Legislative Assembly in 1917, as a Liberal, and 

was re-elected in 1921 and 1925 in the then constituency of Pheasant Hills. Mr. Smith retired from 

active farming in 1947 and moved to Regina, where he continued to reside until his death. Predeceased 

by his wife in 1947, he is survived by a son James Jackson Smith of Carrot River, and by four 

grandchildren. 

 

The sixth former member of this Assembly to whom I should like to refer is Dr. Thomas Frederick 

Waugh, who was 85 years of age when he died in September of last year, in New York City where, 

latterly, he had made his home. 

 

He was born November 15, 1871, at Warwick, Ontario, and was educated at Strathroy College, Ontario, 

and went on to take his M.D. degree at Detroit College of Medicine. Entering medical practice at Park 

River, N.D., where he married the former Mary E. Wadge, Dr. and Mrs. Waugh moved to Imperial, 

Sask., in 1911 and practised medicine there for 20 years. 

 

Dr. Waugh entered the Legislative Assembly as a Liberal in the Arm River by-election of 1928, but sat 

only through one Session of the House, suffering defeat in the general election of 1929. Despite the 

brevity of his membership, however, he made his mark, being credited with having originated the idea 

that later developed into the present system of municipal doctors. 

 

On his retirement from active practice, Dr. and Mrs. Waugh moved to Victoria, B.C., and thence to New 

York City. He is survived by his widow and one daughter. 

 

I would also like to make reference to a veteran of the Riel Rebellion. He was the first mayor of the 

town of Wolseley, the oldest superannuate of the Government of Saskatchewan, and a member of this 

Assembly from 1912 to 1921. I refer to Robert Armstrong Magee, who died, at the ripe age of 92, at 

Vancouver on January 12, 1957. 

 

Mr. Magee was born at Mashan in the Gatineau district of Quebec in 1864. He came west to Wolseley in 

1883, and for many years operated a general store in that town. He was elected the town’s first mayor; 

he was returned to that office by his fellow townsmen several times in later years. 



 

February 15, 1957 

 

 
7 

He was first elected to the Saskatchewan Legislature in 1912, for the Constituency of Moose Mountain. 

He was again elected in the general election of 1917, and sat as a Liberal member. Moose Mountain 

riding disappearing in the redistribution preceding the 1921 provincial election, Mr. Magee was 

unsuccessful in his bid for election in the Constituency of Wolseley. Later in 1921 he was appointed 

sheriff and local registrar for the Judicial District of Moosomin, a position he held until 1939 when he 

was superannuated. During his term in the Legislature he was prominent in the debates on the extension 

of the franchise to women and on the “Banish the Bar” legislation. 

 

On his retirement from the public service, Mr. Magee moved with his wife, the former Eleanor Margaret 

Campbell of Wolseley to Regina, but subsequently went west to Kelowna, B.C., where they lived for 

almost 15 years. The couple celebrated their 65th wedding anniversary on December 31st, just two 

weeks before Mr. Magee died at Vancouver. The only child of the union died at the age of seven years. 

 

Mr. Magee served with the Moose Mountain Scouts in the Riel Rebellion, and received a medal for the 

part he played in the uprising. 

 

The eighth of the former members to whom I would like to refer is Mr. Howard McConnell, Q.C., a 

former Provincial Treasurer and Minister of Municipal Affairs who passed away on Saturday, February 

9, at Saskatoon at the age of 71 years. 

 

Howard McConnell had been active in legal, political, civic, church and fraternal affairs in Saskatoon 

for nearly 50 years. He had served his city as Alderman and Mayor, and had been a member of the 

University Senate for 23 years. He was born at Springbrook, Ont., January 27, 1886, and was educated 

in the public and high schools of his native province. He taught school for a time before coming west, in 

1907, to join his parents who were then residents of Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. McConnell attended the University of Saskatchewan, obtaining his B. A. Degree, and later studied 

law at Osgoode Hall in Toronto. After attaining his LL.B. degree he returned to Saskatoon to practise his 

profession, was called to the Saskatchewan Bar in 1916, and was appointed King’s Counsel in 1929. 

 

Taking an early and active part in civic affairs, he was elected as an alderman of the city in 1919 and 

served in that capacity until 1921. The following year he was elected Mayor of Saskatoon. 

 

A Conservative in politics, Mr. McConnell was first elected to this Assembly in 1927 in a by-election 

necessitated by the resignation of the lat Hon. A.P. McNab, who later was to become 

Lieutenant-Governor of 



 

February 15, 1957 

 

 
8 

Saskatchewan. Re-elected for Saskatoon City in the general election of 1929, later in the year he was 

returned by acclamation upon being appointed Provincial Treasurer in the Cabinet of the late Dr. J.T.M. 

Anderson. Later he became Minister of Municipal Affairs, serving through one of the most difficult 

periods in the history of the province. 

 

A member of the University Senate from 1923 to 1946, he represented the Province-at-large, as well as 

being elected by Convocation. He was awarded an Honorary Life Membership of the Saskatchewan 

Alumni Association in May, 1956. 

 

An active member of Grace United Church, Saskatoon, for many years, Mr. McConnell was a Past 

Master of Saskatchewan Lodge No. 16, A.F. and A.M. He is survived by his widow, the former Valerie 

Thornicroft of Regina; his twin brother, Douglas, a lawyer at Rosetown, and by two sisters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have taken the time of the House to put these facts on the record because I think it is 

important that we should always take a little time out to realize how much we owe to the past, and to the 

men and women who contributed to the life of Saskatchewan. I am sure this information will be useful 

to have on the records. 

 

There is much that I can say, but I am sure that other members, especially those who had the privilege of 

knowing these men, or who represent the constituencies where they were known, will want to say 

something. Mr. Grassick, of course, practically all of us knew quite well and came to love him and 

respect him very deeply. 

 

I had the privilege of sitting with Mr. MacMillan in the House of Commons, and a more friendly and 

kindly man it would be difficult to imagine. When I went to the House of Commons as a new member, I 

found him extremely friendly and extremely helpful. 

 

The thought I would like to leave with the Legislature is that all eight of these men who have lived to 

advanced years, each in their particular way and in their respective communities, and in their different 

political parties, all helped to make some worthwhile contribution to their day and generation. As we 

pay tribute to them, it should be our hope that we, in our day, may be able to be worthy of the example 

which they have set us. 

 

I would, therefore, beg leave to move, seconded by Mr. McDonald, the Hon. Leader of the Opposition 

 

That this Assembly record its sincere regrets at the passing, since last Session, of eight former 

Members, namely: 



 

February 15, 1957 

 

 
9 

Senator James Alexander Calder, Saskatchewan’s first Provincial Treasurer and Commissioner of 

Education, who represented South Regina in the First Legislature from 1905 to 1908, and the 

Constituency of Saltcoats in the Second and Third Legislatures from 1908 to 1917; 

 

Senator John James Stevenson, who represented the Constituency of Francis in the Second 

Legislature, from 1908 to 1912; 

 

Robert Armstrong Magee, who represented the Constituency of Moose Mountain in the Third and 

Fourth Legislatures, from 1912 to 1921; 

 

James Arthur Smith, who represented the Constituency of Pheasant Hills in the Fourth, Fifth and Sixth 

Legislatures, from 1917 to 1929; 

 

John Angus MacMillan, who represented the Constituency of Wadena in the Fourth Legislature, from 

1917 to 1921; 

 

Dr. Thomas Frederick Waugh, who represented the Constituency of Arm River in the Sixth 

Legislature, during the 1929 Session; 

 

James Grassick, who represented Regina City in the Seventh Legislature from 1929 to 1934, and 

 

Howard McConnell, a former Provincial Treasurer and Minister of Municipal Affairs, who served in 

the Sixth and Seventh Legislatures from 1927 to 1934. 

 

This Assembly gratefully records its appreciation of the contributions these former Members made 

in the formative period of the development of the Province of which all were pioneer residents who, 

during long and fruitful lives, gave notable service to their communities, to the Province of 

Saskatchewan, and to their country. 

 

Sharing their deep sense of loss, the Assembly extends its sincere condolences to members of the 

bereaved families. 

 

 Mr. A.H. McDonald (Leader of Official Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, on seconding the motion of 

the Hon. Premier, there is very little I can say that would add anything to what the Premier has already 

placed on the records of this Legislature; but it seems to me that, each year at this time, when we pay our 

respects to ex-members of the Legislature, the list seems to be a little longer. 



 

February 15, 1957 

 

 
10 

I was just thinking, as the Premier was reading over the accomplishments of many of the ex-members, 

that Saskatchewan today is only coming of age, and we, year by year, have more older people in our 

midst. That probably creates some problems for us, but it also gives us the opportunity to stop and think 

that the senior citizens of this province, both those who were engaged in public life and those who took 

an active part in their own private affairs, made tremendous contributions to this province. And you can 

see from the remarks of the Premier today that we do owe a great debt to the senior legislators of this 

Assembly. 

 

There are only three of the ex-members whose memories we are honouring today that I had the 

opportunity of knowing personally. Mr. Grassick was one, and I am sure everyone who has served in 

this Legislature knew the late Mr. Grassick very well. It so happened that the day James Grassick was 

killed in an accident just east of the city, I happened to appear at that particular spot a few moments after 

the accident. I felt we had lost one of the real pioneer citizens not only of Saskatchewan but of western 

Canada, and one of those citizens who had the foresight and the courage to make Saskatchewan, and to 

make western Canada, what it is today. 

 

Then, of course, I was acquainted personally with John Angus MacMillan, one of the few people who 

has ever been appointed to the judiciary and found it necessary to resign from that position almost 

immediately after being appointed. 

 

I also had the privilege of knowing Mr. Magee, as he was the sheriff in the town of Moosomin in my 

own constituency for some considerable time — I think from 1921 to 1939. Mr. Magee was always 

looked upon by the people of that town and of that community as one of the real senior citizens of 

Saskatchewan, and one of those people who had made a major contribution to our province. 

 

I sincerely hope that all those members who had the opportunity of knowing personally some of the 

people we are honouring here today, will have some further remarks to make with regard to these 

ex-members. I, being one of the younger members of this Legislature, have not had the opportunity of 

working with any of the people that we are honouring here today; but at this time I take great pleasure in 

seconding the motion of the Hon. Premier. 

 

Mr. A.P. Weber (Meadow Lake): — There is not much that I can add to what the Premier and Mr. 

McDonald have said in paying tribute to men who have served in this Legislature previously, and have 

now passed on; but on behalf of myself and my colleagues of the Social Credit group, I would like to 

add, in paying tribute, our respects to those men who have passed on. 



 

February 15, 1957 

 

 
11 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, I too, wish to join with the comments made by the 

Premier. There is only one of them I was well acquainted with; I have met Mr. Grassick, but did not Mr. 

MacMillan, however. Mr. MacMillan was well-known and well-respected in Wadena and surrounding 

area. He had been known throughout his years as a very progressive thinker. I think his records in the 

House where when he was in this Legislature, also his records in the House of Commons, showed that 

he was ahead of his time in those days with his thoughts and his ideas, and Mr. MacMillan, up until the 

time of his passing, was a man who was always looking forward to progress and advancement for the 

west. Mr. MacMillan, as the Leader of the Opposition mentioned, I think was a rare case in himself 

when he found it necessary, after receiving the appointment to the Bench as a Judge to decline it, or to 

resign (whichever circumstance it was). I wish to take this opportunity of expressing my deepest 

sympathies to Mr. MacMillan’s family and friends. 

 

Mr. Ross A. McCarthy (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to add a word to what has 

been said in connection with the late Mr. Magee. He was one of the very few left of the vanguard to the 

Riel Rebellion. I knew him very well personally. As a matter of fact, he was the first man I ever voted 

for. He ran at that time in what is now Qu’Appelle-Wolseley, and I happened to be living in that 

constituency at that time. He was a man who was well-respected. He left his mark on his community and 

on his province, and I am sure it is very fitting that he should be honoured at this time. 

 

The last time I saw him was two years ago, and I was surprised at how well he had carried his age, and 

how well he was physically and mentally at that time. 

 

I don’t know that I have anything more to say. He has left his mark on this province and one of the true 

pioneers of the province, and all during his life he did contribute a lot to any public organization that 

was for the good of his community or for his province. In those districts where he had lived, he has 

made his mark and it still carries on. 

 

Mr. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, the only one of the eight former members of 

the Legislature I knew personally was the late Mr. James Grassick, and I would just briefly like to say a 

few words in that connection, and will try not to repeat anything that the Premier has said. 



 

February 15, 1957 

 

 
12 

When my late father first came to this city in 1892 he knew Mr. Grassick at that time. I believe he was in 

the cartage business, and later on organized the Capital Ice business. It is true that he was deeply 

interested in civic affairs, and it is a fact that the city of Regina has honoured his memory by naming one 

of its playgrounds after him, and one of the streets in the west end of the Lakeview area. 

 

Mr. Grassick was quite active right up until the unfortunate accident on 4th August, and I recall seeing 

him at the Exhibition the day before. He seemed just as hale and hearty as ever, and was one of the few 

men whom I ever knew who did not seem to change with the years. I first met him in 1938 and we spent 

two years on the Council together. We all thought a great deal of MR. Grassick and regretted the 

unfortunate end which overcame him. 

 

Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, I know the citizens of Saskatoon would wish me to 

say a few words of respect of one who has contributed much to the community of that city. I refer to the 

late Mr. McConnell who was very prominent in civic and provincial politics. During the time of his 

civic politics he was possibly one of the most popular and respected mayors of the city. He contributed 

much in the way of church work, especially among the young folks; and he gave untiringly of his efforts 

and time to the work of the University, and the standing of that University today is much to his credit. 

My condolences go to his widow and relatives. 

 

Hon. C.M. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, two years ago, on the occasion of 

Saskatchewan’s Golden Jubilee, in delivering my Budget Address, I took occasion to refer to the people 

who had filled the position of Provincial Treasurer since the inception of the province. We put on the 

record the photographs of each of these people; there had been, up to that date, eight people hold his 

position. Of the eight, only the late Hon. George Bell had passed away; the other seven were all living. 

That has now been reduced to five. I think this just goes to show us that with the march of time the 

numbers of these old-timers, these men who have served so well, become fewer and fewer. 

 

The Hon. Mr. Calder was Provincial Treasurer for seven years; he delivered the first seven budget 

addresses that were ever given in this House. I cannot help but think of the differences between the 

budgets that were delivered in those days and the budgets that are being delivered today. This, too, 

shows another way in which time has passed. Mr. Calder started out as a Liberal and finished as a 

Conservative, and this is unusual; we often see people who start out as Conservatives and finish as 

Liberals; but in this case it was reversed. 



 

February 15, 1957 

 

 
13 

The other former Provincial Treasurer who has passed away is Mr. McConnell. I had the pleasure of 

seeing Mr. McConnell just a few months ago. We had quite a chat about the years when he was 

Provincial Treasurer. He told me of some of the problems that he had in those two years that he 

introduced his budgets, in 1930 and 1931, two of the most difficult years that Saskatchewan has ever 

had; the situation was getting worse and worse, of course, as we got further into the depression. 

 

I would like to pay my tribute to these two men — Mr. Calder, as a former Provincial Treasurer, and Mr. 

McConnell, as a former Provincial Treasurer and a former member for Regina. 

 

I also had the pleasure of knowing the late Mr. MacMillan, and I would like, at this time, to record what 

a warm-hearted man Mr. MacMillan was and to say how kindly he treated me. He was of a different 

political faith, but when I was in his town he invited me to come to his home, where I spent a very 

delightful evening. He was most kind and his hospitality was certainly much appreciated. 

 

Then, too, I had the pleasure of knowing our good friend, “Jim” Grassick, for a number of years. I sat 

with Mr. Grassick on the Exhibition Board for 20 years, from 1936 to 1956 — 20 years we were 

together on that Board and I really got to know him very well; there were many committees on which 

we sat together. The people of Saskatchewan truly lost one of their real pioneers and one of the men who 

has done much to make Saskatchewan great, and particularly one who has helped tremendously in the 

development of Regina. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I happened to be acquainted with several of these 

men who have been honoured here today. I knew Senator Stevenson very well for quite a number of 

years. No one who knew the gentleman could help but be attracted to him and be proud of being his 

friend. 

 

I also knew Mr. MacMillan. As a matter of fact, I was one among many others who went up to Wadena 

in 1933 and helped elect him as Federal member — a very pleasant experience indeed. I was very 

surprised and sorry to hear that he has passed away. 

 

However, the person with whom I can claim perhaps a better acquaintance than anyone else is Dr. 

Waugh. Dr. Waugh served for one term in this House as the representative of Arm River constituency. 

He was elected in a by-election in 1928, and he could not return after the general election of 1929. He 

was a medical doctor and he was very much appreciated, and is very much appreciated for the great 

service which he rendered to the farms and the community in which he resided, particularly during the 

years of 1918 and 1919, during the ’flu epidemic. We all know that that was 



 

February 15, 1957 

 

 
14 

a very trying time indeed, as far as medical men were concerned; they certainly contributed a great 

amount to the welfare and the benefit of their communities in that particular period. 

 

Dr. Waugh had not resided in the constituency of Arm River for several years prior to his death, and, as 

the Premier has stated, he had latterly made his home in the city of New York. The last time I met him 

was in 1948, at the convention in Ottawa in that year. He was at that convention, and I was very glad to 

have the opportunity of seeing him there. He has, Mr. Speaker, left a record of service and a host of 

friends in the community where he lived and worked, and I do not think there is any greater monument 

that you can leave to any person. 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, I hesitate to rise, being a newcomer to the Assembly. 

However, one of the former members we are honouring here today was a member for part of the 

constituency that I represent in this Legislature. I refer to Mr. J.A. Smith who, I believe, is the man 

among those being honoured today who spent the longest number of years in this Legislature as a 

member. 

 

Mr. Smith, as has already been stated, had the interests of the farm people of his area, and of this 

province, in his mind and in his heart during the years in which he gave service to the people of the area 

which I now represent. His homestead still stands north of the town I live in, about 12 miles north of 

Lemberg — a beautiful farm location with buildings which are a credit to agriculture in this province. 

He was a progressive farmer, a man who believed in advanced means of operating his farm in that 

community. Unfortunately, in his later years he wasn’t given the means, or no longer had the means, to 

enjoy the later years of his life that he would like to have had. He did not have the opportunity to enjoy 

himself in possibly the way we will, due to the fact that we have taken care of ourselves, by providing 

pensions for members. 

 

With regard to the others, I did have the opportunity of knowing almost all of them. I was a young boy 

when I knew most of them, particularly “Jack” Stevenson, as he was known even to those of us who 

were younger. I had the opportunity, in late years, of working with him on many occasions — possibly 

not on occasions that would give too much joy to the members on the Government side; but Mr. 

Stevenson has worked with me, and I can well remember on one of the last occasions he was out 

working with us, at the age of about seventy-five, one morning getting up in my hotel and finding that 

Mr. Stevenson had departed at five o’clock in the morning for points about 200 miles away. He was 

driving the car himself, and by the time five o’clock came he was back at the point from which he had 

left, after visiting many people throughout the area that he had covered during that particular day. I 

believe that, when he retired about one o’clock the 



 

February 15, 1957 

 

 
15 

next morning, after spending the evening discussing the time he had spent that day, he still seemed as 

lively, if not livelier, than most of us who were sitting with him — young people beginning to undertake 

the work that he had been engaged in for his lifetime. 

 

The others who have been mentioned — speaking of Mr. MacMillan, I can remember very well, sitting 

up in the galleries in the House of Commons, as a boy, watching men such as Mr. MacMillan and the 

Premier of this Province as they engaged in the work of operating our country in Ottawa. I did have the 

opportunity of knowing each of the others who are being honoured today — at least having met each 

and every one of them. I would like to be a party to extending to the wives, children, and those that have 

been left behind my sincere sympathy; and particularly to the family of Mr. J.A. Smith, who was once 

the representative for the area I now represent. They have left an example for those of us who are 

entering this Chamber for the first time, an example which we may well follow in attempting to carry 

out the wishes of the people of this province. They have laid down the torch; I hope that we can hold it 

high. 

 

(The Motion of Condolence was then passed by silent standing vote) 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Douglas, seconded by Mr. McDonald; 

 

“Ordered, That the Resolution of condolence just passed, together with transcripts of the oral 

tributes in memory of the deceased former Members, be communicated to the bereaved families, on 

behalf of this Assembly, by Mr. Speaker.” 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 3:30 o’clock p.m. 


