




















































Hansard: March 27, 1957


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

30th Day 

 

Wednesday, March 27, 1957 

 

The House met at 2.30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

COMPLIMENTARY MESSAGE 

 

Mr. A.L.S. Brown (Bengough):  Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the day are proceeded with, I 

would like to read a short communication which is complimentary to all me of this House, and insofar as 

it is not too often that compliments are paid to the members of this House I would like your indulgence 

to read this communication, which is brief, addressed to the Government Whip on this side of the 

House: 

 

“Dear Mr. Howe: 

 

I would like to thank you, Mr. Howe, and indeed all members of the House for the splendid co-

operation I received during the legislative broadcasts that have just ended. I feel it is great honour to 

be on this work, which was a pleasure to do. I only hope that the work I did is up to what everyone on 

both sides of the House expected of me. Now I look forward to another Session, which will come in 

time. 

 

In closing may I wish you well in the work which you handle so well. Thanks again for everything. 

 

“Bob McKell” 

On behalf of Broadcast Station CKRM” 

 

Mr. Speaker:  I would like to make a short announcement with regard to arrangements that have been 

made for the presentation ceremony to take place in this Chamber later this afternoon. I am told that, in 

order to accommodate the guests who have been invited to attend this presentation, a motion will, later 

this afternoon, be submitted to the House that the House adjourn at 5.15 p.m. Members are requested to 

remain in their seats during the presentation. 

 

SECOND READING 

 

Bill No. 82 –- An Act to amend The Mechanics’ Lien Act. 

 

Hon. R.A. Walker (Attorney General):  Mr. Speaker, this Bill provides a new series of clauses 

dealing with The Mechanics’ Lien Act, and relating to the registration of mechanic liens against leases 

of Crown property. the old procedure was not adequately 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

March 27, 1957 

 

2 

covered in the Act, and it is desired to provide a similar procedure to that available to builders and 

suppliers of materials and labour with respect to ordinary land, to provide the same machinery for the 

protection of liens of builders and suppliers of materials and labour who supply these things to oil well 

sand to other mining installations. Instead, however, of providing for registration in the Land titles 

Offices registration will be made with the proper officer of the Department of Minister affairs; and with 

that explanation, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mrs. M.J. Batten (Humboldt):  Mr. Speaker, I have to apologize for not having had an opportunity 

to peruse this Act, and I would like to move the adjournment of the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned). 

 

According to Order, the Assembly adjourned at 5.15 p.m. for presentation of portrait of late Lieutenant-

Governor Dr. J.M. Uhrich. 

 

PRESENTATION OF PORTRAIT 

of 

Late Lieutenant Governor, Hon. Dr. Uhrich 
 

Mr. Speaker:  Your Honour, Mrs. Uhrich, members of the Legislative Assembly and Ladies and 

Gentlemen, first of all I want to express the welcome of the Assembly to our guests here, this afternoon. 

We are very pleased indeed that you are able to be with us on this occasion. 

 

The occasion, of course, as we all know, is the presentation to the Government of a portrait of the late 

Dr. Uhrich. 

 

Those of us who have frequented these buildings for some time must have noticed the intense interest 

shown by visitors in the portraits that are hung in our galleries, and those visitors, if they are at all 

informed in Saskatchewan’s history, as they progress around the corridors must have brought to mind 

much of Saskatchewan’s political history associated with the men who have been active in the 

development of our province. 

 

I think, and I am sure we all agree, that it is entirely appropriate that the portrait of such a man as the late 

Dr. Uhrich should be added to those which are already there. Dr. Uhrich served for many years as a 

member of the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. He served in various Government portfolios, and, 

of course, he became at last, Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of Saskatchewan. I was not a 

contemporary of Dr. Uhrich’s in this Assembly, but I knew him as citizens of Saskatchewan know 

Saskatchewan’s prominent men. I know the high regard in which he was held by the people of 

Saskatchewan; and I am very happy, on this occasion, to preside at the time of this presentation. 

 

It gives me pleasure to call on the first gentleman who will address us, this afternoon – the Hon. T.C. 

Douglas, Premier of Saskatchewan. 



 

March 27, 1957 

 

 

3 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier):  Mr. Speaker, your Honour, distinguished Guests and friends, one of 

the advantages of getting older as a province is that we do develop a history and a tradition, and part of 

that history is the story of the men and women who have helped to build Saskatchewan; and, today, we 

are to have presented to the Government, to have hung in the halls of this Legislative Building, the 

portrait of a man who played an important part in the province’s history. Dr. Uhrich, for twenty-three 

years, was a member of this Legislative Assembly as member for Rosthern; from 1922 to 1944, with the 

exception of the period from 1929 to 1934, he was a member of the Government. He was Provincial 

Secretary and Minister of Public Health. During that time he was a well-known public figure; he made a 

very considerable contribution to the public life of Saskatchewan. 

 

Like you, sir, I did not have the privilege of sitting in this Legislature with the late Dr. Uhrich, but I did 

have the high privilege of working with him when he became the Lieutenant-Governor of 

Saskatchewan. During the period of time that I have been privileged to hold my present office I have 

worked with several Lieutenant-Governors, and anyone who is familiar with public life knows that the 

association between the Government and the Lieutenant-Governor has to be of a very friendly and 

informal character if the work of the Government is to go on. I want to express my great pleasure at the 

fine association which we have always had between the Government and the Lieutenant-Governor, and 

that is particularly true, sir, of the present Lieutenant-Governor, who is not only popular with the people 

of Saskatchewan, but with whom the Government has had very happy relations. 

 

During the period when Dr. Uhrich was Lieutenant-Governor, from 1948 until his untimely death in 

1951, we worked very closely together. His death came to all of us as a great shock; we missed him both 

as a friend and as a public servant. I think sir, it is most appropriate that we should have adjourned the 

business of the Legislature in order that we may take a few moments to pay tribute to his memory, to 

accept his portrait in order that it may hang in the halls of this Legislative building, and be a constant 

reminder to his friends and to the many people of Saskatchewan of the outstanding service which he 

gave in his day and generations; and in order that it may also be an inspiration to the rest of us, to try to 

do our part in our day and generation to be worthy of those who have gone before us. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Thank you very much, Mr. Premier. I will now ask Mr. McDonald to say a few words. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition):  Your Honour, Mr. Speaker, Members of the 

Legislature and Honoured Guests, the late Dr. Uhrich name will long be remembered, not only by 

members of this Provincial Legislature but I am sure by all of the people of Saskatchewan, for the active 

part that he played while he was Minister of Public Health of this Province. You will all recall that, at 

that time there were a number of conferences held in Canada, when the possibility of public health 

services for Canada was being discussed, and at that time the possibility of a national health scheme for 

Canada was also discussed – something that we are getting closer to day by day, and it would appear 

that it will be a reality in the very near future. 



 

 

March 27, 1957 

 

4 

Dr. Uhrich was certainly well qualified for the position of Minister of Public Health of this province, 

due to the fact that he was a medical doctor who came out to this western country at a very young age, 

both in his own particular age and the age of our province. He practised in the vicinity of Rosthern, then 

came into the Government, acting as Minister of Public Health. He was a very hard worker, and I think 

that can be adequately demonstrated by the fact that he served as Minister of Public Health, Minister of 

Public Works and Provincial Secretary all at the same time. We can see from the amount of work that is 

performed by the different departments now, the tremendous load that Dr. Uhrich carried when he was a 

Minister of the Crown in this province. Dr. Uhrich was a deeply religious man, and I am convinced that 

he felt that, through the fact he was a medical doctor and Minister of Public Health in this province, he 

was able to serve his people best by actually administering his services as a doctor and administering the 

Public Health portfolio of this province. I think it is only right that his picture should be hung with other 

members who have served in similar positions, either as Lieutenant-Governor or speaker of this 

Assembly, in the halls of this building, so that people who visit this building from time to time, will be 

able to view the men and women who have served Saskatchewan so well and made it the great province 

that we enjoy today. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Thank you, Mr. McDonald. I did not introduce Mr. McDonald as the Leader of the 

Official Opposition; I thought perhaps everyone was aware of that without introduction. The next 

speaker, however, is a new member to the Legislature, Mr. Weber, who is the member for Meadow lake 

and Leader of the Social Credit group in the House. I am sure that Mr. Weber is going to prove a good 

member of the Legislature, and we like having him with us. I call upon Mr. Weber to say a few words. 

 

Mr. A.P. Weber:  Mr. Speaker, Your Honour, Mrs. Uhrich, Honoured Guests and Members of the 

Legislative Assembly: I am indeed proud and happy to have this opportunity to take part in this 

ceremony. I had the pleasure, in my younger days, of knowing Dr. Uhrich – as early as 1926. I was 

always interested and aware of his many contributions to the province of Saskatchewan and to the 

country as a whole, as a member of this Legislature. I was also aware of the great respect in which he 

was held by the citizens of the province through his work in his community, through his work in his 

profession, and through his work in his church activities. I also had the pleasure of being associated for a 

time with Dr. Uhrich as a member of the same Council of the Knights of Columbus. 

 

Dr. Uhrich, in my opinion, was one of the province’s most outstanding men. He was rewarded in the end 

of assuming one of the most honoured positions that a province can offer to any of its citizens. 

 

I think it is very appropriate, Mrs. Uhrich, at this time, for a portrait of your late husband to be put in this 

Legislative Building for all to see and to remind them of his contribution to the public and to this 

province. We are indeed indebted to you, Mrs. Uhrich, for making this possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  The next name on the program is the name of a gentleman who was a contemporary of 

the late Dr. Uhrich in this House. I call now on the Hon. J.H. Brockelbank, Minister of Mineral 

Resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Thank you, Mr. Brockelbank. Still another contemporary of the late Dr. Uhrich is a 

member of the Legislature at this time. I call on Mr. Loptson, the member for Saltcoats. 

 

Mr. A. Loptson (Saltcoats):  Mr. Speaker, Your Honour and Honoured Guests: I certainly appreciate 

this opportunity to pay tribute to a man whose friendship and guidance I have appreciated more than I 

can express in words. 

 



 

March 27, 1957 

 

 

5 

I first met Dr. Uhrich in this Legislature in 1929. I sat with him until 1938. I found him to be a man who 

was not only a great statesman but a great humanitarian and a devoted public servant. He endeared 

himself to everyone he came in contact with, and I can assure you that his memory, his acquaintanceship 

and what he did for me as a green member, will never be erased from my memory. 

 

I can only endorse what the other speakers have said in respect to the portrait, how fitting it is that his 

portrait should be in our building here with the portraits of the other great men who have served before 

him. I can assure you, also that I will never forget the great humour the late Dr. Uhrich used to have, 

which the previous speaker mentioned. I do not want you to blame him for any misgiving that I may 

have developed since; you know I was a pretty tame member during the first 



 

 

March 27, 1957 

 

6 

session; but if there are any faults to be found since, I have developed them from the C.C.F. Government 

over the last few years that I have been here, or since 1948. 

 

However, again I want to express my appreciation to you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to 

say these few words. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Thank you very much, Mr. Loptson. I will make a note of that – that you know a fault 

when you see it. 

 

Now we have another guest here this afternoon – one of whose presence in the city I was unaware until 

just before we entered this Chamber. I am sure we all feel honoured and pleased that the Rt. Hon. J.G. 

Gardiner, Federal Minister of Agriculture, is here with us on this occasion, and I would ask Mr. 

Gardiner to say a few words to us now. 

 

Rt. Hon. J.G. Gardiner:  Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislature and Honoured guests, it was 

unknown to me until less than an hour ago that this occasion had been arranged, and while I have not 

had much time to gather my thoughts together, after having made a drive up through the section of the 

country where Dr. Uhrich used to be, and from there westward, it is indeed a happy occasion for me to 

be here at this time, when this honour is being given to a man who so richly deserves it. 

 

Each one of those who has spoken has reviewed the occasion upon which they first met Dr. Uhrich. I 

first me him before he was a member of this House and while he was a practising physician in one of the 

smaller village communities of what was then thought of as the northern part of the province. I met him 

along with Mrs. Uhrich in their old home, and the memory of that occasion is one which, I think, is more 

typical of Dr. Uhrich as a man than any other occasion I can think of. We were in the home of a 

practising family doctor in a community where everyone respected and honoured the doctor, and when a 

few friends were gathered together in order to enjoy a meal such as few could prepare better than Mrs. 

Uhrich, we did what was quite customary in the days before we had the radio, let alone television – we 

all stood up around a musical instrument and sang all the old songs. Dr. Uhrich was a leader. He never 

enjoyed anything more than getting a group of people together, particularly those with whom he was 

closely associated, and leading them in the singing of songs; and the best part of it was that he could 

always give the history of the music that he was enjoying. He could take us right back to the days of the 

composer, and tell us what a wonderful contribution had been made to the enjoyment of people by the 

composing of such music. 

 

That was something which was entirely different from the associations that one had later, although he 

always carried that kind of thing right through all those associations. I had the privilege of being here 

when he first came to the House in 1921, and I also had the privilege of being sworn in to the 

Government along with him. We entered the Government on the same day; we were sworn in about the 

same moment and along with us was ‘Jimmy’ Cross, who used to sit in this House for the City of 

Regina. 



 

March 27, 1957 

 

 

7 

We three were sworn in at the same time. So my associations with him from that time on were very 

close, and there is no one I respected more, of all those with whom I have been associated throughout 

the years, for the very fine service which he gave and I do respect Dr. Uhrich. 

 

Then as time went by we served in the Opposition together and sat in the seats, as was indicated a few 

moments ago, not on that side of the House but over on this side of the House; and again we enjoyed the 

experiences of being in the Opposition, and I would just like to say to some of the members who are in 

the Opposition now, that the most enjoyable days I have ever had since I have been in politics were 

when I was sitting in the Opposition. So it isn’t always to be regretted that one is in the Opposition; 

there is a very fine service to give while there under the institutions of government as we know them and 

as we acknowledge them. There was no one who gave better service on both sides, whether he was in 

the Government or whether he was in the Opposition, than Dr. Uhrich. 

 

As has been stated to members from both sides, he had a sense of humour which always carried him 

further in the Opposition than it does on the Government benches. That sense of humour was 

acknowledged by all of us and enjoyed by all of us. when you who now form the Government were 

fortunate enough to take over and Dr. Uhrich eventually took himself out of political activity, he thought 

for a little while that he might go back and associate with the old friends he had enjoyed his youth with, 

before he came here. I called on him one day at his home back in eastern Canada, and after we had had a 

few words of conversation he said, “You know, I don’t feel at home here; my place is really out in the 

west where I grew up along with the people I served as a physician, and I am going back.” Well, it 

wasn’t very long until he was back here and associating with us again. In due course the honour was 

conferred upon him, of which you were reminding us today, and he became the holder of the highest 

office in the interests of the people of Canada, that of representing the Crown here; and I am sure all of 

us in this country who have learned to honour the benefits which we obtain from the Commonwealth of 

Nations are always pleased to be associated with anything having to do with the Monarchy; and under 

the Sovereigns – the last two or three Sovereigns – we have had, it has been a great honour to recognize 

families that live pretty much the same kind of family life as do the ordinary families throughout the 

Empire. I have had, and I know your Premier here has had too, the opportunity to see them in their home 

life, and there is nothing that has ever reminded me so much, when I am over in Britain, of the way in 

which we used to enjoy ourselves in the rural areas in eastern Canada and the rural areas of western 

Canada, as an hour or so in the home of the Sovereign. There is no one who could have represented that 

family life and that association better – the sing-songs, the games that were played, I recall the old 

charades that we used to play in the homes throughout this country. I enjoyed playing the game of 

‘Murder’ with the King and Queen and members of the Royal Family – a game very similar to that game 

of Charades, which made it possible for us all to get into the closest association with one another. I, 

myself, had the privilege of being searched out in a dark room as the murderer of one of the ladies-in-

waiting by the Sovereign herself. It is those associations and the way in which Dr. Uhrich used to 

conduct himself at the different gatherings at which I met him that make me say he was one very well 

fitted to represent the Sovereign here as Lieutenant-Governor of this province. 



 

 

March 27, 1957 

 

8 

I, along with the others, wish to thank Mrs. Uhrich for having added this service to the people of this 

province and to the people of Canada in making this portrait possible, for this final act in a long service 

to the public through the practice of a family doctor as anyone can possibly give. In addition to that, 

those of you who are in Government service now and those who have been, who are in this House, in 

this Legislative Chamber at this time, know that the wife of a Minister has also opportunities to give 

great service, and Mrs. Uhrich never, at any time, shirked any of those opportunities. Now, today, when 

she comes here to assist us in commemorating the life and work of a very noble and able man, it is a 

great pleasure to be here to associate with all of you and to see so many old friends gather around to 

commemorate his service. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Thank you very much, Mr. Gardiner. I will now call upon His Honour Lieutenant-

Governor Patterson. 

 

The Hon. W. J. Patterson (Lieutenant-Governor):  Mr. Speaker, Mrs. Uhrich, Mr. Premier, 

Members of the Legislative Assembly, Ladies and Gentlemen: Today we pay respects and offer our 

tribute of affection and esteem to one who, for over forty years, gave this province faithful and effective 

service. We honour a man whose personal qualities earned our esteem and affection. 

 

Dr. John Michael Uhrich was born in the province of Ontario just a few months short of 80 years ago, 

but as a young man he adopted Saskatchewan as his own province and made it particularly so. During 

his student days, studying medicine at Northwestern University in Chicago, he spent his summers 

teaching school in this province and shortly after graduation he established a medical practice in the 

village of Hague, towards the northern portion of our province. Here he gave his first period of service 

and I may say that, over that forty years I refer to, that service was divided into what might be regarded 

as three different phases. The first was approximately 14 years as a medical practitioner in the town and 

vicinity of Hague, in Saskatchewan. There he rapidly established a reputation as a wise and skilful and 

able physician. He endeared himself to the people he served, and established a bond of respect and 

esteem that was not broken until his death many years later. 

 

In this position, and in this capacity, he proved capable and skilful. He possessed all the characteristics 

of the old-time family doctor, the old pioneer physician we had in this province in our earlier days. He 

was dignified, and perhaps a little stern, in appearance, but those who came in contact with him soon 

learned that beneath this dignified and stern appearance there bent a heart that was kindly and 

sympathetic. No call was ever refused, no day was too long, no night was too stormy for him to accept 

the duties and responsibilities of a general practitioner. 

 

This had certain advantages for his future career, because practising in this rural community he learned 

at first hand of conditions, of the problems that existed, of problems most necessary for the benefit of the 

people that he served, and this was of untold value to him later when he became Minister of Public 

Health. 



 

March 27, 1957 

 

 

9 

That he won the esteem and affection of his clients, of his patients, and of all those who came in contact 

with him is proved by this province to represent the constituency of Rosthern, Saskatchewan, and his 

subsequent election history might well be the envy of all admiring politicians. He ran in five elections. 

In two of them he was elected by acclamation; in one he had 8,000 voted against the combined 2,000 of 

his two opponents. He took his opponents’ deposits in every case except one. That was the record which 

established the fact that his years of practice in the Hague and Rosthern districts had established him 

firmly in their confidence and in their respect. 

 

Within a year after being elected to this Legislature, as Mr. Gardiner has pointed out, he was appointed 

Minister of Public Health for the province – the first Minister of Public Health in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Prior to that time there had been a comparatively small department of the Government 

called the ‘Bureau’, but Dr. Uhrich was appointed to become Saskatchewan’s Minister of Public Health, 

and established that Department and continued with it in all for 17 years, with the five-year interval that 

was referred to. 

 

His practical knowledge and his experience fitted him, particularly, for this special and particular duty. It 

must be remembered that, during most of his time in office, conditions in this province were rather 

difficult. Conditions were not prosperous by any means, and government revenues were not particularly 

buoyant. Considering the limitations that these conditions imposed, the work and the accomplishments 

achieved by Dr. Uhrich during this period in his difficult and trying office were outstanding, and are the 

best evidence of his capability, of his energy and of his ability. 

 

I cannot begin this afternoon to detail all the public health activities which he sponsored, or those which 

he enlarged or increased, or those which he anticipated for the future, because they were too many and 

too numerous to recount at this time. I might point out that particularly in the field of preventive 

medicine, he was very energetic and very greatly interested. Prior to the time of his coming into office, 

vaccines and antitoxins had not been so very greatly used, but he promoted and encouraged the use of 

these medicines, or these preventive medicines, with the result that typhoid and diphtheria and other 

diseases, which had been very serious in this province in previous years, had been very largely 

eliminated. 

 

He also was very keenly interested in such matters as sanitation, pure milk supply, public health nursing, 

school nursing, out-post hospitals, and many other phases of public health work, and to all of these he 

directed his experience, his knowledge, and his ability with very splendid and very gratifying results and 

affects. He was keenly interested in every question and in every phase of public health, and in bringing 

better medical and hospital services to the people of the province, continually working to enlarge the 

service, and to improve the efficiency of his department. 



 

 

March 27, 1957 

 

10 

As I said, restricted by limited funds, that he accomplished was truly remarkable. Not only did he 

encourage the maximum of activity and service in his own department, but he was very successful in 

encouraged the municipal and northern authorities in the province to do their part, and by the 

encouragement of municipal doctors and local hospitals during his term of office, there was a 

tremendous increase in the medical services made available to the people of this province, and to the 

communities of the province generally. 

 

In co-operation with the Anti-Tuberculosis League, he worked out the plan which is presently in 

operation (possibly with some amendments) which provides for the patient free service of all people in 

the province suffering from this disease. That plan has now been working successfully for 

approximately 30 years, and in itself would be a tremendous tribute to the man who was very largely 

responsible for bringing it about, even if he had done nothing else in his position during the years he 

occupied it. 

 

During the period when he sat in Opposition, the Minister of Health of that day established the Cancer 

Commission. On returning to office in 1934, Dr. Uhrich very actively interested himself in the work of 

this Commission, enlarged its activities, increased its services, and laid the foundations for the very 

excellent system of cancer services that we have today. In fact, one of the last official actions in that 

particular office was to lay the foundation for the provision that we have today, whereby people treated 

for cancer, or suffering rather from cancer, receive free treatment so far as the patient is concerned. 

 

In addition to these definite things, the doctor also had a vision for the future, and one of his very pet 

schemes was to look forward to the day when Saskatchewan would have a medical school of its own. It 

is to be greatly regretted that he did not live to see the present day, when we do have our own medical 

school in operation in the city of Saskatoon. 

 

Having virtually built this Department from the ground up, being a man of the studious and active type 

that he was, naturally he was intimately acquainted with every detail of his department, and one of the 

highlights of every session was his annual address on the Budget Debate, reporting the activities of the 

department for the previous year. That was looked forward to with interest by every member of the 

Legislature, irrespective of political affiliation or other interest, and many of those addresses could very 

well be used today as textbooks of public health. A very find speaker – in fact one of the best orators, in 

my opinion, that ever sat in this Legislature – he was able to express himself clearly and forcibly with 

honour to himself, and with information to those who listened to him. 

 

In addition to being Minister of Public Health for these long years, Dr. Uhrich also was, for 12 years, 

Provincial Secretary, and for 10 years Minister of Public Works. To the administration of these 

departments, he brought the same energy, the same ability and the same success. We do not hear so 

much about his work in these departments because, in the public health services was so great that it to a 

considerable extent, out-shadowed his other work, and his other activities. 



 

March 27, 1957 

 

 

11 

But, in 1944, ill health compelled him to retire from active public life, and for some years, as Mr. 

Gardiner has pointed out, he went for awhile to live in Ontario, but came back to the province of his 

choice, and to his first love – the province of Saskatchewan. Here, in 1948 he was appointed Lieutenant-

Governor, and began an all-too-short period of service in that position. As Lieutenant-Governor, he 

filled the position with grace and with dignity, and with very very general acceptance to all the public of 

the province of Saskatchewan. Unfortunately, as I said, his tenure of office was all too short, and in 1951 

suddenly and entirely unexpectedly, he was called away. Many of you here attended the funeral services, 

and will remember, as I do, that it was the largest and most representative service of that kind ever held 

in the city of Regina, and bore eloquent and effective testimony to the esteem and affection in which Dr. 

Uhrich was held by the people of Regina and the people of Saskatchewan. And it was a well-deserved 

tribute to a life of public service. 

 

But it is not as a public figure that I prefer to remember Dr. Uhrich; it is as a man, as an individual, and 

as a friend. He did not make friends easily, and the first impression upon meeting him might be of a man 

who was rather cold and distant; but when friendship was made, it was real; it was lasting, it was a 

rewarding and a treasured friendship. I speak, I am sure, when I say this, for everyone of those favoured 

men and women who were honoured and rewarded by being admitted to that circle of intimate 

friendship. 

 

Behind an outward seriousness was a kindly, sympathetic and very human personality. He could relax; 

he could enjoy informal gatherings, good stories, good music. He could have a good time with the boys, 

or he could be dignified and serene, but above all, and in every circumstance, he was a man whom one 

was honoured to call a friend. Not only in his own profession did he maintain a constant study of all 

developments, but that was true of other phases of human life as well. He kept music, of art and of 

literature; because well equipped with knowledge he could always find an interesting subject to bring 

into conversation. 

 

As has been suggested, he was intensely serious in his religious beliefs and most faithful in attendance at 

and in carrying out the duties of his church. But tome his outstanding characteristic was his high, 

positive and unbending personally integrity. Honest in word and in deed, intensely honest in every phase 

of his existence, he held in contempt everything that was mean and petty or small, or anything of that 

nature. He could hardly understand the bigotry and intolerance which he sometimes encountered, 

because those sentiments were so entirely foreign to his own character and to his own feelings. In one 

word, he was a man of the very highest personal character, a truly Christian gentleman in the very 

strictest application of that term; instinctively a Christian gentleman, by nature a Christian gentleman 

and by education a Christian gentleman. 

 

Mrs. Uhrich is here today and you will join with me in expressing our thanks to her for presenting this 

portrait to hand in these Legislative corridors. We know that words of praise and expressions of 

sympathy do not fill a void or close a gap, but we do hope they 



 

 

March 27, 1957 

 

12 

will prove of some consolation and make the road ahead some easier. We honour ourselves in paying 

honour to a good life well lived, 70 years of valuable service, and to a fine high character. It is well that 

a portrait should hang on these walls reminding those who come after of what was done for us by those 

who went before. 

 

Mr. Speaker: Thank you very much, Your Honour, for that very revealing summary of the political 

life and personal character of the gentlemen whom we honour this afternoon. 

 

Now, Mrs. Uhrich, if you would care to make that presentation it would be appropriate. The Hon. Mr. 

Willis will assist. 

 

Mrs. Uhrich:  On this occasion it gives me great pleasure to present to you this portrait of my late 

husband, Dr. Uhrich. 

 

Hon. C.G. Willis (Minister of Public Works):  Mrs. Uhrich, as Minister of Public Works, I am 

happy to accept, on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, this fine portrait of your late husband. I 

assure you that it will give me a great deal of pleasure in having this portrait hung in a place of honour 

on the walls of this Legislative Chamber. Our sincere thanks to you. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  On behalf of the members of the Assembly I have been asked to give you this bouquet 

of roses as a token of our regard. 

 

Mrs. Uhrich:  It is wonderful; I am quite overcome, and my grateful thanks. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  This brings the proceedings to a close and again I want to thank all of you who have 

been with us this afternoon. I am sure you have been well repaid for being here. 


