



















































Hansard: March 14, 1957


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session - Thirteen Legislature 

21st Day 

 

Thursday, March 14, 1957 

 

The House met at 2.30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

CORRECTION 

 

Mr. A.L.S. Brown (Bengough): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to draw the 

attention of the Assembly to what might be a typographical error in last night’s ‘Leader-Post’. The 

Leader-Post quotes as follows: 

 

“The Federal C.C.F. member for Assiniboia stated on TV last Saturday he wanted to see the farmers 

get a fair share of the provincial income”, Mr. Coderre said.” 

 

This is from a report on the speech which the member for Gravelbourg made in this Legislature. 

 

I think what Mr. Argue said, and I think what the member for Gravelbourg said Mr. Argue said was that 

the farmers would or should receive a fair share of the national income, and that it was the member for 

Gravelbourg (Mr. Coderre) himself who expressed the opinion the farmers should receive a fair share of 

the provincial income. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to suggest that I didn’t want such a ridiculous statement attributed to Mr. 

Argue. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The House resumed, from Wednesday, March 13, 1957, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 

the Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): That Mr. Speaker, do now leave the chair. (The Assembly to 

go into Committee of Supply). 

 

Hon. J. Walter Erb (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, when I adjourned the debate last 

night, among other things that I said, I had congratulated you upon your election to your honoured office 

and wished you well. I also congratulated the members of the Assembly who had just been newly 

elected, and I had thanked the hon. Premier 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

2 

for the singular and great honour he bestowed, not only upon me, but upon the people of my 

constituency (Milestone) which I represent, in appointing me as Minister of Public Health for the 

province of Saskatchewan. I also commended the Provincial Treasurer upon the excellent Budget he 

brought down, and the manner in which he set that Budget forth. I expressed the confidence that, in 

keeping with our convictions, this budget is so designed as to spread the benefits of our resources to all 

the people of this province. 

 

Since 1944 the various departments of this Government have become greatly expanded. This is 

particularly true of the Public Health Department, and that for obvious reasons. As a matter of fact, the 

Department is now probably the largest department of the Government of Saskatchewan. It has been 

generally recognized, I believe, that the Department of Public Health in its staff and organization, has no 

equal in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

The first credit for the kind of Department we have today belongs, of course, to the first Public Minister 

of Health in the C.C.F. Government, the Hon. Premier. It was his genius for understanding human need, 

and his tremendous capacity for organizing and hard work, that gave to the people of this province the 

many health programs they enjoy today. Because they were challenging programs he was able to attract 

men of outstanding ability and high motivation, to put these programs into effect. Nowhere on this 

continent had one every presided over a Department of Public Health which in four short years had 

inaugurated so many programs of such magnitude, programs that have become models for other 

governments to follow, as the first Minister of Public Health, the hon. Premier of this province. 

 

The programs, as we know, which were inaugurated in 1944-48 were the Hospital Services Plan; the 

mental health program; the free cancer control program; the Saskatchewan Air Ambulance; complete 

medical and hospital care for old-age pensioners on supplementary allowances; persons on mothers’ 

allowances, and other groups of social aid cases, and our regional health services. I submit, Mr. Speaker, 

that the people of Saskatchewan will be forever grateful for these programs for they have removed from 

them the dread of financial insecurity and the spectre of financial ruin, which had been the misfortune of 

many of our fine citizens for so many years. I submit, too, that long after most of us are gone, these 

programs shall remain a monument to the vision and the courage, and the great humanitarian heart 

which inspired them. 

 

I am keenly aware of the professional guidance that any Minister of Public Health in Canada requires, 

and I am, therefore, most appreciative of the excellent co-operation and assistance that I have received 

from my branch and divisional heads. I am particularly indebted to my Deputy Minister, Dr. Roth, 

whose remarkably outstanding organizational and administrative ability has won for him an enviable 

reputation, not only in Canada, but in the United States as well. 

 

During the past several decades, medical science has made tremendous advances in all related fields of 

medicine. New and dramatic 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

3 

surgical techniques have been developed, and a long list of new drugs and antibiotics have emerged out 

of concentrated research. Today thousands of research scientists in their laboratories are seeking the 

answer to some of our most baffling diseases, and each passing day brings them closer to their objective. 

The mass public are keenly aware of all this through its dramatization, by radio, television films, 

magazines, and so on. As a matter of fact, the treatment of acute illness has become glamorised. Indeed, 

there is a great deal of glamour in connection with a hospital. It has often been used as the setting for a 

radio serial, a book, a move and so on. It is my opinion (and I am sure that many will agree) that the 

accent that has been placed on the treatment of acute illness, has been almost to the exclusion of 

preventive medicine, upon which, among other things, I wish to make a few observations this afternoon. 

 

It is not my intention, Mr. Speaker, to deprecate to the slightest degree, the magnificent achievements 

that have been made by our doctors and surgeons in treating acute illness, nor to deprecate the extreme 

necessity that always exists for acute hospital care. I am sure that all of us here are grateful for the 

knowledge that, should the need arise, we have access to highly qualified surgeons and the finest 

hospital care available anywhere. Indeed, by the application of highly specialized surgical techniques, 

and the use of the newest drugs and antibiotics, thousands of lives are being saved daily, as well as the 

life expectancy of the individual being very materially increased. But, Mr. Speaker, we live in an era of 

stress and strain, an era of physical and psychological pressures that often create profound physical and 

mental changes in the human body. And the correction is too often sought only after they have become 

emergent conditions. And often, too, we are compelled to pay the high price of neglect. 

 

As it relates to our modern pace, and our modern environmental living, I suggest that a preventive 

program is highly indicated. Notwithstanding all the great and profound medical know-how, and the 

high quality of hospital care that we are able to provide, the people are not as free from ill health as they 

ought to be. Hon. members may recall a survey that was made in 1951, and the statistics that emerged 

out of that survey were rather shocking. I shall not bore this Assembly this afternoon with those 

statistics, but they clearly indicate that those people who are least able to pay for services are the ones 

whose health, in most instances, is neglected. While such statistics were not available when the first 

C.C.F. Government was elected in 1944, there was certainly sufficient evidence in this province – and 

probably for economic reasons only – that the health of the people of Saskatchewan was badly 

neglected. It might be well to point out here that prior to 1944, public health services were virtually non-

existent in Saskatchewan, with the exception of the cities of Saskatoon and Regina. It was, and still is, 

the conviction of the C.C.F. Government that the opportunity to obtain the best that modern science can 

afford in health care is not a privilege – it is a right of every citizen, regardless of where he lives or his 

economic status in life. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

4 

It was on this premise, Mr. Speaker, that the first C.C.F. Government of Saskatchewan began the great 

task of creating the many health programs that we have today, and which have become a part of our way 

of life in Saskatchewan. Early in 1945 we made it possible for municipalities to pool their resources by 

providing them with a preventive health plan, by assisting them in setting up the health regions. Two-

thirds of our population, or about 500,000 people today, are covered by health regions, and are now 

receiving modern public health services as well as the two cities of Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

In the same year we established a complete medical care program for the needy, the aged, widows, 

pensioners, persons on mothers’ allowance, and other requiring social assistance. Today, 35,000 people 

in need of social or medical aid are eligible for this assistance. In 1947, we put into effect the first 

prepaid comprehensive hospital insurance program on this continent, setting the premiums low enough 

to cover everyone eligible, and providing incentives towards high quality care, and the efficient 

operation of the hospitals. Thereby we have ended financial worries and debt arising out of unexpected 

hospitalization. As early as 1944 we provided construction grants of more than one-third of a million 

dollars to help local communities build new and improved hospitals, both large and small, and in 

locations where they would best serve the communities and the greatest number of people. The 

Provincial Government’s contributions since then have approached $3 million for this purpose. That 

does not include, of course, the expenditures or the construction of the University Hospital and the 

raining School for mental defectives at Moose Jaw. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, we have more high-quality hospital bed accommodation in relation to our 

population than any other part of Canada or the United States: 6,262 measured beds, or 7.1 beds per 

thousand of population at the end of 1956; and 6,758 beds set up, or 7.6 beds per thousand patients, 

compared with only 3.9 measured beds per thousand patients in 1943. We have established a first-rate 

medical school and a 523-bed University Hospital. It is, incidentally, one of the best equipped and best 

staffed on the continent, and I might say here that, for the first time, fully trained medical doctors will be 

graduating from the medical school this year. I am sure that will be a memorable occasion, and one to 

which we are looking forward. 

 

We have completed a new training school near Moose Jaw to provide high quality care and training for 

the mentally deficient. We have greatly increased the numbers of qualified physicians, and nurses and 

other workers in our mental institutions, and I should single out, perhaps, for special mention, our 500-

hour in-service training for psychiatric nurses. First, there is the fact of our considerable success in 

recruiting high school a shortage of this kind of worker. Secondly, this three-year course had developed 

a high quality psychiatric nurse who is able to be of real help to the psychiatrist in the treatment of the 

mentally ill. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

5 

Yesterday afternoon, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) made several wild 

charges about the conditions of our mental hospitals, and the treatment the patients received therein. He 

read from a scurrilous letter which, I understand, was circulated throughout the province during the last 

election campaign. It was obvious that the member for Arm River was simply parroting an alleged 

condition out of which he thought he could make some political hay. In other words, he was grasping for 

a straw that would somehow save him from political submersion. 

 

I remember back in 1949, Mr. Speaker, a tour was arranged for the members of the Legislature – a tour 

of the Weyburn Hospital. I distinctly remember that, of the Opposition, only two members took 

advantage of that tour, and neither of them was the member for Arm River. I say that, unless the member 

for Arm River can stand up in his place and say that he has recently visited the Weyburn Hospital, he is 

among the last in this House who should attempt to speak with any competence upon our mental 

hospitals. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — Mr. Speaker, when I toured the hospital in 1949 with other members of this 

Legislature, the mental health program was just getting under way and, frankly, I felt at that time that 

much was to be desired in personnel and facilities that were necessary to carry on an adequate treatment 

program. 

 

Just last autumn I visited Weyburn Hospital again, and I am happy to say that I was amazed at the 

progress that had been made at Weyburn since 1949. Now, Mr. Speaker, it gets just a little wearisome 

listening to the irresponsible and grossly exaggerated claims of those people who for some reason or 

other have an axe to grind with this Government for the conditions existing at the hospital. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — 12 years – 12 years! 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — I would like the members of the Opposition to understand that it was from the 

Liberal Government in 1944 that the C.C.F. inherited a ‘snake-pit’ – what was supposed to be a mental 

hospital. It was a slum of indignity, degradation and straight-jacket despair; it was a place of exile from 

society – an exile from society of cheap and indiscriminate custodial care, and the stigma of mental 

illness in those days was like the chill of death itself. Where, I ask, Mr. Speaker, was the voice of the 

member from Arm River, prior to 1944, to champion the cause of the mentally ill? 

 

When we listen to these statements and to other statements, which of them are we going to accept 

regarding the real picture of our mental health programs? Will we accept those that are parroted by the 

member for Arm River, or are we going to accept the statements made by responsible people, such as 

the world-renowned psychiatrist, Dr. Menninger, of the Menninger Health Clinic. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

6 

Mr. Danielson: — Why don’t you go to Dr. Osmond, your superintendent down there? Why don’t you 

go to him? He ought to know something. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — Mr. Speaker, I should just like to quote from what Dr. Menninger has to say about 

our mental hospitals, and I will let the people of Saskatchewan judge whether what the hon. member 

from Arm River parroted this afternoon, is grossly exaggerated and not in accordance with the facts, or 

whether they are going to believe the authorities who are interested in this kind of program. 

 

Mr. Danielson: —That’s what you say; nobody else said it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — Mr. Menninger said: 

 

“To my knowledge, Saskatchewan is the only area in the world that has all the competent psychiatrists 

it presently needs.” 

 

Then he goes on to say that he is: 

 

“. . . impressed with the mental health organization in the province, and its long-term planning is a 

highlight of the program. 

 

“The psychiatric aid training being carried on in Saskatchewan is envied throughout the world, and is 

being copied as fast as other areas can arrange it.” 

 

Dr. Menninger says he has formed a high opinion of the province in psychiatry: “some of the best 

trained men in the field are now working in Saskatchewan hospitals and clinics.” That is what the 

authorities have to say, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With particular reference to the charges that the hon. member from Arm River made yesterday, he 

pointed out that the hospital was originally constructed for only 600 people. Well, I should like to say 

that it was a Liberal Government that constructed the hospital, and certainly, if he recognized the need 

for increased facilities today, I ask the question again, where was his voice in those days when 

conditions were infinitely worse than they are purported to be today? 

 

The type of structure that was built at that time (built in 1921, Mr. Speaker) was such that improvements 

to plumbing are very difficult to make; but notwithstanding those difficulties we have continued to make 

progress, particularly to the bathroom facilities to which the member specifically referred. These are 

being improved and increased each year. When 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

7 

we inherited the hospital from the Liberals in 1944 (he talks about overcrowding, Mr. Speaker) there 

were 2,500 or more patients in the mental hospital at that time. I didn’t hear the hon. member for Arm 

River at that time getting up in his seat and shouting that more space ought to be provided for the mental 

patients! It was only a C.C.F. Government, Mr. Speaker, recognizing the deplorable conditions that 

existed then, that immediately set to work upon the first recommendation by a group of psychiatrists, 

that we must segregate the patients. It was for that reason that we took the mental defectives out of the 

hospital and placed them in the airport buildings at Weyburn as a temporary measure, to reduce and 

relieve the overcrowding in the Mental Hospital. 

 

During the past 10 years, renovations have been going on in the hospital all the wards. As a matter of 

fact, we have, in the last two years, carried out renovations that have much improved the 

accommodation of some 350 patients. Plans were made and money appropriated last year, to carry out a 

drastic renovation program on our mental hospitals, and I suggest that if the member for Arm River had 

been reading his Estimates, and following the Public Accounts, he, of all people, ought to know how 

much has been spent on improving our mental hospitals. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — But not to help the patients. 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — We have provided a nurses’ residence at the hospital and recently we have opened a 

new T.B. wing at Weyburn. This year we are spending some $75,000 on renovating wards at the 

hospital. Through the policy adopted by this Government with respect to the mental health program, we 

have reduced the population at Weyburn from 2,600 when we took over to about 1,640 at present. I 

suggest that is just about 1,000 less than when we took over the Saskatchewan Hospital at Weyburn 

from the Liberal Government in 1944. 

 

Let me make another correction. This building in the first instance was not designed for 600 people. The 

best evidence that we can get as to the proper number of people who should be cared for and receive 

adequate treatment in this hospital, as set down by the American Psychiatric Association and also the 

Canadian authorities, is 1,250. While we recognize that the Weyburn Hospital is somewhat 

overcrowded, nevertheless this Government has demonstrated its good faith by relieving overcrowding 

and we have at long last clothed the place in dignity. We have succeeded in greatly reducing the number 

of people in Weyburn by building the new mental training school at Moose Jaw. Certainly be relieving 

the pressure of the mental defectives at the hospital, we have helped the whole program and in that 

process, we have spent between $10 million and $12 million on mental health in this province, during 

these years. 

 

The hon. member for Arm River made some remarks about the clothing. Well, Mr. Speaker, this 

Government has complete responsibility for the patients’ clothing. Last year we spent twice the amount 

of money on clothing that we did the year before. We will continue to investigate the best 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

8 

type of clothing. Some patients are very hard on clothing, and our staff there have been experimenting 

with different kinds of cloth, more colourful as well as more serviceable, and I am sure that the criticism 

we heard here yesterday is one of the gross exaggerations that we have been hearing for so long. 

 

The purpose of the mental health program is that patients may be able to get out to their homes and into 

the stream of society just as soon as possible. The admission rate to our hospitals in the last 10 years has 

doubled, and the demands for treatment are continually heavier. However, I want to point out that the 

discharge rate has increased even more. However, I want to point out that the discharge rate has 

increased even more, so that the discharges are now 87 per cent of admissions, whereas they were only 

62 per cent 11 years ago. Our medical staff has constantly increased; our nurses’ training program, 

which has received such great recognition and which has done such a remarkable job, has tended to keep 

Saskatchewan in the lead in its mental health program. I hope that, when people are constrained to talk 

about our mental hospitals they do so only after having investigated all the facts, because the 

irresponsible drivel that we heard here, yesterday afternoon, can only reflect on those people who are 

trying to do a good job under conditions which, we say, are not yet ideal. It is also a disservice to the 

people of Saskatchewan  . .  

 

Mr. Danielson: — Admission of failure! 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — . . . with whose resources we are trying to provide for a good mental health program; 

and it is insulting to the intelligence of the people of this province. 

 

To continue, Mr. Speaker, we have provided free diagnosis and treatment of cancer cases, and that 

program has been in effect for 12 years. Again here, the best in facilities and equipment has been 

provided, and we have attracted to this province some of the most outstanding men in the field of cancer. 

We have set up a complete range of treatment and training rehabilitation programs for several types of 

crippling conditions. We have established for the first time really effective programs in such fields as 

preventive health education and nutrition. We have embarked on an extensive and long-term training 

program to increase the number of nurses, radiological and laboratory technicians, and similar 

specialized health workers. 

 

At the same time an increasing number of physicians have been attracted to Saskatchewan. Many of the 

best qualified doctors have entered public life as public health officers, teachers, and professors at our 

University Hospital, Medical School, and so on. In 1943, for example, there was only one doctor for 

every 2,054 of the population. Now, we have one doctor for every 1,100 people in the province, and this 

represents an improvement of about 100 per cent. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

9 

What have been some of the recent programs in preventive services? As I said, we are at present able to 

provide almost a complete range of qualified staff in our eight health regions. Personnel shortages that 

are common to all of Canada are gradually being overcome, and new regions to serve the remainder of 

the province are being contemplated. Quite recently we have been carrying forward several important 

projects of special public health interest. In the Moose Jaw region, we have instituted a unique rheumatic 

fever control program, under the sponsorship of the Health Department. The Regional health officer and 

the local family doctors in that area. The Health Department, is supplying penicillin free to select cases. 

These are mainly children who have had a history of an attack of rheumatic fever, and we hope to supply 

penicillin regularly to these people until they have reached the age of 18 years, in order to prevent 

recurrent attacks of this disease, and thus avoid possible heart damage. 

 

Other areas in Saskatchewan are benefiting from similar programs as we work out arrangements with 

the health officers and the local doctors there. I might say, Mr. Speaker, this is the first time, to our 

knowledge, either in Canada or the United States that penicillin is being provided free. We are attacking 

the serious problem of dental decay among our people by encouraging prevention among our children, 

before dental caries begins to make too much progress. We are encouraging our municipal authorities to 

fluoridate communal water supplies, as a completely safe and effective measure which will reduce 

dental caries in children, and that by about 62 per cent. 

 

Again, here in Saskatchewan we are the first to be employing dental hygienists, specially trained young 

women, to provide free preventive care to children in the rural area. Our training program for these 

specially trained young women has been expanded so that the service can be extended to additional rural 

areas of the province. As you know, Mr. Speaker, good mental and emotional health begins in the home, 

and for that reason we are employing specially trained psychologists, teach psychologists, to assist the 

school teacher in understanding the emotional behaviour of children in school, and in the home. This 

program, I might say, is also being expanded. 

 

The Public Health Nurses are the keystone of an effective preventive program. Their number has been 

constantly expanding by recruiting well-trained women from the United Kingdom and from Ireland. A 

post-graduate training course in public health nursing has been added to the University of Saskatchewan 

and, in addition, we are expending our facilities for practical field training of nurses studying public 

health at the University. 

 

The Northern Administration District, with its vast distances and migratory population, poses many 

problems in the provision for public health services. We have appointed a full-time physician to work in 

that area together with a full-time sanitary officer. Members will know that we have also provided a 

small hospital in Uranium City, and we are assisting residents there to develop more complete facilities 

as time goes by. In co-operation 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

10 

with the Department of Indian Affairs, we hope to establish a hospital at Lac la Ronge. 

 

Saskatchewan has been fortunate, Mr. Speaker, in the years 1954-1955 and 1956, in having fewer cases 

of poliomyelitis than in 1952 or 1953. The resources of the entire Health Department were used in those 

two epidemic years to cope with unprecedented numbers of seriously ill cases. Two acute illness centres 

were set up, and two physical restoration centres were established on a full-time basis in Regina and 

Saskatoon. The restorative services are achieving excellent results, I am happy to say. I believe I am safe 

in pointing out that the treatment services – that is the restorative treatment services – that we offer are 

second to none in Canada, and what is more, these services in Saskatchewan are obtainable at very little 

cost to the patient, regardless of the amount of rehabilitation that is given or requires. 

 

The problem of possible water pollution has engaged the attention of my Department for a considerable 

length of time. To the extent of its resources, the Government is assisting local communities to improve 

the purity of their water supply. Sanitary offices play an important roll in inspection and consultation 

and, together with other members of the staffs in health regions, help to inform the public as to the 

benefits to health accruing from safe water. Financial assistance is also given by the purchase of local 

debentures from small communities that are installing water and sewer systems. 

 

I would for a moment, like to speak about our recent progress in treatment service. In regard to treatment 

services, we now have some concrete evidence of what a comprehensive program is doing in improving 

the health of our people. Our public assistance program which ensures a virtually complete range of 

health care for pensioners and other persons receiving social aid, has been most successful. Information 

collected over the years indicates this is proof that they are receiving substantially more care than they 

would normally have had, had not the economic barrier been removed. While perhaps in some instances 

there is overuse, from the preventive health point of view, we have reason to show that one person in 

five of these beneficiaries do not see the doctors at all, and only one in three received no health care at 

all. So, while it may be abused in some cases, the fact is that we have a good record here. This may be a 

tribute to the good health that this group of people are enjoying. 

 

The effect of this kind of program depends upon the willing collaboration of many health workers and 

health agencies. We have enjoyed, in the Health Department, during 1956, the same wholehearted co-

operation that we have received from the groups rendering these services – the doctors, the dentists, 

nurses and other associated groups in the health field. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

11 

I see that my time is running on, and I should like to make a much more comprehensive review of my 

department. I will hurry on. 

 

The Air Ambulance has become an integral part of Saskatchewan’s health picture since its inception. I 

might point out that is really a remarkable record, Mr. Speaker. Since its beginning no patient has been 

injured; no plan has been seriously damaged; over-all, it probably has the finest record of any kind of 

service in the world of its type. I think we must commend and give credit to the pilots, the nurses, 

maintenance personnel and all those who have been responsible in operating the ambulance service. We 

must also give credit to the little communities where our planes land, for in many instances they have 

built landing strips, enabling landings to be made much more safely. 

 

The volume and care provided by the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan, I wish to report, has 

remained almost constant during the last six years, a fair indication again of the beneficial effects of the 

removal of the financial barrier. It also indicates that we have a proper amount of hospital beds to 

provide all the needed care. In 1956 a total of 826,000 people in Saskatchewan were entitled to benefits 

under the plan. This figure includes about 96 per cent of the population for everyone not covered under 

some other provincial or federal program. The widespread support of the Saskatchewan Hospital 

Services Plan is indicated by the fact that 97 per cent of those people eligible for benefits, pay their 

premiums. This again reflects the correctness of Government policy in setting premiums low enough to 

be within the reach of virtually everyone. 

 

I might say that hospitals are being assisted by the Health Department in numerous ways. Construction 

grants, as already mentioned, are being directed towards building modern and well-equipped hospitals 

where they will be most effectively utilized. 

 

Our teaching programs are under way in the Medical College at the University, and special emphasis is 

being given to thorough training of students in general practice of medicine. Research will receive 

increased attention at the Medical School. I might say that an important impetus to research has been 

given by the gift of $250,000 from the Saskatchewan Division of the Cancer Society for the erection of a 

new medical building. 

 

In summing up this portion of my talk, Mr. Speaker, I should like to say that a great many illnesses are 

preventable, a great deal of suffering can be avoided; many lives can be spared and prolonged, if we 

learn to keep ourselves well. More attention must be paid to the food we eat, the houses we live in and 

the conditions under which we work. We are learning that more hospital beds, more doctors, more 

expensive drugs are only part of the answer, and there is real danger that too much of our energies and 

financial resources will get tied up into treatment services, and that we will overlook what must still be 

done in the field of prevention. A health service must be a balanced service. By a balanced service I 

mean one that has all the elements 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

12 

of prevention, treatment and rehabilitation, each adequately developed and each in proper relation to the 

other. I think we have done well in the province of Saskatchewan, and that we have pioneered with 

foresight, judgment and imagination inlaying the groundwork for a balanced health service. 

 

As the budget has indicated, over $27 million will be spent on public health in Saskatchewan during 

1957. I contend, Mr. Speaker, this sum that is being invested in our human resources is one of the best 

investments it is possible for us to make, for it will enable our people, first, to remain in good health, 

and, secondly, to obtain treatment services at the earliest sign of disease with the minimum of financial 

concern. It is the people, I contend, who are physically and mentally well who create the wealth of our 

province. It follows, then, that these same people have a right to that portion of the wealth so created and 

required to provide for their physical and mental well being. 

 

We must always remember that health services are not cheap. We must keep in mind, when speaking of 

the cost of health services and health programs, that the facilities used therein are costly; that is the 

building, operation and maintenance of our hospitals, the expensive treatment facilities that go into that 

operation, the highly trained personnel – doctors, psychiatrists, nurses, physiotherapists, radiologists, 

pathologists, technicians and engineers. All of these are factors in making up the total cost of service. I 

think it can and should be pointed out that inflation has had a tremendous influence upon the cost of 

providing health services, not only in Saskatchewan, but throughout all parts of Canada. To cite one 

example: in 1946 we could erect a hospital at a cost of about $5,000 to $6,000 per bed; today that cost 

has risen to $10,000 to $12,000 per bed. 

 

No one can logically argue, or suggest that because health services are costly we should provide only a 

minimum thereof. I am confident that the economic base of this province justified the kind of health 

program that this Government has developed. Notwithstanding the great advances we have made in 

Saskatchewan compared with other parts of the country, much remains to be done; but what we have 

done has been in keeping with the best tradition of that which is both practical and humanitarian. And I 

am confident, too, Mr. Speaker, that this Government has the overwhelming support of the people of 

Saskatchewan, for the manner in which it has pioneered and advanced so many health programs, which 

have become so much a part of our way of life. 

 

I should like to have said something, Mr. Speaker, about that which relates to the plight of our farmers. I 

want to say that I wholeheartedly support the genuine and realistic appraisal of the agricultural situation 

that has been made by my colleagues on this side of the House, and the C.C.F. members in the House of 

Commons. I am confident that, when the Federal Government begins to realize its responsibility – 

because, let us make it clear that it is a responsibility of the Federal Government – then we shall begin to 

see some measure of relief in the plight that has befallen our farmers. But until the Federal government 

decides to do something about the agricultural crisis, this 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

13 

problem will continue, and could conceivably become even more grave. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has been customary at each session for the Opposition to spend a good deal of time in 

deprecating the political philosophy of the C.C.F. party. Since the return of the hon. member for 

Redberry (Mr. Korchinski) out of exile, we have heard particularly a lot about social democracy. In 

being opposed to democratic socialism, Mr. Speaker, I have been trying to analyze what cause the 

Opposition do champion. Certainly they cannot be opposed to the C.C.F. party on the grounds that we 

are opposed to private enterprise, because private enterprise in Saskatchewan has never had it so good. It 

is evident by the industrial expansion in this province, together with the hundreds of millions of dollars 

that have been invested in exploration and development that this is an indication of the faith and 

confidence that free enterprise has in this Government. Certainly Mr. Speaker,, the Opposition ought not 

to be opposed to the C.C.F. because of our philosophy respecting the co-operative movement. I am sure 

that many members in the Opposition belong to the co-operative movement. 

 

Mr. Gardiner (Melville): — Do you want to see my membership? 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — Well, the member for Arm River certainly does. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was only under this Government that the co-operative movement really came into its 

own and was able to expand and grow as it has. Saskatchewan today has become the leading co-

operative province in Canada. Surely, sir, the Opposition cannot take issue with this Government 

because we believe in public ownership, for has not the federal Government at Ottawa established 

publicly-owned enterprises on a far greater scale? There’s the Eldorado Mine, T.C.A., the Polymer plant 

and many others. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — They were shoved into it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — Whatever the reason for their almost pathological aversion to C.C.F. philosophy, one 

thing is certain, they have confused democracy with capitalism. 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Would you repeat that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — They have tried to confuse the people that somehow democratic socialism ultimately 

leads to Communism. It is strange, Mr. Speaker, that we have never heard the Opposition voice the 

dangers of Fascism. Fascism, I submit, did not die with the dictators, Hitler and Mussolini. It is alive in 

Spain, it is alive in several South American countries; and what is almost even as serious, Mr. Speaker, 

 . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — And in the Liberal party! 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

14 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — . . . these Fascist regimes have been cloaked with respectability, and have been 

helped in many instances by those people who profess to be champions of democracy. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Don’t be so ridiculous. 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — Democracy, I submit is a way of life and while various interpretations of democracy 

have been made particularly by those institutions or systems working within the frame work of 

democracy, they do not contribute or enhance the basic ideals of democracy. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Who is this, Socrates? 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — Indeed, these systems, by virtue of the concept of freedom enunciated in a democracy 

have, in some instances succeeded in identifying themselves as synonymous with democracy, Mr. 

Speaker, and therein, I suggest, lies the danger. Monopolistic and cartel capitalism constitutes such a 

danger within the democratic process. Let us not confuse this kind of capitalism with competitive free 

enterprise, Mr. Speaker. The latter is an integral part of our democratic society; the former would 

destroy it, and in many cases has succeeded in doing so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is to be hoped that the Opposition, particularly certain elements thereof, do not espouse 

this kind of capitalism. If they do not, then like Don Quixote, they will have become the epitome of the 

ludicrous by charging the imaginary. . . 
 

Mr. McDonald: — What about Davy Crockett? 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — . . . in maintaining that democratic socialism is a threat to democracy. But, if 

unwittingly, by their circumscribed thinking of capitalism as being synonymous with democracy, they 

do champion its cause, I should like to quote for their benefit from both the protestant Church councils 

and the Catholic hierarchies in this regard. 

 

Mrs. Batten (Humboldt): — What else would you use?  

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — “Capitalism seizes, confiscates and dries up wealth; reduces the number of those who 

may enjoy riches and holds up distribution, and defies divine Providence who has given good things for 

all men. 

 

“St Thomas Aquinas says that man must not consider riches as his own property, but as a common 

good. This means that Communism itself as an economic system, apart from its philosophy, is not in 

contradiction with the nature of Christianity as is Capitalism. Capitalism is intrinsically atheistic. 

Capitalism is godless, not by nature of a philosophy 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

15 

which it does not profess but in practice, which is its only philosophy, by its insatiable greed and 

avarice, its mighty power and dominion.” 

 

From the official Vatican paper, “Osserratore-Romano” as quoted in the ‘Catholic Worker’ of 1954, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Socialism and rheumatism. 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — Since the last war a number of nations in Africa have won their independence and 

just recently, in Equatorial Africa the little nation of Ghana. It is highly significant that these nations 

have adopted democratic socialism as their way of life for providing them with the best system to 

develop their resources and institutions. Mr. Speaker, this momentous ideological decision was not made 

overnight. This decision was in the making for decades upon decades, for upon their backs for a hundred 

years and more rode the ruthless exploiters of western democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberal party and their political mouthpiece, ‘The Leader-Post’ have for years 

endeavoured to convince the people that the C.C.F. is a spent force. But I want to say to my friends 

across the way . . .  

 

Mr. McDonald: — Take it as read. 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — I want to say to them, Mr. Speaker, that as long as the dignity and worth of a single 

human being is challenged, just so long shall we continue to abide. As long as there remains one hungry 

human being, we shall be around to see to it that he is fed. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Bravo! 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — As long as one man suffers from social and economic injustice, we shall be present to 

defend the cause. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Watch that halo! 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — As long as there are people who are of goodwill, so long shall the C.C.F., together 

with countless millions of peoples throughout the world, of kindred spirit, and of every race and creed 

and colour, march on in a great and human crusade towards that day when mankind, in the fullness of its 

heart . . .  

 

Mr. McDonald: — Toot! Toot! 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — . . . shall walk in peace beside the still waters. . . .  

 

Mr. McDonald: — Who wrote that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — . . . and lie down in pastures green. I shall support the motion. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

16 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, due to the time factor, I will have to forego 

the usual complimentary remarks, and will have to hurry on. Again I am Minister of Saskatchewan 

Government Telephones and of this I am very pleased, and wish to thank the Premier for this 

appointment. 

 

First, I will deal with Telephones and will follow with reports from the Department of Labour, and 

whatever Safety Branches I may have time for. During the coming fiscal year, Saskatchewan 

Government Telephones will spend in the neighbourhood of $11 million for the enlarging and replacing 

of the telephone plant. This will provide cable extensions, central office equipment, carrier equipment (a 

big item by the way), telephone instruments, pole lines and some building work; a new warehouse in 

Regina, which is badly needed, and many other items. Approximately $6 ½ million has been paid for the 

micro-wave system which leaves only a half million dollars in next year’s Budget for this item. 

 

There has been only one general increase in telephone rates during the past 12 years, which varied 

according to circumstances, but was approximately 13 per cent on the average. Slightly upward 

adjustments have also been made at some of the larger points, which have grown to the extent where 

automatic increases are applied when the total number of telephones has reached a certain level. In price 

comparison with almost every other service or commodity in the country, we fell that 13 per cent is a 

very modest increase. 

 

It is the policy to gradually convert the manual systems of the province to automatic, and I have the 

privilege of officially opening our new Kamsack office on February 26, which was the fourteenth to be 

provided with automatic in the past eight years. A similar function will take place at Eston in a few 

weeks’ time, but that was all for 1956. The towns of Wynyard, Wadena and Shaunavon will be provided 

with automatic service during 1958. We have 985 rural telephone companies connected to our system, 

and have a Rural Branch employing a superintendent and 10 employees, five of whom go into the field 

to assist in organization and inspections of rural telephone companies at no cost to the companies. 

 

These companies when connected to the system where automatic phones are in use, are provided with 

automatic instruments free of charge, and these instruments are fairly expensive, running from $30 to 

$35 each. The old wall types are taken out, and either stripped of anything of value, or discarded 

altogether. During the winter months, we have a school set up, with five two-week courses to instruct 

and assist rural ‘trouble’ men, so that they may maintain their lines. Approximately 50 of these men took 

the course last winter, which is also given free. 

 

A goodly number of amalgamations of rural companies take place each year through the efforts of this 

Department. Mr. Earl Cavanaugh has been Superintendent for the past 10 years, and had been with the 

Department 28 years before that. He is the only practical telephone man who has ever held that position. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

17 

I will have more to say in regard to telephones a little later on, especially the new microwave system. 

 

To turn to the Department of Labour, Mr. Speaker, we are asking for an amount of $1,162,950 for the 

coming year, which is not large as departments go. However, we can deduct from that amount the sub-

vote for the administration of The Fire Prevention Act which is $109,250, and is paid by a 1 per cent tax 

on all fire premiums in the province. We also get from the Dominion Government, in regard to civil 

defence, $9,200; also from the Dominion government their share of the apprenticeship training program 

$117,190. Thus, a total of $235,740 can be deducted from the item of slightly over $1 million. Then we 

find that the Department receives considerable revenue from its various branches. The boiler Pressure 

Vessel and Elevator Branch brings in $106,000; the electrical and Gas Inspection Branch, $357,000; the 

Film Censor almost $100,000; Fire Prevention, $8,500; Theatres and Public Halls, $39,000; 

Apprenticeship and Trades and Qualifications, $48,000; or a total of $663,000. When that is deducted, 

the amount we receive from the Provincial Treasurer amounts to $263,930, which is not excessive and 

will be used to the ultimate advantage of the people of Saskatchewan, particularly those who live in the 

cities, towns and villages. 

 

To go to the various branches of the Department, I will first refer to the Labour Standards Branch. It is 

perhaps one of the most important because it sees to it that the employees (mostly those in the lower 

income bracket) are paid proper amounts for their work, and are not worked excessive hours. Most 

employers have every desire to treat their employees fairly in the matter of wages, holidays, hours and 

so forth, although some do make honest mistakes, and are quite willing to correct them when the matter 

is brought to their attention. Of course, there is always the small percentage who will ‘chisel’, and we 

have to watch them closely. We have eight inspectors in this branch who inspected 16,180 places of 

business during the year 1955-56, and collected $78,502 for 1,918 employees, which amount was paid 

over to them. This is broken down as follows: The Statute, The Minimum Wage Act, pay in lieu of 

notice – that is when an employee has been employed more than three months, he or she is entitled to 

one week’s notice by law – 27 employers paid in $1,284 for that; pay for public holidays, 52 employers, 

$3,929; wages – 114 employers paid in $8,004; meals and lodging (that is where the place of business 

has overcharged its employees) – 11, of them paid $2,956; the Hours of Work Act, we find 367 

employees received $18,132. The Annual Holidays Act, 860 employees received $28,982; and The 

Wages Recovery Act, 193 employees received $15,212. So there we have a total of 1,918 employees for 

whom we collected and paid over the amount of $78,502. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I might say that the Minimum Wage Board just recently – I think it was some time in 

January, held meetings with the employers’ and employees’ representatives, and while I can’t give the 

exact amount of the proposed increase, it will be available fairly soon, along with some other 

recommendations. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

18 

From time to time, Mr. Speaker, in this House and out of it, we are told that Saskatchewan is behind 

other provinces in the matter of wages. Up until recently our minimum was the highest in Canada, and 

has been for the past 12 years, which means that we have seen to it that no one in this province must 

work for less than what can provide a reasonable standard of living. 

 

Unions in this province have, generally speaking, been able to maintain wages comparable to what is 

paid elsewhere in Canada, and, in some instances, better rates. Statements then to the effect that our 

averages are low can only cast a reflection on the generosity of Saskatchewan employers, who 

themselves decide what they will pay to their employees. 

 

According to the Dominion Bureau of Statistics for November, 1956, the average weekly wage in 

Saskatchewan was $63.65 as against $62.09 in Manitoba, with Alberta slightly higher. This survey 

covered firms employing up to 15 people. A check of average weekly wages and salaries by industries 

shows that we in Saskatchewan are higher than some in many of the other provinces, including 

Manitoba. So it seems that Liberal speakers from time to time in claiming that wages are lower here 

only indirectly are criticizing the employers who pay between the minimum rate and the union rate. 

 

Older workers – I have a paragraph on that. I have on previous occasions referred to older workers, and 

the fact that they are sometimes discriminated against in regard to employment. Nobody knows who, 

years ago, dreamed up this mythical milestone of 65 to end a person’s working years, and in my opinion 

it is almost inhuman to apply it rigidly. Invariably the average person must seek employment in other 

fields which is not easy to find at that age. While obviously no hard or fast rules should be applied, it is 

basically wrong to refuse to hire a man or woman up into their 40’s or 50’s or even their 60’s, because 

of age. Youth must be encouraged and provided with opportunities, but should not be allowed to crowd 

middle-aged or older persons out of the employment picture. The State of Rhode Island recently enacted 

a law prohibiting discrimination in employment against people 65 years and under, between 45 and 60 

years, because of age. In Massachusetts and Pennsylvania similar bans on discrimination because of age 

were incorporated into their Legislation. 

 

Following the slogan of ‘Humanity First’, Mr. Speaker, this Government has extended many of its 

employees beyond the age of 65, where they have been able to do the work, and especially if they have 

no pension or only a small pension coming to them. Many business firms do the same, and they are to be 

commended. Disabled persons, too, should be given at least an even break, and even by given 

preferences in jobs they are able to do. 

 

I have something of interest here, I think, in regard to the Regina Trades and Labour Council, which 

recently held its 50
th

 anniversary and presented three of its members, Mr. William Cocks of the Painters’ 

Union, Mr. Tom Molloy of the Printers’ Union (at one time Deputy Minister of Labour in a previous 

Government) and Mr. J.D. Simpson, of the Carpenters’ Union, with 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

19 

with life memberships, they being the only local residents now living in Regina who were members of 

this Labour Council when it got its charter away back in 1907. Mr. Ralph Heseltine was also presented 

with a life membership, but he hasn’t quite the 50 years in, in Regina. It was interesting to know, Mr. 

Speaker, that these men and their colleagues, 45 to 50 years ago, promoted the idea of public ownership 

in telephones and power and street railway transportation, all three of which we now enjoy in this 

province. I understand they had quite a fight on their hands in the street railway problem with the 

‘”Regina Standard’, a newspaper of that day, being definitely in favour of private ownership, and did 

everything to block the forming of a city-owned transportation system. However, by delegations and 

public meetings a favourable opinion was created and the transportation company owned by the people 

themselves was started, first with streetcars, but now, of course, entirely with buses. I great deal of credit 

can be given these men, Mr. Speaker, not only those who reside in this city, or did reside here, but their 

counterparts elsewhere, for their views and actions on public ownership in the early years of this 

province. 

 

I wish now, Mr. Speaker, to draw your attention to a news item which appeared in the ‘Leader-Post’ on 

February 7, just a little more than a month ago. This is particularly interesting because of the talk about 

the safety angle during the nine days the C.P.R. cased to operate in January. While the news item does 

not elaborate, the Canadian, their fast train, struck a freight transportation crossing in front of it on 

another line at Portage la Prairie, 15 cars from the engine. Fortunately it didn’t hit the 11
th

 car which was 

a carload of dynamite. The rails have been removed from many of these crossings in the interests of 

economy or automation if you like – and the employees’ positions abolished. So now the first train 

which approaches one of these diamond crossings automatically places the signal against traffic coming 

toward it at right angles. One might ask how such an accident could happen, with the signals so plainly 

indicating ‘Stop’, and it is hard to understand. But at the same time they do happen occasionally. Had 

there been a fireman in the locomotive at the time, no doubt he would have seen the signals; but he was 

back in the second unit making some minor repairs. Automation on railways has gradually moved ahead 

over the past years, resulting in tremendous savings, and employees do not oppose it, but economizing 

to the extent of gambling with the safety of the travelling public in the interest of cutting down expenses 

is not automation. 

 

A news item dated February 28 is headed: ‘Train Rams Into Truck’. This was the fast coast-to-coast 

train of the Canadian National which, a few days ago, struck a tractor-trailer near Ottawa and had nine 

cars derailed. The vehicle had not observed a stop sign. Fortunately, personal injuries were not severe, 

although the damage was almost a million dollars, which will no doubt by paid by the trucking 

company. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

20 

We have been remarkably free of strikes in this province, Mr. Speaker, especially during the past year. 

Outside the one on the C.P.R. in January, we had only four minor strikes here. I realize a lot of feeling 

against the locomotive firemen’s and enginemen’s union was created before and during the first part of 

the work stoppage. Large full-page advertisements which must have cost the railway tremendous sums 

of money, were placed in almost every newspaper in Canada with a view toward moulding public 

opinion in favour of the Company and against the employees. It had its effect, too, and many I know in 

this city who have a labour viewpoint, later called me up and said that, until they had seen my statement 

in the paper, they have been inclined to go along with the Company’s position. I am afraid that many 

farmers, too, were mislead by this one-sided publicity, and were led to believe that if the firemen’s 

positions were abolished, somehow or other there would be lower freight rates. 

 

I would like to take a moment, Mr. Speaker, to go into the history of this unfortunate incident, where a 

great transportation company, serving hundreds of thousands of people came to a full stop for nine days. 

The many customers of this railway were inconvenienced in one way or another, and thousands were 

thrown out of work. On February 28, 1956 all 140 railways in the United States, and the two in Canada, 

served notice on the Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen and Enginemen, that after a certain date 

firemen would be no longer required. In fact here is the exact wording, and I will quote it: 

 

“Eliminate all agreements, rules, regulations, interpretations or practices, however established, which 

require the employment or use of firemen (helpers) on other than steam power, and establish a rule to 

provide that the Company shall have the unrestricted right to determine when and if a fireman (helper) 

shall be used on other than steam power.” 

 

Over a period of months, while negotiations were going on, all 140 railways in the States, and the 

Canadian National Railway in Canada, abandoned the idea of abolishing the firemen’s positions, and 

signed their new agreements in the usual way, but not so the Canadian Pacific Railway. They persisted 

in their attempt to force the employees to abolish the firemen on all but passenger trains, although they 

did sugar the pill by claiming that no fireman with more than three year’s seniority would be forced out 

of work. Out of 142 railways in the United States and Canada, it appeared that 141 were out of step with 

the C.P.R. and this railroad ceased to operate on 2nd January. Almost immediately practically the entire 

press of Canada rushed in to vilify the employees and uphold the railways’ official stand. Senator 

Roebuck, the firemen’s nominee on the conciliation board, held some time before that, had previously 

written an excellent minority report which was either sup- 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

21 

pressed by the newspapers, or partially printed on the back of pages. Editorials, letters to the editor were 

printed and all the time the employees were taking quite a beating as far as publicity was concerned. 

Some papers wept crocodile tears for the poor farmers unable to market wheat for this nine days, but the 

fact that this same wheat had been lying on their farms in storage for two or even three years without a 

market did not seem to matter. The press also passively condoned the fact that the C.P.R. was willing to 

act as a guinea-pig for the other 140 railways on this continent by forcing a strike. However, the road is 

now back into operation with full engine crews, and the issue will be decided sometime this fall. 

 

I have two or three more clippings here, Mr. Speaker; I will go through them as quickly as I can. There 

is one here from the ‘Moose Jaw Times’ of February 16, a letter from a Mr. Beggs, which I thought was 

very good, and I will read part of it. It’s headed ‘Data on Foreign Control C.P.R. System’, and he says: 

 

“According to Moody’s Transportation Manual for 1956, this is the breakdown on C.P.R. ownership: 

Preferred stock: 96.19 per cent of the total held in the United Kingdom or other British hands; less 

than 1 per cent held in Canada. Common stock: only 20.15 per cent held in Canada, 43.9 peer cent in 

the United States, 24.90 per cent in the United Kingdom, and 11 per cent elsewhere.” 

 

That was in answer to the cry of dictation which came from some of the papers to the effect that the 

firemen’s organization was dominated from their head office in Cleveland, regarding which nothing 

could be further from the truth. 

 

Then, we have from last night’s ‘Leader-Post’ an article on page 14, ‘Oil Income Adds to C.P.R. 

Earnings’. I will read just part of that: 

 

“Income from oil rights and land rentals helped swell the net profit of the C.P.R. to $55,617,000 for 

the fiscal year ending December 31, 1956, an increase of almost $11,600,000 over 1955. That was 

reported in a preliminary statement today by Mr. N.R. Crump. 

 

“The net profit works out to $3.77 a share compared with $2.95 in 1955. 

 

“The financial report says the income from oil rights and land rentals was $9,268,121. After provision 

of applicable income taxes, this added $5,300,000 to ‘other income’. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

22 

“Steamship operations earnings were $3,843,340. Income from dividends, mainly from the 

Consolidated Mining and Smelting Co . . . Net income from hotels, communications, and so forth . . .” 

 

I haven’t time to read all the figures, but I don’t think the C.P.R. is going to go bankrupt for a few days 

anyway. 

 

I come now to my last article here which appeared in the ‘Moose Jaw Times’ on February 19. It is 

headed ‘Nationalized C.P.R. Urged by Farmers’, dated from Ottawa, Canadian Press: 

 

“The Government was urged today to nationalize the Canadian Pacific Railway and to provide a vast 

program of aid for Canadian farmers. Yet a Provincial Farm Union Council in its annual submission to 

the Cabinet called for parity prices, a national food bank for surplus food disposal, extended long-term 

credit for farmers, increased payments for crop failure, a soil bank program and restriction on food 

imports. 

 

“On the privately owned C.P.R., the council which draws its main strength from prairie farmer unions, 

said the railway openly defied the Federal Transport Controller when he called for more boxcars in the 

spring of 1956, and that it has been demanding upward revision of long-established low freight rates 

on prairie grain for export. 

 

“This criticism of the C.P.R. has been further aggravated by the recent railway strike for which neither 

the railway nor labour received much sympathy from the farmers.” 

 

Well, I hope now that the farmers who may get to know what I have said this afternoon, will not think 

too badly of the employees. 

 

It is my opinion, Mr. Speaker, that if the Board of Directors of the C.P.R. or their higher officials, cannot 

operate that railroad without driving a portion of their employees into strike action, followed by apparent 

unconcern for the transportation needs of hundreds of thousands of people who live on their lines, if they 

will not provide the farmers of the prairie provinces with enough boxcars to move their grain, then it 

might be better for the Dominion Government to take over the railroad, pay the stockholders a fair price 

for their shares, and operate it for the benefit of the people of Canada. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

23 

I said I was going to come back to microwave, Mr. Speaker, and I have a little information here which I 

think will be of considerable interest to the members of this House. The Saskatchewan section of the 

microwave radio relay system which is being built across Canada to improve television programs and 

long-distance service will go into operation sometime in 1957, I think sometime this spring. It should be 

understood, however, that the new microwave system will not extend the field of vision beyond what it 

is now, but it will provide live telecasts from the east and later on from the west. It will also provide up 

to 600 long distance circuits on one channel in comparison with the present system, whereby 16 calls 

can be carried simultaneously on one pair of wires. 

 

Perhaps I should take a few minutes to speak about the microwave transmission, which is one of the 

most recent developments in the communications field, the importance of which has been compared to 

the building of the first railway or the first telephone system across the country. Microwaves are super-

high-frequency radio waves oscillating in the range between three and 10 billion cycles a second. 

Because of the extreme short-wave-length, these microwaves have many of the characteristics of light, 

and like light, they travel in straight lines, and once over the horizon tend to shoot off into the unknown. 

This requires the use of relay points which are 25 to 30 miles apart on the average. Microwaves can be 

focused into a beam like the light of a searchlight, and the energy from a transmitter can be concentrated 

and aimed directly at a particular receiver, rather than being scattered in all directions. These 

microwaves by the way, travel at the same speed as light, 186,000 miles a second. Because the curvature 

of the earth must be taken into account in finding straight paths for these waves, elevated sites such as 

hill-tops are desirable, and towers are required some 50 to 200 feet in height, although I believe there is 

one as high as 850 feet. The antenna focuses the microwaves into a beam, only two degrees wide, aimed 

directly at the next tower in the chain. I thought this was most interesting, Mr. Speaker, - only two 

degrees wide are these beams, and so efficient is the antenna that less than one watt of power (that is 

about the amount needed to operate a flashlight bulb) is needed to span the distance between the 

stations. Some 50 million watts would be required if a none-directional antenna were used. 

 

At the reception end of the network, further equipment reduces the telephone conversation or television 

programs back to their original frequencies, and they are fed to their outlets by cable, which is either the 

telephone receiver in the case of long-distance, or the television station for television programs. In the 

case of telephone messages which can number hundreds on each channel, electrical filters separate each 

individual voice circuit. For the TV program, another step is required. As the image reaches its ultimate 

journey, it must be accompanied by the audio portion; that is, the voice, or music, or discharge of 

firearms or the groans of the wrestlers, or whatever it may happen to be. Technicians at the control 

centre co-ordinate the two parts of the program and the picture and sound are delivered together by a 

cable to be broadcast. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

24 

Construction of this overall system will cost between $50 and $60 million. The basic network will 

include 137 relay points and will stretch 3,800 from the Atlantic to the Pacific to make the longest single 

microwave system in the world. That is all I will say about the microwave. I found the information very 

interesting. 

 

I will come now to the office of the Fire Commissioner, and we find that Saskatchewan’s fire loss for 

the calendar year of 1956 amounted to approximately $2 ½ million. This figure represents a reduction of 

over $3 million on the previous year’s fire loss of $5,902,000. Of course, we had two very large fires 

during the previous year. The latest report issued by the Dominion Fire Commissioner is for the year 

1954. This report showed Saskatchewan with a 10-year per capital fire loss of $2.79, and a five-year per 

capita loss of $3.37. These are the lowest of any province in Canada. Manitoba followed with a 10-year 

per capita fire loss of $3.71, and a five-year loss of $4.66. Fire continues to take a toll, a tragic toll, of 

human life, and in the province of Saskatchewan during 1955, 30 persons perished in fires, 16 of whom 

were children. Twenty-eight of the 30 died as the result of fires in private dwellings. 

 

There was a substantial reduction in the number of lives lost through fire in 1956, the total being 

reduced to 14, two of whom were children. Smokers’ carelessness continues to be the leading cause of 

fires in this province, and in fact all over the North American continent, followed by stoves, furnaces 

and heaters. Electricity is third, and I am alarmed about that, because I know a lot of the work done in 

this province in the last seven or eight years has been done by inexperienced people, and they may have 

hazards in their homes they do not know about. Chimneys and flues are fourth. Fire strikes the private 

home more of ten than any other type. Of 2,000 fires reported in 1955, some 1,345 were in private 

homes. Most of these fires would not have taken place if the owners had maintained their premises in 

accordance with the recommendations of the Fire Prevention program. 

 

Another very important division of this office is the Firemen’s Training Program. In co-operation with 

Civil Defence authorities, we are conducting an average of 40 fire-fighting training courses each year. 

Through these courses the volunteer firemen in the smaller municipalities are given an opportunity to 

learn how to properly fight fires. 

 

Another important division is fire investigation, which is in conjunction with the Fire Inspectors, to 

determine the cause, origin and circumstances of fires which occur in this province. As a result of these 

investigations during the year 1955, there were five convictions for arson. 

 

Sale maintenance and operation of oil burners in the province of Saskatchewan are controlled by a 

regulation under The Fire Prevention Act, but this should be mentioned here today, because we see quite 

a number of these fires throughout the province, and some of them have been fatal. This 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

25 

regulation permits the Department to licence wholesale distributors, retail vendors and oil-burner 

installers. Oil-burner inspections are carried out by Fire Inspectors and personnel of the larger municipal 

fire departments. Our district Inspector spot-checks three installations of every licence installer in each 

town, village or hamlet, which he inspects. During this year, 1,500 such inspections were made and in 

202 cases changes had to be made. This, in our opinion, is quite a small percentage. We believe that our 

present method of controlling the sale and installation of oil-burning equipment is quite adequate. Since 

1946, we have a record of approximately 90,000 oil burners having been installed in this province. Fire 

loss statistics indicate we average approximately 60 oil-burner fires a year. Of these, 60, 75 per cent 

were caused by space heaters. These space-heater fires are usually caused by careless operation or 

maintenance and not by poor installation. Therefore, increased inspection of this particular type of 

heating appliance would not substantially alter fire-loss statistics. 

 

I will briefly mention the Theatres Branch which will require $30,500 for the coming year. Our 

inspectors made 1,204 inspections of public halls and theatres last year, and the total revenue derived 

was $36,997. It is important in such places where the public gather that fire hazards be kept to a 

minimum, and there were only seven fires in such places, the small number being due to the rigid 

inspection provided. 

 

Our Film Censor in Winnipeg rejected six films, last year, and cut approximately 1,594 feet of 

undesirable dialogue or scenes in 12 pictures. A recent picture “Baby Doll” did cause us some concern a 

few weeks ago. The League of Decency in California, which is a splendid Catholic organization, has 

disapproved of it, although, strangely enough, it was passed in the province of Quebec, with some 

eliminations. It was rejected entirely in three Canadian provinces, but our censors in Winnipeg passed it 

with some eliminations, but was willing to call the picture in for review, if we received any unusual 

complaints. On the strength of advance publicity, several church groups wrote me about the film, but 

only one person who had actually seen it made any protest. Such publicity does arouse a certain amount 

of curiosity. The first day it was shown here brought a capacity crowd, mostly men so I am told. 

However the picture turned out to be rather sordid, or a rather ugly story about poor white and coloured 

people in the deep south, and something about a mill being set on fire. That seemed to be the main part 

of the story. It was rather a depressing picture, and the attendance soon fell off, and nothing has been 

heard of it for some time. We seldom get any complaints from the public in regard to motion pictures, 

but we do welcome any suggestions or criticisms. 

 

I have a brief report here as far as the Apprenticeship branch is concerned. The past few years has shown 

a steady increase of apprentices, the number having increased from 592 at April 1, 1953 to 1,139 at 

March 4 of this year. The number attending school has increased from 372 during last fiscal year, to an 

estimated 675 students during the present fiscal year. Here they are by trades – and I will go over them 

very quickly: motor vehicle 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

26 

repair, 305 (that is the largest); plumbing, 118; carpentry, 155; electrical, 143; motor vehicle body 

repair, 54; sheet metal work, 81; welding (both electrical and gas), 45; bricklaying, 51; painting, 22; 

barbering, 23; beauty culture, 58; making a total of 1,162. We have auto body repair and welding trades 

presently being conducted in the Moose Jaw Technical School. The school is doing very well despite the 

fact it is overcrowded. It is anticipated that, in the not too distant future, this group will be moved to 

Saskatoon. In May, 1955, it became compulsory, on a province-wide basis, for persons engaged in the 

motor vehicle mechanics repair, barbering and beauty culture trades to hold valid certificates. By means 

of an extensive program and examinations in these trades, we have almost caught up with the increased 

examination requirements. 

 

An extensive program of training in gas installation has been carried on during the past year in Moose 

Jaw, Regina, North Battleford, Weyburn, and Yorkton, with a total enrolment of 197. Further classes are 

scheduled at Swift Current and Regina, during the next few weeks. This procedure provides quicker and 

safer installation when a community changes over to gas on a large scale, by having enough experienced 

installers available when the time comes. 

 

I have something here now on the Electrical Branch. During the year under review a total of 109 fires 

were attributed to the use of electricity, which were reported to this branch by the Fire Commissioner; 

79 of these fires were caused by the overloading of circuits, and plugging in too many extensions on one 

outlet. Many of you have seen the Power Corporation’s film on TV each Sunday and will recall the 

plugging in of half-a-dozen appliances – the radio, lamps, TV, clocks and so forth – all on one outlet. 

The circuit then becomes overloaded, and the wires are heated to an almost red-hot state, which 

obviously creates an element of danger. There were 53 of these fires last year attributed to the 

overloading of circuits. We had seven prosecutions for offences under The Electrical Inspection Act. Six 

persons were prosecuted for wiring without an appropriate contractor’s licence, and one contractor for 

having unlicensed persons perform electrical work without the supervision of a licensed journeyman. 

Convictions were obtained in all cases. 

 

While inspection is being given to farm installations for electrical power when it is first installed, our 

records indicate that many farmers are not reporting work done afterwards. Reports from electrical 

contractors state that, after the inspector has been through the district, at least 50 per cent of the farmers 

purchase electrical equipment through the retail or mail order stores and either try to install it 

themselves, or have some unlicensed person to it. By not reporting work done to the branch, improper or 

faulty installations are not checked, which is another dangerous practice. Unofficial information 

indicates that this practice has already resulted in loss of life and livestock through shock and electric 

fires. This may continue or get worse. The owner’s permit privilege is being abused by other persons 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

27 

doing the work for the owner; that is, persons who have failed in their electrical examinations, or 

persons who are sort of handymen in the district. In such cases the owner is held responsible for the 

electrical installation if it does not pass inspection, and, what is worse, may have fire hazards in his 

home that he knows nothing about. In addition, he is not in a position to make the unlicensed persons 

correct faulty work. The total revenue for the fiscal year 1955-56 was $232,449; expenditures $171,000. 

 

We will take just a moment on gas inspection which is something that is uppermost in our minds these 

days, especially in this part of the province. All new gas installations are inspected as are additions and 

alterations in equipment on consumer’s property, including liquefied petroleum installations, which 

much be reported to the Branch for inspection. Under the provisions of this Act, all these new gas 

installations together with additions and alterations must be reported to the Branch for inspection, where, 

if installations create a hazard or potential hazard, it is required they be brought up to the provincial 

standard within a specified time. I think perhaps that is all I need to say on gas. I would just like to add 

this brief remark, with the advent of the Trans-Canada Pipe Line, plans are being made to provide 

gasfitters and gas contractors in the city of Regina and rural points concerned so that no delay will be 

experienced when additional systems are commenced. 

 

I have something here on the Boiler Pressure and Elevators Branch, but I don’t think I will go into that 

today. 

 

I am going to just briefly mention the merger between the Trades and Labour Congress and the 

Canadian Congress of Labour which took place in Toronto, towards the end of April, 1956. I was 

privileged, along with the Ministers of Labour from British Columbia, Alberta, Ontario and 

Newfoundland, together with the Hon. Mr. Gregg, the Federal Minister of Labour, to attend this 

conference. An historic occasion, I think we could call it. It was held at the Canadian National 

Exhibition building, and was attended by 1,620 delegates from 1,380 organizations, representing more 

than a million workers, the largest membership of any secular body in Canada. Since that time, the two 

groups have proceeded with the formalities of amalgamation province by province, and are now united 

under the name of the Canadian Congress of Labour, with Mr. Claude Jodoin as President, and their 

headquarters at Ottawa. Instead of two Congresses competing against each other as had been the case for 

many years, labour will not be able to speak with one voice for the benefit of their entire membership. 

 

Just a word now in connection with winter employment. The Provincial Government has been 

concerned with seasonal unemployment, mainly caused in Saskatchewan by our winter weather. Just as 

regularly as night follows day, Mr. Speaker, we have this seasonal unemployment commencing every 

fall. The Department of Labour, this winter, assisted the Regina Labour Employment Council by 

supplying the part-time services of two members of the staff. This Committee, by the way, had the 

active support of the Provincial Government, the National Employment Service, the Regina Employers’ 

Association, 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

28 

the Chamber of Commerce, representatives from all religious groups, and the Canadian Labour 

Congress. One of the members I referred to just a moment ago, acted as publicity manager to the 

Council and assisted in sparking a community effort to combat seasonal unemployment by asking 

householders and businessmen to undertake necessary repairs and reservations to their quarters under 

the slogan of “Do It Now”. It has received a good deal of publicity, and I think we all know about it. 

Contractors, retail merchants and organized labour have indicated that they consider that this campaign 

has been successful in helping to maintain business activities and curtail unemployment. It has provided 

work for quite a number of tradesmen; who had been idle for a number of months. Just a few days ago I 

received a letter from Mr. Leyton Robinson, manager of the National Employment Service in this city, 

dated February 27, address to myself. Here is what he said: 

 

“Another winter employment campaign has just about been completed. With your wholehearted 

assistance this campaign has been the most successful ever put on in Saskatchewan. We feel that every 

man, woman and child that can read, hear or see, has been made aware of the tremendous impact of 

winter employment. The work of the entire Committee, the sub-committees, and each organization 

connected with the campaign has been outstanding. Please accept on behalf of the National 

Employment Service our sincere thanks for your co-operation.” 

 

And it is signed Mr. Leyton Robinson, Manager of the N.E.S. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in closing I would just like to say a few words about my own constituency, Regina 

City, which I have had the honour to represent in this Legislature, along with the Provincial Treasurer, 

for the first eight year, and with Mrs. Cooper for the last four years, and I appreciate the confidence 

shown me by the electorate last June. As I indicated at that time, I will serve to the best of my ability in 

this Legislature. The city of Regina has grown tremendously during the past 10 or 12 years and has been 

fortunate in having a number of find public and commercial buildings erected, many of them down in 

the business section. The population has increased from 60,246 in 1946 to an estimated 88,797 in the 

June, 1956 census, and there is no let-up, no sign of any let-up, in the building of homes. It is also 

estimated that by the end of the century, the city will be built solidly to the turn of No. 1 Highway, now 

south of these buildings, but I am afraid not many of us will be around at that time, Mr. Speaker; 

perhaps the hon. member from Souris-Estevan (Mr. Thorson) will be just about retiring at that time from 

active political life. It is also estimated that the residential area will grow in other directions, not only 

towards the south, but expand to the northwest, and northwest. It is hard to say what will happen. 

Sometimes it is rather difficult to know where so many people are coming from. We do know, of course, 

that many farmers from the fertile plans around Regina do move into the city, and we make them most 

welcome. Also industry is locating here in an increasing volume, and, needless to say, is also quite 

welcome. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

29 

Their payrolls add to the making of a better community. Oil has also had its effect, and we look forward 

to further developments in this field with additional benefits to our city, which we hope to see become 

the oil centre of Saskatchewan. The Civic Centre is being developed, and it is gratifying to note that the 

old Victoria School, which has been there for approximately 45 years, will be replaced by a modern and 

up-to-date school four or five blocks to the west. The present site will be used for the new Y.M.C.A. 

building in the near future, and a new Court House at a later date. I find it a pleasure to represent such a 

progressive community in this Legislature. And, Mr. Speaker, I will support the Budget. 

 

Mr. F.E. Foley (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to participate in the debate on the budget, I 

would first like to register some of my reactions to words spoken this afternoon by former speakers. 

 

After listening to the hon. Minister of Public Health (Hon. Mr. Erb), particularly to some of his rapid 

ending statements, I was minded to try and write something down myself, which would have about the 

same degree of comprehension. Now this may not be the best English in the world, but this is what I 

wrote: 

 

“This was another addition to the conglomeration of outrageously incomprehensible and utterly 

contumelious statements heard from the Government in this House during the Budget debate.” 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — How long did it take to figure that one out? 

 

Mr. Foley: — Well, at least I can say I wrote it myself. I don’t know, but Mr. Stone walked out there a 

while ago; maybe found the remarks of the hon. Minister a little hard to understand. Nevertheless, the 

hon. Minister did make some remarkable statements. First, he paid compliments to the Minister of 

Public Health and he said to the “first Minister of Public Health”, referring no doubt to the hon. Premier. 

I think it only right that he should have mentioned the Hon. John Uhrich, the Hon. Fred Munroe, who 

served between the years of 1923 to 1944 in that capacity, and I think did a commendable job. 

 

I am sure the hon. members opposite are familiar with the report made by Dr. Sigerist, in which he 

stated that, when the C.C.F. Government came into power in 1944 the province of Saskatchewan had 

one of the finest groups of municipal health units on this continent. The Minister completely disregarded 

the import of that report. Here again, we have an example in the field of public health where apparently 

nothing ever took place before 1944. Saskatchewan is the only area in the world, the hon. Minister said, 

that has all the competent psychiatrists it needs. There is a remarkable statement, Mr. Speaker, . . .  



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

30 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — Dr. Menninger said it. 

 

Mr. Foley: — . . . I challenge the hon. Minister, in the next few days, to give us some figures to back up 

that statement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank (Minister of Mineral Resources): — After you make this speech, we will be 

sure we need one more. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Thank you very much. I appreciate that remark. 

 

Now, I would like to point out a fact or two in rebuttal to the hon. Minister’s statement that for every 

hospital bill in Saskatchewan, 20 per cent of that money comes from Ottawa, 20 per cent from our 

Provincial Treasury, approximately and the rest from the Saskatchewan taxpayers. In view of this, I 

would like also to point out to the hon. Minister that national grants to the hospitalisation and health 

scheme in this province, have been a considerable amount of money. Between the years 1948 and 1955, 

the Federal Government allotted $14 ½ million for health in this province, and in that same period of 

time, according to the figures here, the amount expended by the Provincial Government was only $11 ½ 

million, which means some $3 million which should have been spent for health in the province of 

Saskatchewan in those years was apparently used in other ways. 

 

I would like to point out that, in the years 1954-55, the Government of this province received over $2 

million from the Federal Government for tuberculosis control, crippled children, hospital construction, 

mental health and so on. Now that is only one way. The Government’s contribution over a period of 

years has been considerable in the field of mental health. I would like to point out also who built many 

of our fine public health buildings, in this province; who built our sanatoriums, some of our mental 

hospitals. I think the hon. Minister will admit that many of these buildings were here before 1944, and 

many of these buildings were a distinct credit to previous Ministers of Health in this province. 

 

I am sure that speakers following myself will have more to say about the history of health and health 

services in this province. I sincerely hope that they do present a true and unprejudiced picture of the 

history of health in this province. The hon. member from Arm River (Mr. Danielson), I think yesterday, 

read a letter which apparently wasn’t very flattering to the hon. Minister of Health. I wondered what 

replies were made to this letter. The challenge was made yesterday, and I think it is worth repeating 

today. The Minister did not, I feel, answer these charges forthrightly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — You weren’t listening. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Surely, if these charges are true, then immediate action should be taken. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

31 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — They are not true. 

 

Mr. Foley: — If these charges as the Minister says are not true, then let him stand up and say they are 

not true. I am very much afraid . . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — Obviously he wasn’t listening. 

 

Mr. Foley: — I don’t think the Minister made any such positive statement. I don’t think the Minister 

denied, in any plan language at least, these statements. 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. I commented on every point that was raised in 

the letter than the hon. member for Arm River read to us yesterday. If the hon. member for Turtleford 

had been listening he would have known that I had discussed every point, and showed how it was 

erroneous. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, he commented. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Well, I would appreciate, Mr. Speaker, language which we in the Opposition possibly 

could understand. 

 

Premier Douglas: — That’s unparliamentary. 

 

Mr. Foley: — I listened quite carefully to the hon. Minister and I did not get the impression that he 

categorically denied the statements. He denied little bits here and there. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He excused himself. 

 

Mr. Foley: — I believe that, if this statement is true, every member in this Assembly would be 

interested in seeing that improvements are made in the shortest possible time. 

 

Mrs. J.E. Cooper (Regina City): — Would the hon. member permit a question? Has he ever visited the 

hospitals in Weyburn or North Battleford? 

 

Mr. Foley: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that question has any bearing on my remarks. 

 

Premier Douglas: — No, no, of course! 

 

Mr. Foley: — I have not . . .  

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose): — On what authority are you speaking? 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

32 

Mr. Foley: — . . . but I must attach some importance to a letter of this nature. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Yes, I am sure. Every letter you read . . .  

 

Mr. Foley: — I am sure the hon. member from Arm River, and I am sure every member in this 

Assembly, did not push the letter lightly aside. I didn’t make any statement as to whether or not I 

thought the remarks were true, I merely asked the Minister to give us a direct answer on that matter. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Well, he gave it to you. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Now, we are getting rather used, on this side of the House, to rather remarkable, loosely-

made statements on the part of members of this Government. I would like to quote from remarks made 

during the Budget address by the hon. Minister of the Power Corporation (Hon. Mr. Brown) who is not 

in his seat at the moment, I regret to say. He said: 

 

“The loose and irresponsible attacks on the Power Corporation were the result of the ignorance of 

cold, hard indisputable facts by members on this side of the House.” 

 

That is what he said, Mr. Speaker. Then he goes on to say: 

 

“We are not prepared to jeopardize the Power Corporation for selfish political purposes.” (That was 

another statement). 

 

And finally he said: 

 

”Manitoba was finding it not a sound policy to connect farms with electricity . . .” 

 

Mr. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): — Rubbish! 

 

Mr. Foley: — . . . without making construction charges, and today more farms were being disconnected 

than connected to the system.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, those were statements made by the hon. Minister of the Corporation, as reported in the 

newspaper. I was here for all of the Minister’s address and they are in accord with what I heard. Now I 

see the Minister has come in, and in all fairness, I think I should repeat that remark. The hon. Minister of 

the Power Corporation said this: 

 

“The loose and irresponsible attacks on the Power Corporation were the result of the ignorance of 

cold, hard indisputable facts by members on this side of the House.” 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

33 

He went on to say: 

 

“We are not prepared to jeopardize the Power Corporation for selfish political purposes.” 

 

And then he wound up with a few supposedly hard and indisputable facts of his own and said: 

 

“Manitoba was finding that it was not a sound policy to connect farms with electricity, without 

making construction charges, and today more farms were being disconnected than connected to the 

system.” 

 

It was also interesting to note that at the very time the hon. Minister of the Power Corporation was 

making those remarks, it was also reported (I believe in yesterday’s Leader-Post) that Mr. Cass-Beggs 

and a seven-man delegation from the Power Corporation met with the Winnipeg Hydro in an attempt 

to set up some system of inter-provincial power that would be of assistance to both provinces. After 

the remarks made by the hon. Minister of the Power Corporation, “his cold, hard indisputable facts”, 

as he said, this is what the Manitoba Power Commission replied, in yesterday’s issue of ‘The Leader-

Post’: 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Read it all. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Do you think I should? May I read it all? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Sure! 

 

Mr. Foley: — It’s not very long: 

 

“A Manitoba Power Commission spokesman Wednesday denied charges made in the Saskatchewan 

Legislature that more farms in Manitoba are being disconnected then added to the power system. 

 

“Mr. Brown said Manitoba was find out ‘providing farm connections without construction charges to 

the farmers is not a sound policy.” 

 

“He said that in 1956 the service was dismantled and the equipment salvaged from 193 farms, but (in 

the same period) 806 farms were connected to the system.” 

 

Indisputable, cold hard facts. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown (Provincial Secretary): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. I am quite prepared 

to correct an error which I made in my speech the other day. I apparently said that, last year, (1956) and 

I am quite prepared to admit that that was not 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

34 

correct. What I should have said was that the information we had available on the previous year, 1955, 

indicated that that I said was correct at that time. If I was wrong, which I apparently was as far as last 

year is concerned, I am quite prepared to retract it. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You are wrong on the year before, too. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Mr. Speaker, . . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — Well, at least I was only wrong on one, instead of all of them. 

 

Mr. Foley: — . . . I would like to go on just a little further. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — And by the way, Mr. Speaker, the indisputable fact I was talking about, was with 

regard to . . . 

 

Mr. Foley: — Mr. Speaker, I believe I have given the hon. gentleman certain privileges . . .  

 

Premier Douglas: — You don’t give anybody privileges. Mr. Speaker, gives them, and the rules give 

the privileges, not you. 

 

Mr. Foley: — “He said there have been so few connections because the job is almost completed in 

Manitoba. Power now is connected or available to nearly every farmer in the province. 

 

“There is no relation, therefore, between the disconnections and the connections, he said. Connections 

were made only on the few farms which remained to be done, while disconnections could be made of 

any of the about 44,000 farms already connected. 

 

“In theory, he said, (and he agreed here), a point could be reached at which no connections would be 

made in any one year while several farms were disconnected.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I submit that such statements by a Minister of this Government could certainly 

jeopardize what we hope are good relations between the province of Manitoba and ourselves, and could 

certainly jeopardize the mutual help which our two provinces could give to one another in terms of 

power. I submit that when the Minister makes the statement, “we were not prepared to jeopardize the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation for selfish political purposes”, I wonder how much attention we can 

pay to that remark in the light of a remark, which I just mentioned. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

35 

Now, more on this matter of power. The question was asked, and I am sure has been asked a number of 

times in this Assembly, why did this Government change its policy on the distribution of gas, from the 

policy which it used to distribute hydro-electric power? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — We would explain that if we thought you could understand it. 

 

Mr. Foley: — I and I am sure, many of my colleagues agree this question has never been successfully or 

satisfactorily answered in this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — You wouldn’t understand it if we did. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Well possibly someone here would understand it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — We have been trying to make you fellows over there understand it for years. 

 

Mr. Foley: — I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that we work along from day to day, and I think on the 

whole we understand a surprisingly considerable amount of what is said by this Government. 

 

Why was the gas distribution system not set up? Why did this Government charge the farmers of 

Saskatchewan such exorbitant rates for power connection? 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — How ridiculous can you get. 

 

Mr. Foley: — I think the facts have been well gone over in this case. In spite of all the attempts made by 

the hon. Minister of the Corporation to justify the method used for power installations in this province, 

the fact remains, Mr. Speaker, that the farmers in Manitoba got the power for $65 per installation  . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — He goes to Manitoba now. 

 

Mr. Foley: —   . . while the farmers in Saskatchewan had to pay in the neighbourhood of $600 for the 

power brought to their yards, and before they were finished, in many cases, getting a few appliances to 

make the power feasible, it cost in the neighbourhood of $1,500 to $2,000. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Just go across to Alberta . . .  

 

Mr. Loptson: — The C.C.F. probably put it in for nothing . . .  

 

Mr. Danielson: — No wonder you are sympathizing with the farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Will the hon. gentlemen stop this crossfire. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

36 

Mr. Foley: — Well, I don’t mind really, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I mind. 

 

Mr. Foley: — I was going to say that it indicates . . .  

 

Mr. Loptson: — The Premier started it. 

 

Mr. Foley: — . . . that we have raised a question which apparently they still are not prepared to answer 

with any degree of accuracy. 

 

Now, when we talk about rates of electricity to the farmers, and when we talk about the installation 

charges of rural electrification, in all cases we must invariably come to the conclusion that the rural 

subscribers are paying a great deal more than the urban subscribers. The fact remains that you can move 

into one of our urban centres and receive the power for a $3 meter deposit; whereas the farmer still has a 

considerable cash outlay. I asked the question before and I will mention it again, there are a great 

number of farms in this province today where the power lines are within a few rods of the house, where 

the people residing in those homes need power, want power, but simply cannot afford power, under the 

policies of this Government. Now is that ‘Humanity First’? 

 

Mr. Cameron: — It’s the dollar first. 

 

Mr. Foley: — It is all very well for the gentlemen opposite to suggest that the financial structure of this 

province is such that electrification without initial cost is not feasible. In fact, it is mighty discomforting 

to hear Ministers of the Crown suggest that we had a difficult time borrowing $7 or $8 million this year 

on the Canadian market, and that we are faced with the problem of securing around $40 million from 

our good neighbours to the south; it is mighty discomforting, to hear them say . . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, may I point out that no one has ever made 

such an irresponsible statement. The statement is absolutely wrong. 

 

Premier Douglas: — The hon. member only prepared to wake up periodically, and catch half sentences. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Mr. Speaker, in the Budget address and in various reports which I have read in the papers 

I have been led to believe that this Government plans on borrowing $50 million. The figure has been 

used in this House before, and I don’t recollect anyone challenging it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Well, Mr. Speaker, may I challenge it now, then. The Budget statement is very 

clear. We have borrowed $15¾ on the United States market this year. The balance of 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

37 

the $50 million will be all borrowed in Canada. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Then I think, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. Provincial Treasurer should whisper in the ear of 

the hon. Minister of the Power Corporation, because that is not the implication that I got from his 

statement yesterday, or the day before. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. I didn’t make any reference at all to any 

money borrowed in Canada or the United States. All I referred to was $39½ million for the Power 

Corporation. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — You had your turn yesterday. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Mr. Speaker, I have the remarks of the hon. Minister of the Power Corporation here, and 

he says this: 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. Minister states that he did not make that statement. You can’t dispute 

it for that quotation completely. You must accept that statement. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Very well, Mr. Speaker, I will be glad to accept that statement. But nevertheless, in my 

own opinion, according to my own interpretation, it seems to me the hon. Minister said that to borrow 

$20 million to pay back the farmers of this province would be laughed at, and considered a handout. He 

went on to say that it was extremely difficult to borrow $39½ million to carry on the Corporation this 

year. Now possibly my memory doesn’t serve me right. Finally he suggested that the borrowing powers 

of this province had been stretched to the absolute limit, and he felt that for that reason also, it would be 

impossible to repay the large capital outlay which the farmers of this province had made for power. 

 

We on this side of the House feel that the financial structure of this province could have made it possible 

to provide power to the farmers without initial cost. It was on that understanding that we presented our 

platform to the people. 

 

Premier Douglas: — And nobody bit on the bait. 

 

Mr. Foley: — We felt at that time (and we have never had any reason to change our minds today) that it 

would have been feasible. We say if the province to the east of us can do it, then surely we can do it, and 

no amount of misrepresentation and . . .  

 

Mr. Kramer (The Battlefords): — That’s something you know all about. 

 

Mr. Foley: — . . . juggling of facts and so on, can change our opinion in that respect. We feel that if this 

Government were to practise 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

38 

‘Humanity First’, then ways and means could have been found to implement that program. Instead of 

that it was a little too late for this Government to do anything about power, in spite of the fact that I 

firmly believe many of the hon. gentlemen on the other side of the House agreed with us, it was a little 

too late. However, it wasn’t too late, I submit, Mr. Speaker, for the Government of this province to 

realize the value and the work of the Liberal platform in this respect, and to implement our suggestions 

in their distribution of natural gas and I think we on this side of the House can take. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — Becoming a Socialist, eh? 

 

Mr. Foley: — . . . credit for the more reasonable financial arrangements which were made in the 

distribution of natural gas in the province. 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): — Just what is the difference? 

 

Mr. Foley: — I understand that natural gas is piped into the homes of the subscribers for a very small 

amount. I think it is in the neighbourhood of . . .  

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): — Isn’t that true of power in smaller centres? 

 

Mr. Foley: — Not that I know of. It seems tome, then, that I some day would like to have the Minister 

of Statistics stand up and explain to us of the Opposition what were the real reasons for changing your 

policy on the distribution of natural gas? Did the fact that the larger urban centres reject the use of the 

Power Corporation have anything to do with it? Did the great amount of controversy in the larger urban 

centres over the natural gas contracts have anything to do with it? We will be very pleased to have you 

give us the true facts on this matter. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I was very interested in the overall Budget as brought down by the hon. Provincial 

Treasurer last week, and certainly there is much there for us to comprehend, and wonder. A total 

expenditure greater than has ever been made in the history of the province, the introduction of some new 

sources of revenue, the dropping of a few others, is certainly food for a great deal of thought. We have 

already heard some reactions to this Budget. We have, I believe, thanks to the hon. member from Pelly 

(Mr. Barrie), got our thinking straightened out a little bit, on just exactly how much money we owe 

around here. The fact that we owe over a quarter of a billion dollars is rather a staggering situation. 

 

I know that the direct debt of the province is a figure not nearly so frightening, but I would like to 

associate myself with the hon. member from Arm River (Mr. Danielson) when he said that the hon. 

Provincial Treasurer has a uncanny knack of apparently making the statement true that ‘the more he 

borrows, the less he owes’. I think the hon. member from Arm River hit the nail on the head. I would 

that I had his experience and his \ears, that I could use a few more of his remarkably descriptive 

statements and phrases. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

39 

There are certain sections of the Budget in which I was particularly interest, in light of the fact that the 

School Trustees’ Association of the province have just completed their convention, and that the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities is nearing the end of their convention. While I wasn’t 

privileged to attend the Provincial-Municipal Conference, I did receive, I think, copies of about every 

word that was either spoken or presented in the form of a brief, and have had no opportunity of looking 

through the vast majority of these. In light of that, I was rather interested to note the reference which the 

hon. Provincial Treasurer makes – and he says, in part: 

 

“I was deeply impressed by the event . . . both the Premier and myself reaffirmed the Government’s 

long-standing program of dealing local government in on the province’s increasing revenues. 

 

“Large as it is, the provincial transfers of about $38 million may be looked upon as an interim 

emergency step. So far as our present and prospective revenues will permit, the Provincial 

Government is anxious to find a more fundamental solution to the problems of local administration. 

The primary purpose of the recent conference was to seek the co-operative support of local 

government itself in this endeavour.” 

 

Then, he went on to say, and this is on Page 10 of the Budget Speech: 

 

“The fact is that our whole approach is based upon the conviction that local government has an 

immensely vital role to play in our broad and growing province.” 

 

The Provincial Treasurer went on to say: 

 

“. . . Legally speaking, local government units are creatures or instruments of the province. But their 

real and traditional importance as vehicles of democratic self-government far outweighs this mere 

legal status.” 

 

Now, in view of these remarks, Mr. Speaker, and in view of what little knowledge I have been able to 

obtain from the reports, I have been extremely interested in some of the results, not only of the 

Provincial-Municipal Conference, but also the results of the suggestions made by the Report of the 

Royal Commission, by the Britne Cronkite Report, and by the reaction of the various bodies who 

attended this Conference. I was a little taken aback when in (I believe it was) Tuesday’s issue of the 

local newspaper, I was able to read a resume of remarks made to the convention of the Rural 

Municipalities by its President, Mr. Noble, when he made the following statement: 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

40 

“I consider it most unfortunate that members of the Government had to resort to abuse and insulting 

remarks with reference to the ability and honesty of purpose of your executive, he said, adding that at 

one point the delegation had very nearly decided to walk out of the conference. 

 

‘Instead he had gone to Premier Douglas, and before the conference ended one Minister had 

apologized.” 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis (Minister of Public Works): — What is he reading from now? 

 

Mr. Foley: — I am quoting from ‘The Leader-Post’ as reported here, remarks attributed to the President 

of the Rural Municipal Association in Conference at Saskatoon. 

 

Now, I was astounded. 

 

Premier Douglas: — That’s the third time you’ve been astounded in three minutes. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Instead of laughing, Mr. Speaker, I suggest the hon. Premier might feel very, very 

concerned because I submit this is not the type of publicity which this Government, or any other 

Government wants, now or at any other time. 

 

Premier Douglas: — But the Liberal candidate who gave it, he certainly wants it. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Do you deny it? 

 

Premier Douglas: — I certainly deny it. 

 

Mr. Foley: — I resent the implication, Mr. Speaker, that I made that remark to further his interest. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege. I am not referring to my hon. friend. I 

said the Liberal candidate who made the statement. I understand Mr. Noble is a Liberal candidate or 

aspiring to be one. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. I would ask the Premier to withdraw that 

statement. The gentleman in question is not a Liberal candidate, and surely to goodness the Premier of 

this province knows that. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I said a Liberal candidate or aspiring to be one. Duff Noble clubs are being 

formed up in that part of the province. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Casting insinuations on the executive! 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

41 

Premier Douglas: — Don’t try to . . .  

 

Mr. Cameron: — Oh, yes you are. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think it has been shown quite clearly at this time the problem of reading 

statements from persons who are not members of this Legislature, respecting actions of the Government. 

The initial statement perhaps was permissible, but to go on and read a long article or a report on a 

statement made by an individual who is not a member of the Legislature, I think there should be very 

little if any reference. 

 

Mr. Foley: — I have just three more lines, Mr. Speaker. ‘The Leader-Post’ is also reported as having 

attributed this remark to Mr. Noble: 

 

“Make no mistake, he told the delegates, every effort was made by every government department brief 

to convey the idea that the prisoners who were in the dock were the rural municipalities of 

Saskatchewan.” 

 

It seems to me that this is a very serious matter, because we are all awaiting, I am sure, with a great deal 

of interest the decision of this Association regarding the matter of municipal boundaries. I have here a 

copy of the summary of the Royal Commission on Agriculture and Rural Life, a summary of the 

recommendations. Among those recommendations it states, if I may be allowed to read just a few lines: 

 

“That the reorganization of the present municipal system into the modified county or the full county 

system, as defined in this Report, be undertaken by the Government under the constitutional powers 

invested in it by the British North America Act.” 

 

That is the opinion of the Royal Commission on Agriculture and Rural Life. 

 

I have here also a report of the opinion given by the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation on this matter, 

and they state: 

 

“The Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation believes that School Boards must be elected, and that the 

fiscal independence of School Boards be retained.” 

 

I have also, as I said, read quite a number of the reports given to the Provincial-Municipal Conference 

by Ministers of this Government, and I think I could be safe in saying, at least from my own 

interpretation, that the great majority of them were in favour of some changing or readjusting of 

municipal boundaries. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that this Government has devoted a great deal of 

time and money and energy to this matter. While I agree that 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

42 

the eventual decision is certainly a weighty one and an important one, I feel that this Government has 

been somewhat amiss in the methods of arriving at this decision. How much money can the taxpayers be 

expected to pay for decisions in this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — What decision are you talking about? 

 

Mr. Foley: — I understand that the Report of the Royal Commission cost the province nearly a half-

million dollars . . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — That’s a report, not a decision. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member said that he thought the Government had 

been amiss in arriving at this decision. Now I want to know what decision of the Government he is 

referring to? 

 

Mr. Foley: — Mr. Speaker, I will try to clarify that for him. I am referring to the number of bodies that 

have in some way or another acted in the interest of the Government in this matter. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Is that a decision? What decision, though? 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — You can make a speech tomorrow. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I sure can, and if I can’t make it better than that, I will crawl in a hole. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Just exactly what decision would this Government like in this matter? Would they like a 

form of remote centralized control of our rural municipalities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Paint her up. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Would they like that, in such a way, less and less freedom would be given to our rural 

people, that our rural people would be more and more remote from local government control? Just what 

decision would they like? 

 

We can’t help but feel that remote centralized control might possibly be in the interests of this 

Government in more ways than financial ways. If I may be permitted another very short quotation, Mr. 

Speaker, I have here a little newspaper clipping reporting the remarks made by the President of the 

Alberta Association of Municipal Districts to this same meeting, where he says: 

 

“That Alberta municipalities are still looking for a better deal from their Provincial Government.” 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

43 

Now, I don’t know how much significance there is in that remark, but I think there is this about it, that, 

in Alberta, where municipal boundaries I understand, are different from our own, the problem of 

municipal finance is still an acute one, and I submit that this Government cannot wiggle away from 

under its financial responsibilities to the local government bodies of this province no matter what type of 

system they may attempt to encourage. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — You sure wiggled out when you were in. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Now, then I have another interesting headline here, which states, ‘aid to Municipalities 

Said to be a Provincial Strain’. This is attributed to the hon. Minister of Agriculture (Hon. Mr. Nollet), 

and he suggests that rural Saskatchewan is getting more and more difficult to finance. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, regardless of what decisions are arrived at in this matter of local government 

boundaries, the fact still remains that this Government has the challenge to meet to provide more 

assistance to these local government bodies; and regardless of whether, in the words of the hon. Premier, 

“whether rural people agree with the Commission’s conclusions or not, it had done a superb job of 

research”, (and a very costly one), the fact remains that this Government has these problems to face, the 

problem of rural finance. I am going to suggest, Mr. Speaker, if the over-all revenues of the province 

cannot be increased, then other ways must be found of bringing some revenue and making it available 

for our rural municipalities and our other provincial government bodies. Since this Government took 

office, the Government has purchased numerous buildings throughout the province. The annual cost of 

cleaning, heating and maintaining these offices has increased enormously. Many additional employees 

were appointed, and when we heard . . .  

 

Premier Douglas: — How many? 

 

Mr. Foley: — I have a figure here which states that civil servants have increased from about 2,700 to 

about 5,700 or an increase of 106 per cent to the end of 1955. Total expenditures to administer Natural 

Resources have increased. The total expenditures for the administration of Natural Resources, according 

to my source of information, were about $512,000 when this Government took office in 1944. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Hear! Hear! – and the revenue was even less! 

 

Mr. Foley: — In 1955, the total cost of administration was in the neighbourhood of $2½ million. 

 

Premier Douglas: — ‘The Leader-Post’ said it’s not enough. 

 

Mr. Foley: — In 1944, the cost of administering northern areas and local improvement districts was just 

about $42,500; in 1955 it was $248,000. These are just administration costs. Administration costs alone 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

44 

have increased under this Government from about $82,000 in 1944, to about $290,000 last year, in the 

Department of Education; from about $20,000 to $190,000 in about a 10-year period in Public Health; 

from about $22,000 to $186,000 in Agriculture in the same period. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Do you object to it? 

 

Mr. Foley: — These are just administration costs, Mr. Speaker, - and from $24,000 to $319,000 in Co-

operatives. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Do you object to that? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Sit down? 

 

Premier Douglas: — Does the hon. member object to that? He hasn’t got the courage to answer that 

one. 

 

Mr. Foley: — The present Government are . . .  

 

Premier Douglas: — Is the Liberal party opposed to it? 

 

Mr. Foley: — I have noticed the skill with which you have parried leading questions from this side of 

the House for a long time. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I never run away from them, though. 

 

Mr. Foley: — I am standing right here. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Foley: — I am merely pointing out, Mr. Speaker, that administration costs have one much beyond 

the ratio of increase in our provincial revenues, which I understand are in the neighbourhood of about 

four times as great today as they were when this Government took office. 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis: — Compare programs. 

 

Mr. Foley: — But certainly administration costs have gone much beyond that. Now, Mr. Speaker, I am 

not suggesting that a certain amount of this increase in costs isn’t justifiable, but I am, remember, asking 

the question which I asked at the beginning: is it not possible to get some additional revenue in this 

province through economy, which this Government, up until this time at least, seems to know very little 

about? 

 

We already heard the figure, yesterday, of the vast increase in the cost of ‘Saskatchewan News’, from 

about $9,000 or $10,000 in its inception to a sum of over $31,000 last year. The cost of the Bureau of 

Publications has increased from $14,500 in 1944 to about $180,000 to the end of 1955. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

45 

Mr. Loptson: — A sizable increase. A little more than 10 times. 

 

Mr. Foley: — There have been a great many questions raised in this House, Mr. Speaker, as to the 

ultimate aims of the Bureau of Publications. It is not my purpose today to go into that. Certainly forms 

and nicely drawn-up bits of advertising for the various duties and accomplishments of our province, I 

believe, have their part to play in the economy of our province; but certainly members in this Assembly 

with much more experience than myself have cast reasonable doubts on some of the functions of the 

Bureau of Publications. The cost of the Public Service Commission has increased nearly 12 times from 

about $8,500 in 1944, to over $100,000 to the end of 1955, and no doubt it is higher today. Why is the 

public payroll rapidly increasing each year? And I can go on and on. A number of other extravagances 

of this Government have been mentioned by previous speakers. 

 

Auditing costs, just to take another example, have increased from $67,000 in 1944 to $260,000 until two 

years ago. I understand (I stand to be corrected) that one reason for this is that Crown Corporations do 

not pay auditing costs. 

 

We heard the hon. member from Pelly (Mr. Barrie) tell us something of the costs of the Boys’ School as 

compared to other public institutions. We have heard a great number of opinions voiced concerning the 

Museum of Natural History, and it’s not my intention to make any controversial statements concerning 

those institutions; but I certainly feel that some thought can be given in the future, when Government 

expenditures are being planned, to what are the real needs of the people of Saskatchewan, when 

expenditures of this calibre are being contemplated. 

 

We are still getting used to the fact that $80 million is being spent on two power installations in the 

province. I am still remembering, with a fair degree of clarity, the report made by Mr. Cass-Beggs 

concerning the feasibility of the Saskatchewan Dam, when he stated that power could be generated more 

cheaply with coal than it might be by hydro, when he went on to say the Saskatchewan Dam was 

primarily an irrigation proposition. Time, I think, has born out what many on the Opposition have said, 

that Mr. Cass-Beggs was right. The Government of this province have been putting into effect his 

suggestions in this respect; but nevertheless $80 million is a remarkably large amount of money in our 

day and age. 

 

Much more could be said, and will be said, but the fact remains that the attitude and the conduct of many 

members of this Government have left themselves open to question in many parts of this province. In 

view of my remarks this afternoon, I think it is reasonable to assume I will not support the Budget. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Call it 5.30. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It being 5.30, the House will recess until 7.30 o’clock. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

46 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — In listening to the debate, Mr. Speaker, today and during the 

past week, Iv have come to the conclusion that the members opposite have been trying to fan up a great 

big flame, and all that has happened is that we have seen a lot of smoke and the member who spoke just 

before me (Mr. Foley) got lost in that smoke. 

 

Reference has been made in the Budget debate to the situation as it exists in Canada today, particularly 

as to the inflation which is facing the people of Canada. I can only say that, when one considers on one 

side you have the ‘boom’ as they call it, and then on the other side we have our farm population in a 

depression, it is very unfortunate for Canada; unfortunate for business, and I believe, it is most 

unfortunate for all of us. 

 

I would like at this time, Mr. Speaker, to point out how dangerous a situation we are facing, and I am 

going to quote from MacLean’s of March 2, where Bruce Hutchinson tells why our boom has the 

experts scared. You will find on Page 18, a few paragraphs, and with your permission, sir, I would like 

to read some of these paragraphs. He says: 

 

“Inflation at its present rate would wipe out all your fixed savings within your life-time, even if you 

are already of middle age.” 

 

Again he says: 

 

“Under the best of conditions, nothing on earth can prevent a dangerous rise in prices during the next 

six months, together with a nuclear explosion in politics.” 

 

I would like the members opposite to take note of that. Another quote: 

 

“For the first time our newly invented and supposedly foolproof economic system is now on trail for 

its life, and could easily end in a national smash-up.” 

 

I would like to make reference to a few more quotations that I have here, because I agree with what this 

writer says. You will find on page 36 of this same article: 

 

“Government in a democracy will finally do what the public demands, whether wise or unwise. If 

there is to be more legal counterfeiting of money, the public will be the master counterfeiter; 

Government, only the technician, as history has proved over and over again.” 

 

One more paragraph, Mr. Speaker: 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

47 

“The paramount question is whether the Canadian people, in trying to have it better than their actual 

resources allow, will precipitate a ‘bust’ later on . . . whether, in short, democracy can stand 

prosperity.” 

 

I mention these things because the hon. members opposite have been, for the past week and longer, 

pointing to the healthy conditions in this country. They have been talking about a boom; actually they 

have been trying to avoid the actual state of affairs in this people of Saskatchewan and the existent 

deflation. I feel that if this boom had been extended to the rural areas, probably things would not have 

been quite so bad, and I am sure there is a way out of the dilemma. I don’t think that we need to have a 

‘bust’, but I do think that if we had a courageous government in Ottawa, something could be done to 

alleviate the situation as it exists in Canada today. 

 

I believe that one reason why we have inflation is the fact that on many commodities, we have 

tremendous tariffs and high duties which people in this country directly or indirectly must pay. Just to 

illustrate what I have in mind, may I point to a merchant who had been shipping a few things from 

countries overseas; he gave me a picture of what happens. For example, this man used to bring (and still 

does) lighter flints into this country. If you wanted to buy a half a dozen, or maybe three or four flints, 

you know what you have to pay. You pay 15 cents or 25 cents for a little tiny package. But here is the 

price overseas in one of the countries in Europe; two and a half pounds (or a kilo) of flints costs, in 

Germany, $12. Back in 1919 all the duty that was paid on this item and all the taxes that were paid on a 

kilo of flints, was 97 cents. In other words, it cost this particular merchant or any merchant who obtained 

this material from overseas trade, to $12.50. You may want to know what the duty is today – I’m not 

sure what it is at the present time; but just a matter of a year ago or so, the duty, excise tax and sales tax 

on a kilo of flints amounted to $37.50. Who is paying the shot, Mr. Speaker? It is the consumer in this 

country, and that is one of the reasons why Canada today is obtaining such tremendous surpluses in the 

budget. I submit that, if the Government of Canada were wise, and particularly if it considered the 

position of the primary producers (the agriculturists) probably what it would do would be to return some 

of these surpluses which it collects in taxes and excise duty back to the people who need it the most; but 

Ottawa refuses to do that. So Canada is in the position that it may face a ‘bust’, and, as the writer in 

MacLean’s says, he is quite sure that it will come n a short time. I will recommend all the members in 

this House to read this article; it is in the March 2 issue of MacLeans. It is worthwhile. It will be helpful 

to all of us in understanding the dilemma in which Canada is finding itself today. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

48 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, I think we could do something about alleviating that condition. I am proposing at 

this time to submit for the consideration of this Assembly, a few suggestions. I may be possible that 

these could be incorporated into a resolution. 

 

The Government in Ottawa, first of all, could reduce expenditures for national defence, which is not 

productive, and put to use much of this reduction into productive and national services. 

 

Secondly, I think it could use its powers under the existing board to lend out sufficient money to those 

interested in farming, at a very low rate of interest, because it is being done in many countries of the 

world, today, at less than 2 per cent. It could do this so that these people could acquire capital for 

purchases of farms. We have hard a lot from the Opposition about what this Government should do 

about re-establishing young people on land, and I could not help but wonder whether they were ignorant 

of the fact that it is practically an impossibility, and also whether they were aware of the fact that we 

could not possibly lend out money at a low rate of interest. But the Dominion of Canada with its huge 

surpluses of $500 million and $600 million, which they say they don’t know what to do with – here is 

something that could be done with these surpluses. Money could be loaned out to establish farmers, say 

$20,000 or $30,000 for a long period of years, say at 1 ½ or 1 ¾ per cent interest. It can be done and the 

hon. members opposite know it; the Liberals in Ottawa know it, and we know it. It is clear that we could 

divert much of these surplus taxes and credits for capital expansion as opposed to increasing 

unproductive services. It is quite true that this investment into capital eventually increases the gross 

national production of wealth, but with more wealth, a better balance will be established, and there will 

be more competition on the market. 

 

The third suggestion I make is that the Government at Ottawa should reduce the heavy burden of 

taxation on the small income group, in order to have a smaller surplus. I think this request is most 

reasonable, and has been discussed in this House. Such action would put into the hands of the working 

people and the farmers more money to pay for the essential needs and services required by people on a 

local government level. 

 

The hon. member from Turtleford charged that the municipalities and the schools are hard up and that it 

is up to this Government to provide more money – one way is higher taxes; but he did not come out with 

a suggestion where the Government could obtain the money. Well, maybe we could borrow it. Maybe 

the Government in Ottawa could provide, or make some arrangement to lend the province the necessary 

money at a very low rate of interest so as to relieve the load upon the people whom we desire to help. 

 

The fourth suggestion is that the Government could increase the taxation on the corporations, so that it 

could cut down on the surplus production by these corporations, because they have been, in many cases, 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

49 

over-productive. This was mentioned by the hon. member from Yorkton (Mr. Neibrandt). We find this 

over-production at a time when the consuming public is in a depressed condition and not able to buy 

these surplus goods for cash. True, people are buying considerable goods on time; certainly they are not 

paying for them in cash, and we are in exactly the same kind of position as we were in 1929-1930, when 

we had the great ‘bust’ in the United States. 

 

The members opposite may not agree with some of my suggestions, but I think it is a much better thing 

to try and save our country – to try to stabilize the conditions in our country, and to attempt to find some 

kind of solution. 

 

I am prepared to suggest that instalment buying should be controlled, and when we talk about controls, I 

am of the opinion that the best thing the Government at Ottawa can do would be to re-establish a fair 

basis of price controls. Now, this is nothing new. MacLean’s points out that price controls are inevitable, 

and whether the hon. members opposite agree or not, those appear to be the facts today, and therefore, 

the Government of Committee should take the matter in hand, and if that is the answer to our economic 

illness, it should go ahead and initiate price controls. Certainly those of us who live in this part of the 

country would be very happy to get back to the prosperous days when we did have price controls. But if 

we are to have price controls, then the Government should establish a fair relation between the goods 

that are produced and the good that are bought. We wouldn’t want to leave them on the present basis 

where, without argument, the farmer is getting less for the goods he produces than he got a number of 

years ago, and yet he is paying three and four times as much for the items which he has to buy. There 

must be some level established that would be fair to all concerned. 

 

I will digress somewhat because I feel this whole economic situation is most serious, and certainly it is 

affecting the province today, and the municipalities and other local government bodies. I am not an 

historian; nor an expert schoolteacher like one of the hon. members opposite; he spoke all afternoon, but 

I couldn’t understand what he was talking bout. I will refer him to something that I think may be of 

value. We have been accused across on this side of the House time and time again that we have certain 

viewpoints that eventually are going to bring about a collective way of living, and things like that. I 

would suggest to then that the happenings in Canada today may lead to exactly the kind of situation that 

we all fear. I will go back 100 years – just about 100 years to a country which was, at that time, ruled by 

the Czars of Russia, and at that time you had a bureaucracy equal to none in the world. There were other 

people in that country (no, not the peasants!) people of the middle class called the ‘intelligentsia’, an 

educated group, and yet people who had some sympathy for the serfs that existed in that country at that 

time. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

50 

I recall reading the life story of a girl by the name of Vera Figner. Vera Figner was not a revolutionist in 

the sense that the hon. members sometimes thing of revolutionists. She was a woman with the kindest 

heart and the most Christian principles that you would find anywhere, and Vera Figner and a group of 

people like herself tried to do something about alleviating the situation in that country. What was the 

situation? It wasn’t the Czar and it wasn’t the peasants that had created the situation where 80 per cent 

and 90 per cent of the budget of that country went for defence; where the peasants as well as the middle 

class were taxed beyond their limit to pay. She wasn’t one of those. She was well-to-do, but she saw 

what was happening to Russia at that time and so she associated herself with the number of people who 

were called ‘Social Democrats’. She tried to do something about it; as a matter of fact she is one of the 

leaders. 

 

Well, to make the story short, they fought, they pleaded, they made petitions to the Government of that 

day which was the Czar, of course, and a few ministers, and they could get nowhere. The bureaucracy of 

that country would listen to no one. All that was achieved was that the government decided to allocate 

the lands of the rich landowners to the peasants, and so the peasants or the Mouzhiks (as they referred to 

there) were given half an acre, or an acre or two acres of land. But here was the thing. When those 

people got those small parcels of land, the tax, I pointed out as being of such a tremendous weight, was 

greater than the productive value of the land and so again, you had discrimination and hardship and 

these serfs were ready to do anything. So what did they do? They did the wrong thing, Mr. Speaker. 

They assassinated Czar Alexander II, and they thought that would teach the Government of the day that 

something should be done to help these people of a large country to live a better life. But nothing 

happened. An uprising came about in Poland, I think in about 1865 or 1867. That did not help. In 1905 

they tried again. Through the Ukraine and through Poland and through Russia proper, or Muscovy (as 

we refer to it) there was an uprising. The uprising brought results, a parliament for the first time in the 

history of that country. Bureaucracy was struck, but not a death blow, and they had a parliament for one 

year which they called the ‘Duma’, and then it was abolished. Again, the peasants, suffering under the 

deadweight of taxation and of discrimination and bureaucracy, carried on until their sacrifice in the war 

of 1914-1916, when, without guns and ammunition, they were mercilessly shoved against the German 

armies in the Carpathians, and that was the time of the great uprising and fall of an Empire. They rose 

against their own government and they set up different states. The Polish people set up their state; the 

Ukrainian people set up their state, and had it not been, as I mentioned on a previous occasion, that 

armies from the west had been sent out, led by Generals Deniken and Haller, and others, maybe we 

would have had a different situation in the world today. The imperialistic world was against the 

peasants, and the thing that happened is that these people having no other choice, adopted the leadership 

of Lenin and what he stood for. 

 

I am pointing this out because we who believe in democracy do not wish to see the people of Canada, or 

of any country go to that kind of an extreme. We believe that the liberties we are entitled to, the 

economic 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

51 

freedom we are entitled to, and equality of one kind and another, can be achieved, through a democratic 

process. So, when I listen to the hon. members opposite, I can only say that to me it is disgusting, 

because with the intelligence with which these men must be endowed, representing fine communities, 

they must have been good men, and intelligent men, to be found here. So when they come out with this 

kind of argument that they do, and refuse to see the facts as they should be seen, failing to recognize a 

danger lurking of an imperialism striking Canada, and as Blair Fraser says, we are read to go ‘bust’, 

when I see all this, I am disappointed. And they laugh. They laughed, Mr. Speaker, but history will 

prove whether or not I am right. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — You should set up another party! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — We have a party that believes in the right kind of principles; which believes in true 

democracy, not only freedom to speak but economic democracy as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, having said that, I propose this evening to indicate to you nearer home what is happening. 

To me there are only two kinds of people: those who exploit and those who are exploited. And there are 

only two kinds of governments – those who exploit and those which are exploited. Those are the only 

two kinds of people and government you have. So getting back to my constituency, Mr. Speaker, I will 

deal with trappers, with fishermen and with others. Take the case of trappers. This Government has done 

one of the finest things that could have been done to give people economic freedom. A few years ago we 

established a fur marketing service, and through that service I intend to prove that, half a million or $1 

million a year more went into the pockets of the trappers. But there was pressure, and particularly from 

the hon. members opposite and their party, the Liberal party; pressure upon the trappers to say that what 

we had was compulsory; that it was a wicked thing. They forgot to point out that if they lost the 

compulsory features they might lose a million dollars. Mr. Speaker, if you look through the records of 

last year, you will find that social aid only cost $45,000 in the northern district, but the taxpayers lost, if 

not million, then a third of a million, or ten times as much as we give in social aid. Had they received 

that money perhaps they would not have had to receive social aid. 

 

I am going to prove something to you, or at least I will try. Looking through the annual report for 1956, 

on Page 37 we find a table dealing with the value of wild fur pelts. You will see that in 1956 (I will take 

just a few of these) there were 18,514 mink trapped or sold by the trappers of this province, of which 

possibly half and maybe more came from the north. (It doesn’t matter too much). You will note that the 

price in this particular year, on the average to the Fur Marketing Service was $26 for a mink. The hon. 

members have the figures for the high and the low, but the average was $26. Now, I took a little time off 

to investigate and I have some figures that are most interesting. I will not name the companies, but I 

could give that information. I have company No. 1, which is a very reputable company, 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

52 

and established right across this country. This company paid, during the best month of the year, 

December, 1956, $17 average per mink. On one hand $26 from the Saskatchewan Fur Marketing 

Service; on the other hand, $17. Here is another company, not quite so big, doing business in the city of 

Regina. As a matter of fact, these are all doing business in Regina; that’s where I got the figures. For the 

month of December, the average it paid for mink was $11 compared to $26 obtained by trappers from 

the Saskatchewan Fur Marketing Service. Company No. 3 another reputable company, advertises in the 

press that it pays top prices, and here is the top price they pay to the trapper, Mr. Speaker: the average 

per mink for the month of December, when you get the best fur is, $8.58. There, Mr. Speaker, is your 

free enterprise. Are they satisfied with a reasonable profit of 10 per cent or 20 per cent? Figure it out for 

yourself: $26 from the Fur Marketing Service; $8.58 from a private enterpriser. 

 

Am I to stand here in this Legislature and not say anything about it? I don’t blame these companies for 

making profits; they’re free to do so. This is a free country. If anyone is to blame, it is the trappers who 

know no better. I would only suggest to the Government that they carry on more publicity, spend more 

money on publicity to advise these people of what happens when their furs are offered for sale. 

 

Take the case of weasels for the whole year, as found on page 37. There were quite a number of weasel 

caught, 108,283. The average price shows a little less than the previous year, but the average price is 

$1.60. What did free enterprise pay? Here is this Company No 1 – it is not too bad, it is a reputable 

company, that is why they pay a little better; the average is $1.24 compared to $1.60. What about 

Company No. 2? The average price for the month of December when you get the best fur (I used to buy 

fur and I know something about it) the average price was $1. What about Company No. 3? The average 

price they paid for weasel was 72 cents at the time of the year when the best fur came in. 

 

Again, as I say, I don’t blame the companies. But why blame this Government when we try to help the 

people who trap by having orderly marketing? Isn’t it desirable? Take the case of muskrats. It isn’t quite 

so bad with muskrats. I have here the average price paid by the Saskatchewan Fur Marketing Service 

during the year 1956 as shown on this record. The high at one sale was $1.72, but it was 93 cents 

average for the whole year. During the month of December, Company No. 1 paid an average price of 54 

cents. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Give us the names of the companies, will you? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I am not going to disclose the names of companies. I will say this, Mr. Speaker. 

The hon. members can go to these companies and they can get the figures for the month of December, 

and they can come back and say I am not telling the truth. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Well, Mr. Speaker, just on a point of order, the member is putting up a great case of 

these companies and yet he is calling 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

53 

them A, B and C and he is quoting from some press report of which we have no knowledge. We don’t 

know what the facts are . . .  

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I am not quoting from a press report; I investigated this and I can prove . . .  

 

Mr. Cameron: — . . . I think we should have the information he is quoting from. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, the member has a perfect right, if he has 

collected the prices paid by certain companies, to give those prices without quoting the companies’ 

names, and accept responsibility for it. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — He is reading from statements in the press pertaining to . . .  

 

Premier Douglas: — Well, he’s not reading from the press at all. He is reading from the list which he 

has compiled after getting in touch with these various companies, and I would think that, as far as the 

companies are concerned, they probably would prefer not to have their names bandied around in the 

debate. But I am sure if the hon. friends insist, the hon. member will be glad to divulge them. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, who is to say this information is correct? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I take full responsibility for submitting these figures. I compiled 

them. It wasn’t taken out of a press report; it was compiled from records, and I can give the information 

to be held in confidence to any member in this House as to where I got this information: but I will not 

divulge it in this House and make it public. I am not going to stand up and be charged for libel. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — You sure would be after those statements. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — In any event, these figures are correct, and I let the people here and the members 

here decide whether I have integrity and tell the truth when I am submitting these figures as true figures. 

 

Going back to muskrats, the Saskatchewan Fur Marketing Service average as shown here for the whole 

year is 93 cents. Company No. 1 paid 54 cents in the month of December; Company No. 2, the average 

price per muskrat was 42 cents and Company No. 3 the average price per muskrat was 41 cents. As I 

pointed out in Committee recently on one occasion (I hope I am not out of order), I saw one account 

where a trapper sent in 75 muskrats and got $5. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — They may not have been worth any more. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Do you want to protect those companies? I am not attacking the companies. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

54 

Mr. Loptson: — They might have been mistaken for cow-hides! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I am pointing out that when you take these figures on page 37, (these figures are 

not the figures) of the total price received by the trappers of Saskatchewan; these figures are the value of 

the fur produced in Saskatchewan, based on the market value paid by the Saskatchewan Fur Marketing 

Service; and when these figures say that these trappers received nearly $3 million, then those figures are 

not correct; they probably received less than $2 million. These are the figures that represent the value of 

the fur, but the trappers never got the value for the fur, and, as I say, if anybody is to blame, it is the 

trappers and it is the kind of members we have opposite that have encouraged trappers to uphold these 

free-enterprisers who are taking away the break and the butter and the clothing that the people of the 

north need in order to exist. 

 

We heard today from the hon. member for Turtleford (Mr. Foley) who teaches school, and should know 

better, that we should do this and that, but he never tells you where the money is going to come from. 

Yet it is a simple answer. We take $50 million or $100 million from the people of Saskatchewan, and we 

give it back to them, and if we are going to give them another $50 million, there are only two ways you 

can do it. You can either go and tax them, or else you have to go and borrow, and put this province into 

debt. Yet he suggests to this Government that we should cut down. Cut down on what, Mr. Speaker? 

The Hon. member for Pelly (Mr. Barrie) is not in his seat, but he said the same thing; cut down on 

administration. There’s too much administration, they said, twice as much as there was in 1944. Well, 

sir, there is five or 10 times as much work being done to make this province something that it wasn’t in 

1944. And I well recall the political speech that the hon. Leader of the Opposition made last year, and I 

mentioned it in this House last year, and he didn’t deny it, when he said that if the Liberals got in, they 

would fire half the civil servants. 

 

Mr. Gibson (Morse): — He sure did. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — They have it right in their platform. I have their platform right here. They don’t 

say how many, but if you read their platform, Mr. Speaker, it is one of their planks. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: —It’s only their ‘gas’ program, Bill. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — It’s being generated free over there. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — What do they say? 

 

Mr. Cameron: — You’re sure that’s the platform, now? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — You can’t understand it, eh? 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

55 

Mr. Cameron: — It’s in there somewhere. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — It’s in there where he says he will cut down  . . I am sorry, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t 

my glasses with me so I had to borrow a pair and I am doing the best I can. I will let my friends here 

find it for me. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Here, Bill, take mine. Maybe you can see better with them. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — That’s better. These things happen, you know. But I’m not going to be stuck 

because I have no glasses. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Share the wealth! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Thank you very much. Here’s what they say. This is in the Liberal four-year 

program broadcast by A.H. McDonald, Saskatchewan Liberal Leader, April 11, 1956. He says: 

 

“Millions of dollars each year for additional services may be obtained by reducing the excessive 

administration costs, and by eliminating the multitude of extravagances which are conspicuous 

features of present administration.” 

 

Some Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — If they are going to go ahead and save millions and millions of dollars to the 

people of Saskatchewan, then I believe that what they said they intended to do, was to fire 3,000 or more 

of the good civil servants we have in this province . . .  

 

Mr. Cameron: — Where does it say that? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — It says so when you mentioned reducing services. 

 

Mr. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — That didn’t mean civil servants, though. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — The hon. member, this afternoon, said the auditors’ fees are extravagant. Yet how 

would they feel if we came into this House, or into Committee and didn’t have a proper accounting 

made, a proper audit? Is that a good administration? 

 

Mr. Foley: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. I did not say auditors’ fees were extravagant. I 

merely pointed out the increase in auditors’ fees over a ten-year period; nothing more than that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

56 

Mr. Berezowsky: — In any event, Mr. Speaker, I have to fight the battle for the people who cannot 

come here and speak for themselves and the people of the north. And when I see these advertisements 

saying, ‘top prices’, ‘highest prices’ and malarkey of that kind, and I find the trappers of this province 

have probably lost a million dollars in one year, then it is my job to come to this Legislature and ask this 

Government to do the best they can to continue a program of publicity so that these people can save 

some of that money for themselves. The same story applies to fish. We are paying this year in my 

constituency, at Cumberland House, $1.30 a pound for Sturgeon. There will be about 7,000 pounds 

caught, and I am sure it is going to mean quite a bit to the economy of that particular community. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — That is about one-half of what it’s worth. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — That may be, but I am quite certain that the hon. member, if he went down to New 

York, probably would be able, with the money he’s made in oil and whatever else, to pay $5 for a plate. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — And you are only paying $1.30 a pound for Sturgeon. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — The thing is, we’re happy that we can get $1.30; and if people are willing to pay it 

is helping my people up there. By having the Fish Marketing Service we have more or less guaranteed 

the people of the north some kind of an income. I can recall, a few years back though not so long ago, 

when I went into the Pelican-Rapids district, and I inquired and got some figures. I got them from an 

Indian agent, if you want to know. They’re correct figures, and I found out the income averaged as low 

as $187 a year, including family allowance, pensions and everything. I would like to see the hon. 

member from Saltcoats live on $180 a year, and see how he would like it. 

 

That’s the reason I am speaking for those people today, and I am very happy to see that we can get $1.30 

a pound for Sturgeon. I am glad to see that we can pay our fisherman anywhere from 10 cents to 20 

cents for whitefish, and I am glad to see that we can pay a fair price for jackfish and pike; but there are 

some things I don’t like, and that is all this argument about compulsory features. There’s no compulsion, 

of course, in fishing now, but it does . . .  

 

Mr. Loptson: — That’s why you’re paying more for the fish; because there’s no compulsion. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — You would only pay half that when you had compulsion. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — But they do affect the thinking of a lot of the fishermen in the north who are, in the 

first place, honest and simple people. And when the M.P. from Meadow Lake comes down with a box of 

cigars and 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

57 

hands them out, they think he’s a pretty good fellow, and they believe what he says, and they would 

believe the hon. member from Saltcoats, if he came along with a box of cigars and handed them out. 

He’d be a fine fellow, and they would probably believe him. So, when he tells them the Fish Marketing 

Service is robbing them, of course they may believe him, too. Of course, that is not true. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — What do you give them? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I do not give out cigars anyway  . . if you want to know the story, I’ll tell you. You 

will be ashamed of what happened; what the Liberal candidate did at Cumberland House. It had better 

not be said here. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — It might be libellous, eh? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I have never given anybody a cigarette, or a cigar or a bottle of whiskey at any 

time, where you people did. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — We hoped it would be in good grace. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — It is not very wise to bring those things up. In any event, Mr. Speaker, I know of a 

situation in the north, just a year or so ago, where a private dealer was buying fish and he is a free 

enterpriser. It’s a thing we wouldn’t do in the fish marketing. He said to them, “If you want to sell your 

whitefish, you’ll have to sell your pickerel and jacks.” 

 

Mr. Weber (Meadow Lake): — Who said that? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I can tell you. It was in the Meadow Lake and Patchenac district, and the 

fishermen, in order to get a better price for their jack and pickerel, do you know what they did? They’re 

smart people, too. They dug holes in the ice and buried the jackfish and the pickerel, or most of them, 

and then they sold to the dealer, who wouldn’t take the whitefish unless he took the jack and pickerel, 

some jacks and some pickerel, and he took their whitefish, and then during the night – it was beautiful to 

see on the lake – cars travelling back and forth – and another fish dealer picking up the jackfish and the 

pickerel. Yet id did help the fishermen in that area, because they got more money. 

 

Some Opposition Member: — Were they private enterprise? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Yes, they were both private enterprisers. 

 

Some Opposition Member: — Hurray! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — So they helped my people, and I thank them for that. But at times people have to 

be smart. Actually, it was 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

58 

the fishermen of Meadow Lake, but I refer to the northern people as my people. Until this year (we now 

have the hon. member from Athabasca, Mr. Harrop) there was nobody to speak for those people, except 

the member for Cumberland, and I was very happy to do that. 

 

I will go back to fish and will let the hon. members (those who were here) recall when we were accused 

of only paying 50 cents for Sturgeon and it turned out that the Fish Marketing Service was paying $1 a 

pound for Sturgeon, and the people who were paying 50 cents were dealers in the Manitoba section; and, 

of course, the hon. member for Athabasca at that time was very, very embarrassed. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — You have the best fish in the world. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I would now like to mention something about other prices and costs before I touch 

upon mining and other matters in my constituency and in the north. Up in the Meadow Lake district, I 

think, again around Pathenac, Ile a la Cross, Buffalo Narrows, my information is (and I can be corrected 

if I am wrong), that until a couple of years ago in that community, the merchants who have 

establishments and businesses charged more for a can of beans than you had to pay another 100 miles 

farther north. There was no competition, and they exploited the people to the limit – 10 cents, 12 cents 

and 15 cents a can more than you could have bought the same good for, 50 and 100 miles farther north. I 

shall say that the people of the north have initiative, and they are going to do something about these 

situations, and in this particular community, today, they have a co-operative store. They started out with 

nothing, and the hon. member from Meadow Lake (Mr. Weber) should know what I am talking about. 

The last report I had they had a turnover last year of $70,000 and were able to pay a 10 per cent 

dividend, and they are selling at competitive prices as they are in Meadow Lake. So the people, whether 

politically or otherwise, are taking the situation into their own hands and are going to solve their 

problems. No more will you see the day when the free enterpriser charged me $7.50 a bag for flour, and 

turned around and charged the native in that community $15 a bag for flour. Those days are gone. And 

no more will you see in the north, where we are able to do something about it, that before the 

Saskatchewan Government trading came in, you paid $1.25 (and this happened at Stanley, and I paid it) 

for a gallon of gasoline for your motor; but as soon as Saskatchewan Government Trading came in, the 

price went to 75 cents, and I understand, last year, it was only 60 cents a gallon. There, my friends, is the 

difference between your philosophy and mine. 

 

Some Opposition Member: — Gasoline jumped up one cent. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Getting closer to home, and something that affects all of us, and again we will talk 

about free enterprise. let us try to understand the situation. Let us try to represent the people of Canada 

to save this country from this kind of exploitation. A year ago the price of wheat had not gone up, labour 

had not gone up to any extent, but one day I 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

59 

I awoke and found that the price of bread has gone up one cent right across the board. I don’t know who 

these free enterprisers are or whether they all got a dream during the night, but in the morning they 

decided to raise the price of bread by one cent right across the country. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Now, you’re opposed to free enterprise. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Then again, just last fall, again they went to sleep one night, and the next morning 

they got up and decided they would raise the price of bread one cent. Every one of them had the same 

dream, because the price of bread went up one cent right across the country. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — We woke up one morning and gasoline was a cent higher. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Yes, and who really put the cent on the farm fuel, if it wasn’t these same 

companies? They come with a balance sheet and say, “We made more millions this last year than we 

made the year before.” Then they come and raise the price on gasoline which the farmer needs to 

produce food for hungry people; he has to pay that extra cent. They don’t pay it. And you want to be 

their friends! I don’t! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — You’re opposed to free enterprise, then, of course. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — You should speak to the Provincial Treasurer about that. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — And to the Premier; he spoke very highly of free enterprise. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — These are some of the things, Mr. Speaker, that you will find in and around us, and 

this Government has to be congratulated for the fact that they have done everything that has been 

possible within their limits to do. I am not going to talk about the services we give, which are good – 

better than anywhere in Canada. I am not going to say, or suggest, that they could have given, as was 

suggested about power this afternoon, without somebody paying for it. We are not going to be like the 

people to the west of us and offer $22 dividends, in cash, which is actually royalty or tax money which 

should have gone into the treasury and paid for services; and I would not suggest to this Government, as 

has been suggested this afternoon, that we should take $20 million and give it back as a dividend to each 

of the farmers professional rata. We are joined together; we are going to pay our way in this province, 

and build the best province in Canada. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Got a good mine up there? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — No, I haven’t any. I worked for a mining company and they paid me fair wages. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — You have to go to Manitoba to find a mine. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

60 

Mr. Loptson: — Can’t get money to develop it, eh? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I did work for a mining company last year for wages, part 

of the time, because as you know, our indemnity isn’t very high, and when you have a family to support 

you have to get out and work, and I love working. But I will tell you something about the north. You 

will find that the north has not been scratched. That is not just my opinion; though I have seen 

practically every section, from the Northwest Territories down to the sediments in the south; I have been 

up at Pelican Narrows, I have been as Deschambeault, Reindeer Lake, Scott Lake north of Stony Rapids, 

Uranium City and in the west around Porter Lake and other places as well. Certainly I have been around 

Lac la Ronge and have seen with my own eyes the potential that exists there. 

 

It is unfortunate that we are located as is the province of Ontario, where they have transcontinental 

railways running through, and branch lines and roads, because I am quite sure that we would have the 

same kind of development as you have in Sudbury or down in Quebec, and in other places. But the 

potential is there, and I recall that in September last year we had a gentleman from Saskatchewan, a 

professor our University, Dr. Byers – if I can find the clipping  . . it doesn’t matter; you have probably 

read it in any event. Dr. Byers was checking that area, and he said: 

 

“The Deschambeault area has the greatest potential of any area in Saskatchewan for base metals.” 

 

And I agree with him. I understand from people who are close to what is going on in the north, that 

hundreds of claims have been staked this winter. Again, having been up in the Porter Lake area last year 

I saw with my own eyes all kinds of uranium ore potential, and the people in that company I was 

associated with last summer indicated to me that there should be no fear of uranium going too far into 

the doldrums, because within eight or 10 years there would be such a demand as we cannot possibly 

visualize for uranium. There is nothing that can replace it. I want to point out that north of Meadow 

Lake in the Porter Lake area we have tremendous deposits of disseminated uranium in the rocks of that 

region, and again I want to point out to you that up and around Deschambeault and Pelican Narrows, 

there are tremendous possibilities for base metals – copper, zinc, lead, gold and so forth. Let us not 

forget, too, that in my own constituency in the south, in around Choiceland and from there on right up to 

Wapaweka Lake there are indications of tremendous iron deposits. This is in my constituency, too, but 

part of it is in the constituency of Nipawin. I understand that the ore has not proven to be a high enough 

grade, but there is enough of it, and I am quite certain that, within our lifetime, maybe a matter of five or 

ten years, we will have mining for iron in that particular region. Certainly it appears to me to be much 

simpler to put shafts down a couple of thousand feet and obtain the iron ore, than to have to build a 

railway 300 miles, as they did down at the Quebec-Labrador boundary. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

61 

I say all this because, realizing the potential of the north, I have a genuine confidence in that area, and I 

only wish that, somehow, I could persuade all the members here, and the Government here, to do a little 

more for the north than is being done. I know quite well there is only so much money to go around, and 

I’ll be the last one to cry about it; but at the same time, if we are going to have the kind of development 

that we should have, I think that more money will have to be allocated to that area, because if you do 

that, Mr. Speaker, you will find that royalties will bring more revenue into the treasury, which will build 

a lot of the things that we desire to build. You will find there will be more employment, and I hope that, 

before this budget debate is closed we may have some kind of announcement that roads will be built into 

that area. 

 

I will commend the Minister of natural Resources and his Department for building the road up to 

Buffalo Narrows. It is not in my constituency; but I say that, because I know how valuable that road is to 

the people of Saskatchewan, not just to Buffalo Narrows. It is opening up a section of the north, this 

Porter Lake area. I again wish to stress the very great importance of building a road from province of 

Saskatchewan; I don’t care where it goes – whether it goes down by White Fox or whether it goes 

through Candle Lake or Smeaton; but I think it would be in the interests of this province. It is urgent; as 

a matter of fact it is imperative that we begin to construct a road past Deschambeault Lake (somewhere 

in there), so that we can have access to that tremendously potential area of which Dr. Byers has spoken, 

as I said, in September in the Saskatoon ‘Star-Phoenix’. 

 

I would also like to point out at this time to the Minister of Highways here that I hope something will be 

done in the community of Creighton. The people there are very fine people, not because they have me 

about 80 per cent of their votes, or because they have confidence in this Government; but they are fine 

people because of what they are. They are mostly people from Saskatchewan, and they have very few 

roads in that area. So while I am pleased about what has been done about the road to Denare Beach, I 

would suggest to him that it is most urgent that the small section between the town of Flin Flon and 

Creighton be black-topped, because there is just as much traffic on that road as there is on Highway No. 

6, or No. 1 here in Regina; I’m quite sure of that – one car and one truck after another). There are 3,000 

people in Creighton, just a mile away from the city of Flin Flon, any you can imagine the tremendous 

amount of traffic that exists there. And I will be prepared to be criticized by the people of my 

constituency for the suggestion that if money cannot be found, we cut down on any other projects in the 

south, and use the money in the north where road-fare is urgently needed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now have the article here. It is dated September 29, ‘Saskatoon Star-Phoenix’, page 14: 

“Big Mineral Potential Resources”: 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

62 

“A 300-square mile area in the vicinity of Deschambeault about midway between La Ronge and 

Deschambeault about midway between La Ronge and Flin Flon has a tremendous mineral potential”, 

Dr. A.H. Byers, Associate Professor of Geology at the University of Saskatchewan, said Friday. 

 

“Dr. Byers has been doing geophysical and geo-chemical exploratory work in this area for three years 

on behalf of the Department of Natural Resources. Tests indicate high copper, zinc, nickel and lead 

potential, Dr. Byers said. These were the minerals being mined about 50 miles to the east by the 

Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting Company in the Flin Flon area.” 

 

And I know that Dr. Byers is right, because I have been in that area and know the possibilities that are 

there. For those that understand something about mining, there is a fault that runs right through 

Deschambeault Lake past the settlement of Pelican right up to Reindeer Lake, probably about 100 miles 

or more; something very similar to what is found in Ontario, I think near Sudbury. 

 

There is one other matter I would like to suggest to the Government; they may not like it, but I think this 

is the proper place to say it. I suggest that, when we get these mining companies developed, and they are 

in production we should levy a tax on them. I will illustrate. In the area of Creighton we have a mining 

Company that took out of this province a net profit of $22 million or more last year. It is not going to 

hurt them if we put on a tax which can be used either for hospital services or for some other purposes, 

such as education in the province of Saskatchewan. Certainly we could use this money to build some of 

the roads that we so urgently need. I am going to tell you what they have. They have mine shafts; they 

have machinery there; they built a railway over a distance of 20 or more miles; they have their own 

highways, which they built at a cost of about $30,000 a mile or so to the mine. I suggest to the 

Government that if we tax the people in Buffalo Narrows, Lac la Ronge or in any small community in 

this province for the purposes of this province, then it is just as fair to tax the mining companies for the 

property they have outside of the settlements where the local authorities cannot tax them. 

 

I would suggest, also that some thought be given in this matter of taxation to see that the money goes 

into the treasury of the province such as taxes from a pulp mill. It could be possible that there might be 

an assessment on that pulp mill if and when it is built (and I think it is going to be pretty soon) and it 

could have an assessment of $20 million or more. The municipality in which I live has a total 

assessment of $1,300,000. If the municipality assessed this pulp mill, then the local people would be 

required to pay few taxes, if any, but I believe that that pulp mill should contribute through taxes to the 

treasury of this province, and I believe that every industry such as the industries outside of the city of 

Regina, where the city 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

63 

cannot tax them, should be taxed by this province, and the tax money should then be distributed to the 

province through equalization or some other way. 

 

I have much more that I could speak upon, Mr. Speaker. I have some interesting letters from people I 

would like to read. I don’t know whether I should, but I think I shall. I have to go back to what I said at 

the beginning – that a lot of our difficulties in government, whether it is provincial or the federal 

government, is because of bureaucracy, and no government is to blame for it. We have a treasury board 

in Ottawa that tells the Prime Minister and his Cabinet what the current fiscal policy should be – that’s 

the real government behind the scenes; and we have advisers in this Government. It has to be that way, 

but we have to be careful about bureaucracy, and I want to mention this, and I hope there are civil 

servants here to hear me. I know of cases where income inspectors go into communities and threaten 

people. This is not good public relations. I want to say this also, that when our staff, men who are paid 

good wages, administer affairs for the people of the north who haven’t had the opportunities of 

education, if they consider them and say they are riff-raff, then they are just as bad as the income tax 

inspectors, I have mentioned. 

 

I had to get this off my mind, Mr. Speaker, because it is generally know that both Dominion 

Government civil servants (just a few of them) and a few of our own civil servants, have taken that 

attitude of superiority. It is not good, and I hope if any hear what I have said, they will behave 

differently in the future. But on the whole I will say this about the civil servants. I have been associated 

with many of them; some of them do not think politically as I do, and probably vote for other political 

parties; but I am sure that probably 99.9 per cent are the finest kind of people you will find anywhere, 

interested in their work, trying to do a good job, and advising their superiors what they consider would 

be good for the people and the province of Saskatchewan, and for their loyalty. I think they should be 

commended. 

 

The one or two I have in mind who have strayed, just like our hon. friends opposite have strayed from 

the rest of the people of Saskatchewan, we will try to correct and we will forgive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have been trying to find a letter just to show you what I mean, because I am not happy 

when I get letters of this nature. I will not read it all; I hope the hon. members opposite won’t think that I 

have typed this out or anything. It is a very interesting letter, and is from a person who is not a white 

man, as some people refer to themselves. He comes from Indian stock, and I was interested in the kind 

of language he uses, and he says this – I’m not going to bring up what he says, I just want you to see the 

kind of language they can use, and the kind of education they have. They are just simple, ordinary 

people, and I would like the hon. member from Turtleford (Mr. Foley) to try to understand this one: 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Give it to the Minister of Health. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

64 

Mr. Berezowsky: —Here is what he says: 

 

“If the purely administrational forms of the executive arm of the Government can override any 

established judicial procedure, or any minions of that Anglo-Saxon enclave of maladministration 

which is particularly obnoxious to the Northern native, it is clearly not only maladministration, but 

oppression.” 

 

Now, that is how simply they write letters. With that, Mr. Speaker, I repeat that I am going to support 

the budget. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the hon. member would permit a question? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I was very interested and followed very closely your discussion of the mineral area of 

the north; how it should be developed. I was wondering if you were prepared to tell us how you would 

get the mines sunk in the north, and who you would ask to do that work? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I think that question is very easily answered. I know what you expect me to say, 

and I agree with you – private capital. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Private enterprise? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — No, private capital and public capital, and if you want me to go into a dissertation 

then I can tell you that, if the Dominion Government gave the same kind of deal to the Canadians that 

they give to the Americans, we would have much more capital invested in mines. Look at the income tax 

laws! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Private enterprise. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Look at the income tax regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Or your friends, private enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate Adjourned) 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

65 

CANADIAN WHEAT BOARD 

 

Moved by Mr. Dewhurst, seconded by Mr. Johnson, (Kerrobet-Kinderlsey): 

 

“That this Assembly, through the appropriate governmental channels, requests the Government of 

Canada to pass the necessary legislation to put the Canadian Wheat Board on a permanent basis.” 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): —Mr. Speaker, in rising to move this motion which appears on the 

Order Paper under my name, I do so with the feeling that if this principle which is enunciated in this 

resolution were to be carried out, it would give considerably greater security to the grain farmers of 

western Canada, and to the grain farmers of eastern Canada, too, for that matter, although the grain 

economy is not as vital to the eastern farmers of Canada as it is to be western farmers. You will notice 

on this motion that it is a concise, clear-cut motion; it cannot be construed as a double-barrelled motion, 

asking for two things in the same motion. While there are points I would like to have included pertaining 

to the Wheat Board, I deliberately, when framing this motion, stayed exactly to just the one point. 

 

For the benefit of members here, I would like just briefly to go over the history of the Canadian Wheat 

Board. I do not intend to take very long, Mr. Speaker, because I believe that pretty well all the members 

of this House are fairly well acquainted with the Wheat Board and its history. The first Wheat Board we 

had was back in 1917. It was then known as the Board of Grain Supervisors. That came into being on 

June 11, 1917, during the First World War. Wheat was a very vital commodity at that time for our allies 

overseas, and it was thought that, if the speculative system was going to be allowed to continue, wheat 

prices would rise so high that the grain would not be available for our allies; also certain individuals, or 

groups of individuals, were buying up options on the wheat at that time on the Winnipeg Grain 

Exchange. The Government of Canada of the day feared that there may become a corner on the wheat so 

they instituted the Board of Grain Supervisors. This was followed in 1919 by the Canadian Wheat 

Board, and then the Canadian Wheat Board was abolished in 1919 by the Canadian Wheat Board, and 

then the Canadian Wheat Board was abolished in 1919. Then the farmers of the west, realizing that the 

Wheat Board had been of great value to them in stabilizing the price of wheat, put on pressure after that 

time, asking that we have a Wheat board, some orderly feature of marketing. But the Government of the 

day refused to give them an orderly marketing system, so consequently the three prairie Wheat Pools 

were set up in the early ‘twenties. The Alberta Wheat Pool was set up in 1923; the Saskatchewan and 

Manitoba Wheat Pools were set up in 1924. This continued up until the end of the better part of the 

1920’s. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

66 

On the whole, by and large, the Wheat Pools did a very successful job. They did secure some stability 

for the grain growers of the west. But in 1929, when the crash came, the grain crash, along with 

everything else, went tumbling down. The Wheat Pools (as we all remember) at that time had made 

initial payments on their wheat, but the prices came tumbling down so fast that the initial payment 

became greater than the final payment would be. Consequently, the Pools were in a serious situation. 

The Government of the day did not come to the assistance of the Pools, but they did come to the 

assistance of the banks. They guaranteed the banks that the money which the banks had loaned to the 

Pools would not be lost; they would make up the difference, if the Pools were unable to pay. 

 

The Wheat Pools have, since that time, repaid all the money which the banks were guaranteed by the 

Government on their behalf. In 1929, or just shortly after that time – I have all the exact dates here in 

front of me, Mr. Speaker; but approximately 1929 or 1930 there was considerable pressure on the 

Federal Government asking for assistance for the west. We all recall the famous ‘five-cent speech’ of 

Mackenzie King, when he said he would not give a five-cent piece to any Conservative Government. 

Mr. Speaker, that money wasn’t requested by the west to help the Conservative Government, it was 

requested to help the economy of western Canada; not just Saskatchewan alone, but the whole west. And 

we always want to keep in mind that when agriculture is depressed, especially in western Canada, so is 

the rest of our western economy. Far more was it true then than it is today, because industry by and 

large, in the four western provinces, has considerably increased to what it was 25 years or 30 years ago. 

 

Shortly after that famous ‘five-cent speech’, Mr. Mackenzie King and his colleagues were replaced at 

Ottawa by Mr. Bennett and his colleagues. The pressure was brought on Mr. Bennett to bring in a Wheat 

Board. He consistently refused to do so. It was not until just before his term of office expired that he did 

bring in legislation to set up a Canadian Wheat Board; in face of opposition from the Liberal party in the 

House of Commons at that time and Hansard (if anyone wants to take the time to check it) reports the 

debate that took place. The Liberals then were in the Opposition, and fought that Bill tooth and nail until 

some of the better features were deleted from it. Then the Canadian Wheat Board functioned on a 

voluntary basis. It functioned to the extent that, as long as the wheat on the open market did not drop 

below a given price, the Grain Exchange was free to take all the grain. If it fell below a certain price, 

then the Wheat Board would step in and buy the wheat out. So what it actually did do was to put a floor 

price on the wheat. 

 

Also back in those times after the Wheat Board was set up, during the 1939 session of Parliament the 

price was then set at 70 cents a bushel for No. 1 Northern at Fort William, Port Arthur, Vancouver. An 

amendment also limited the amount of wheat that they were to take delivery of from any one producer to 

the extent of 5,000 bushels. All they would guarantee was 70 cents a bushel for 5,000 bushels to any one 

producer. However, in 1940 there 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

67 

was another amendment to the Act, and the 5,000 bushels limitation on deliveries to the Board was 

removed. Provision was made for storage payments on farm-stored wheat at a rate not greater than that 

established at country elevators. So back in 1940, the Federal Government did agree at that time to pay 

storage on farm-stored grain under the Wheat Board, but it was not to be at a rate greater than that paid 

at country elevators. 

 

It is also very interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that some of the clauses which were passed in 1935 when 

the Wheat Board Act was before Parliament, were not proclaimed until March 27, 1942. It’s all right to 

say you have legislation on the Statute Books, but if it isn’t proclaimed it does not help; and some 

clauses which would have been beneficial to the west which were passed in 1935, lay on the Statute 

Books and were not proclaimed until March 27, 1942. It was not until about 1943 that the price of 

wheat, after four years of war, went up above 90 cents per bushel. 

 

The Wheat Board, throughout its history, has never been set up satisfactorily to the farmers in a number 

of respects. We have consistently in this House and one the hustings, along with our colleagues at 

Ottawa, fought to put the Wheat Board on a permanent basis, not a temporary basis. Just recently there 

was an amendment to the Wheat Board Act at Ottawa which extended the life of the Wheat Board for 

another five years. I, on behalf of the farmers whom I have the privilege to represent, believe that a 

Wheat Board should not be there just for a five-year period, and always be the subject of attack by the 

Winnipeg Grain Exchange, and the friends of the Winnipeg Grain Exchange. The Wheat Board should 

be put on a permanent basis. Steps should then be taken to give the Wheat Board the authority and 

power so that they can do the job for agriculture that should be done. 

 

We cannot blame the Wheat Board for the lack of things they should do, or for the conditions agriculture 

finds itself in now. The Wheat Board can only function within the powers that are allocated to them by 

the Federal Government. Some of my friends opposite are quite ready, at any time we suggest that 

different things should be done in order to give the Wheat Board more power, to say we’re attacking the 

Wheat Board, and we should be careful in attacking the Wheat Board because we may be destroying it. 

Mr. Speaker, there is not, and never has been, a member on this side of the House who has supported 

this Government, who has advocated either directly or indirectly, that the Wheat Board should be 

abolished or removed. We have consistently fought to protect the Wheat Board; we believe that 

additional powers should be given to the Wheat Board so that they can do a proper job. 

 

The present situation of the Wheat Board is that they know they are extended for another five-year term; 

but how can the Wheat Board and its officials start planning for a long-term agricultural policy, or for 

the marketing of wheat, when they don’t know whether they will be in existence in another five-years’ 

time? If the Government at Ottawa five years from now does not renew the Wheat Board Act, they 

would automatically go by the board. Consequently they cannot set up the long-range selling agencies 

which they should set up, nor can they set up the other technical staff which they should have in order to 

do a good job; so we believe they should be put on a permanent basis, whereby those things can be done. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

68 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think it is necessary for me to elaborate any more at this time on the Wheat Board. I 

think most members understand it; but these were a few points in the history of the Wheat Board that I 

thought I would like to bring before the members of the House for their consideration at this time. I take 

great pleasure in moving, seconded by Mr. Johnston, the above motion standing in my name. 

 

(The Motion was agreed to unanimously.) 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Brown: 

“That Bill No. 51 – An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Insurance Act — be now read the second 

time.” 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, after reviewing Bill No. 51, most of the terms and the 

changes seem to be more or less elementary at the present time. That being the case that there is not any 

great change in principle, or a great many changes in the Act, we are prepared to wait until Committee 

to make any suggestions that we might have in mind, or any questions with regard to the changes which 

the Minister is proposing in the Insurance Act. 

 

(The Motion for second reading was agreed to, and Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at next 

sitting.) 

f 

“Bill No. 59 — An Act to amend The Fuel Petroleum Products Act.” 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, the amendments pertaining to The Fuel 

Petroleum Products Act are not matters of vital importance, of any new principle. They are either for the 

purpose of clarification, or for changes necessary as the result of an agreement that we have made with 

the Government of Alberta. There will, of course, be a change which will be very vital which will be 

brought in by way of House amendment. During the Budget Debate I indicated that we would be 

increasing the tax by one cent. There is no provision, however, for that in this Bill at the present time; 

that will come in by way of a House amendment when the Bill is in Committee. I move that the Bill be 

now read the second time. 

 

(Motion for second reading agreed to, and Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at next sitting.) 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

69 

Bill No. 60 – An Act to amend The Education and Hospitalization Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — The amendments to The Education and Hospitalization 

Tax Act, may appear to be quite numerous (I believe there are eight sections), yet there is nothing very 

vital with the exception of the amendment to remove the tax from the purple fuel. I may say this is an 

Act which was introduced in the Legislature in 1937. Since that time, from 1937 to 1945, during the first 

eight years of its existence, there were no amendments which removed the tax. Since that time, however, 

I am afraid that we have pretty well chopped up the original intention of the Act and have lost 

tremendous amounts of revenue. My officials estimate that we have lost approximately 50 per cent of 

the revenue by virtue of the amendments that have been made from time to time since 1945. 

 

Stop and consider that at that time, the tax was placed upon all groceries. That has now been removed. 

The tax on meals has been removed; the tax on second-hand goods has been removed. I recall, for 

example, that a second-hand car could be sold as many as six or eight times with the tax having to be 

paid each time, until we took steps to remove it. The tax on school textbooks has been removed so that 

today there is no tax on them. The tax on drugs is something which has been of tremendous importance, 

particularly during recent years with the sharp increase in the price of drugs,, both for old types of drugs 

and new developments in that field. This has meant a great deal; and, of course, the removal of the tax 

on hearing aids has also been something which has been appreciated by our elderly people who have had 

to purchase this equipment. 

 

One could go on to discuss other exemptions – grasshopper bait, which was a very important item 

during the years when we had the great influx of grasshoppers. The amount of revenue which was lost to 

the province, and the amount which was saved by the farmers, was very substantial. The same is true of 

many of the machines from which it has been removed, and also fertilizer. Fertilizer has become a very 

important part of the expenditure in the production of a crop in this province, something that amounts to 

a very considerable amount each year. In fact, I believe that in the case of many farmers the annual 

savings, through having the tax removed from fertilizer, would be even greater than the tax which we 

are removing by the second reading of this Bill tonight. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the hon. Minister a question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I bought a lot of fertilizer way back in 1935, 1936 and 1940, and I never paid any 

Education Tax on it. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

70 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — You certainly did. If you didn’t just let me know the date in 1940 that you got it, 

and we will still be able to collect it from you. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Somebody else paid it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Certainly it was not on in 1935 or 1936, you’re quite right, because in those days 

there was no tax; but when the tax was put on n 1937 it was placed on fertilizer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — You didn’t buy any fertilizer, not since 1937. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I bought some in 1940 and 1943, and never paid tax on it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — May I just make a note of this. What were those dates again? Mr. Speaker, we 

removed this tax about 1949 or 1950, and I can assure my hon. friend that if he didn’t pay the tax, he has 

certainly, or should have, a guilty conscience; he is owing the Saskatchewan Treasury Department 

money. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — They’ve never asked for it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I need not say more. I know this move has been popular. I want 

to say that this is in line with the policy we enunciated in 1945 in our first Budget Address, when we 

said we were going to progressively remove this tax, and make it more equitable. I want to assure my 

hon. friends opposite that we have not needed them to advise us as to when we should remove these. As 

a matter of fact, the great majority of the articles which have been exempted from tax were exempted 

even before they realized they were there. In recent years  . .  

 

Mr. Loptson: — You didn’t do it though until just before an election. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — No, that’s another thing, Mr. Speaker. I hope the hon. friends will notice. We have 

been accused of raising taxes right after an election. Here is a tax that we have removed right after an 

election. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — But you put a new one on! 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Let’s get full marks for that, now; let’s never forget that. This tax has been removed 

a year after an election. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Tell them about the new ones you’ve put on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — I think this is further proof that this Government is never motivated by political 

greed. 

 

Mr. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Creating a precedent. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 



 

March 14, 1957 

 

 

71 

(Motion for Second Reading agreed to, and Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at next sitting). 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 10.00 o’clock p.m. without question put. 


