



















































Hansard: March 21, 1957


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

26th Day 

 

Thursday, March 21, 1957 

 

The House met at 2:20 o‘clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

SASKATCHEWAN AUTO INSURANCE SAFETY GUIDE 

 

Mrs. M. J. Batten (Humboldt):  Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I wish to draw to the 

attention of the House a publication in the Saskatchewan Auto Insurance and Safety Guide, which I 

think is an embarrassment and almost an insult, and certainly an injury, to the dignity of this Legislative 

Assembly. I refer particularly to Page 36 of this publication, which has today come to my attention, and 

which I think has been published for some few days. On this page, as reasons given for the revocation of 

licences, it states: 

 

―Refusal to submit to a chemical test if suspected of driving a motor vehicle while under the influence 

of intoxicating liquor.‖ 

 

I would draw to your attention, Mr. Speaker, that the Bill introducing this Legislation has not passed 

second reading let alone third reading, and it has not become the law of the land. I would ask your 

attention, sir, and the attention of this Assembly, to the fact that it is a basic lesson in civics, or social 

sciences, or call it what you will, today that the laws of the province are not made by a particular 

Minister or even by the entire Cabinet, but by this Legislative Assembly. Either the publication is 

misleading; and, I must say, deliberately so, because surely the people who publish and allow this to 

become public property must know the contents of the publication, or else the dignity or power of this 

House is being deliberately insulted. 

 

Hon. C. M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer):  Mr. Speaker, I agree with a great deal of what the hon. 

member says, and that was the reason I asked to have this Act proceeded with early in the Session; but 

because of certain objections, certain amendments are being prepared, and we have not been able to 

proceed with it. However, I think we have to make a choice whether or not we are going to have people 

throughout the province informed as to what the legislation is, and the things which may cause them to 

lose their licences. Every year we do this, and we have to make certain presumptions. You see, we had 

to get these printed away back in January in order to get 200,000 or 300,000 copies of this printed and in 

the hands of issuers of motor licences. We, for example, 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

2 

had to assume that we were going to change the licence year. That is another change which is required, 

too. And each year we have done that. 

 

I realize that it may be probably taking for granted that the Legislature is going to approve certain 

legislation. Nevertheless, it certainly is not intended as any slight on the members of this House who 

were well-informed well ahead of this being published, but rather simply because it is essential, in order 

that we can give to the people in connection with terms, and things of that sort, and they did not appear 

in this, then they could very well go before the courts of this province and say here is something that is 

officially put out by the Government, and there is no reference to it. 

 

So, in order that the people may have a greater knowledge of what the law is, we have had to take a 

chance on this legislation passing. 

 

CONGRATULATIONS ON 60th WEDDING ANNIVERSARY 

 

Premier Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I wish to ask the indulgence of the 

House for a moment. The member from Nipawin (Mr. Nicholson) tells me that a very important 

celebration is taking place in his constituency at the present moment. Mr. and Mrs. William Rupert, of 

Codette, are celebrating their 60th Wedding Anniversary, and their family, their friends and their 

neighbours are gathering to congratulate them and to extend to them best wishes on this happy occasion. 

 

As our population gets older, we are having more and more people celebrating their 50th and some even 

their 60th wedding anniversary, and this is an excellent opportunity for the Legislature to extend its 

congratulations, not only to this particular couple, but to all the pioneers of the province who came here 

in the early days, and underwent the hardships and vicissitudes of those years, and are now celebrating 

an important milestone of life. 

 

Mr. and Mrs. William Rupert came to Saskatchewan from Perth County, Ontario, as far back as 1910, 

and farmed at Guernsey, and in 1930 moved out to Codette, where they now live. I know that all the 

members will want to join with the member for Nipawin in extending to them our best wishes for this 

important occasion, and express the hope that they will have many years of health and happiness 

together in the future. 

 

Mr. L. N. Nicholson (Nipawin):  Mr. Speaker, I have had the pleasure of knowing the Rupert family 

for a good number of years, and they are the kind of people that are true-blue to the 



 

March 21,1957 

 

 

3 

pioneer of Saskatchewan. Very few people have the honour or privilege of living to enjoy their 60th 

wedding anniversary, so I would like at this time to join with the Premier, and all of the member of this 

Legislature, in wishing Mr. and Mrs. William Rupert of Codette, Saskatchewan, many more years of 

good health and happiness together. 

 

FEDERAL-PROVINCIAL AGRICULTURAL CONFERENCE 

 

Moved by Mrs. Brown (Bengough), seconded by Mr. Dewhurst: 

 

―That this Assembly 

 

1. reaffirms the position unanimously taken in the 1956 Session in support of the Government of 
Saskatchewan‘s request for a Federal-Provincial Agricultural Conference on Marketing and Farm 

Income, pursuant to which the 1956 Assembly appointed a Select Special Committee in order to 

obtain the views and opinions of members of the Legislature and farm and other interested 

organizations and persons, the Report of which Committee was made available to the Provincial 

Government to assist it in its representations before such Federal-Provincial Conference; and 

 

2. strongly recommends that, in view of the continued deterioration of the agricultural industry 
relative to other sectors of the national economy and particularly in respect to marketing of farm 

products and farm income, the Government of Saskatchewan continue to press upon the 

Government of Canada the necessity of convening a Federal-Provincial Agricultural Conference 

which would include representatives of farm organizations.‖ 

 

Mr. A. L. S. Brown (Bengough):  Mr. Speaker, the subject matter of the resolution which I am about 

to introduce into this Assembly is one that has received considerable discussion and debate in this House 

over a period of years. It has, in a general way, been discussed already in this session in a general 

debate; that is, on the Speech from the Throne, and in the Budget debate. But I make no apologies to this 

House for, at this time, introducing a specific resolution asking that some consideration be given to the 

future economic welfare of the agricultural industry. I feel that all of us in this House have a 

responsibility to that basic industry of agriculture in this province, and that we have a responsibility to 

those people whom we represent, to those people who elected us to this Assembly, to at all times place 

before the people of the province and before the people of Canada, our views and our opinions 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

4 

respecting that very vital industry, agriculture. 

 

I think it is particularly true that we who sit on this side of the House have a responsibility possibly 

greater than others in this House have in this respect. We went to the people in 1956 with a provincial 

program in which we committed ourselves to undertake action which we, as Provincial Government, 

should do; but in addition to that, I am not going to introduce at this time any partisan note into this 

debate. I think it should be said on the record that the commitment which we made on behalf of the 

agricultural industry, was a commitment which we said, if elected, we would undertake to fight for on 

behalf of that industry. In placing on the record of this House this commitment on behalf of that 

industry, I will refer to the card which my hon. friend from Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) referred to the 

other day, this little yellow card which we distributed in large numbers throughout the province during 

the election campaign, and which, as intimated in this House, we on this side of the House carry with us 

at all times to see that we are fulfilling those obligations. 

 

We committed ourselves at that particular time to fight on behalf of the agricultural industry for the 

following four or five basic programs: 

 

(a) establishment of parity price for farm products, bearing some relationship to farm costs; 
 

(b) provide cash advances on farm-stored grain paid through the Wheat Board as a permanent 
feature of an orderly marketing system; 

 

(c) to sell Canadian wheat and other farm surpluses by accepting partial payment in currency of 
other countries, as well as by barter and by lateral trade agreement; 

 

(d) to establish a national livestock marketing scheme, and set up a Board of Livestock 
Commissioners; 

 

(e) to begin immediately the construction of the South Saskatchewan Dam. 
 

Those are our commitments to and on behalf of the farmers of this province and of the economic welfare 

of the agriculture industry; so I have no apologies to make at this time in introducing a resolution of this 

nature. 

 

You will note, Mr. Speaker, that the resolution is divided into two parts. In the first part we are once 

again reaffirming the position which we took here in 1956; a position which we have taken in this 

Assembly on more than one occasion; a position which the Provincial 



 

March 21,1957 

 

 

5 

Government has taken over the years, that, if we are going to undertake to solve the chronic problems 

that face the agricultural industry in Saskatchewan and in western Canada, yes, indeed, in the whole 

Dominion of Canada, what is required is that those people who are in the responsible position of 

administering not only the production end of it, but the marketing end of our agricultural products, sit 

down around the conference table and try to work out a long-term policy for the welfare of agriculture, 

as an integral part of our whole Canadian economy. 

 

In the second part we are suggesting that, where the agricultural economy was, relative to the other parts 

of our national economy, in a position certainly not on parity with them, and in many respects, in a 

position where the farming industry was unable to provide economic and social necessities for the 

people engaged in that industry, and in a position where agriculture could well be forced into a virtual 

state of bankruptcy, the Government should continue to press for a Federal-Provincial Agricultural 

Conference. At the time that the Minister of Agriculture introduced the resolution one year ago into this 

House, asking that this Legislature set up such a Select Special Committee to study these agricultural 

problems, he placed on the record of the House at that time the position of agriculture relative to other 

parts of our economy. He placed on the record the precarious position that agriculture was in at that 

particular time. I do not intend to take the time of the House to review facts which he placed on the 

record at that time, but I do suggest that the situation has worsened since the time the Minister of 

Agriculture placed those facts upon the records of this House. The cost-price squeeze in itself has 

worsened since 1956; that the markets for our agricultural products has not only not improved, but in 

many respects have shrunken. 

 

I think it is sufficient for the House records at the moment to refer in brief and in part to the report which 

was submitted by that Special Select Committee to the last Legislature. This Committee verified the 

facts which the Minister of Agriculture placed on the records at that particular time. It indicated clearly, 

and beyond the shadow of a doubt, that farm cash and total income had declined substantially both in 

1954 and 1955; that farm costs had reached their post-war peak in 1952, and had levelled off the last few 

years at nearly twice the level of 1945-46. In other words, farm costs had in 1956 practically doubled 

since the level of 1954. Farm prices had declined relative to industrial wage scales. The farmer at that 

time (and I suggest it is even more emphasized today) was receiving a smaller portion of the consumer‘s 

dollar spent on food. That the situation has worsened since that time, you don‘t need to take my word for 

it; possibly the word of the Hon. Walter Harris, Federal Minister of Finance, might carry more weight 

than the words I might express. Speaking, as reported in ‗The Winnipeg Free Press‘ on March 15, 1957, 

he said in part: 

 

―Farm prices have not been commensurate with those of industry over the past four years.‖ 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

6 

We can go on with respect to decrying the portion of the national income that agriculture is receiving in 

respect to the national income of all of Canada. In 1953, the net income received by farm operators from 

farm products amounted to $1,657 million, or 8.63 per cent of the national income. In 1956, the farm net 

income had increased by some $2 million over the 1955 level, but even so, it was some $52 million less 

than the 1953 level, and in terms of total national income, amounted to only 6.8 per cent. In other words, 

the percentage of the national income that went to the agricultural industry has decreased by 

approximately 2 per cent in terms of national income, or decreased approximately 25 per cent in 

relationship to the share it was previously receiving. 

 

The cost-price squeeze, since 1955-56, has continued to worsen. Since 1951, the index of other farm 

products in Saskatchewan has fallen by some 22 per cent; while at the same time farm costs have risen 

by almost 8 per cent. As a result of the increased farm costs and the decline in farm price, the parity 

index in 1956, which expresses the relationship of farm prices to farm costs, is some 27 per cent below 

the level of 1951. 

 

I think I have given sufficient data to indicate that the expression we made that the situation today, so far 

as agriculture is concerned, is worse than it was even one year ago. What of the future? What are the 

prospects for the future? I think we must take into consideration to some degree, at least, the report 

which was submitted to the Government of Canada by the Royal commission on Canada‘s Economic 

Prospects; a commission better known as the Gordon Commission, which some time ago (I think it was 

the month of January) issued its preliminary report. In this preliminary report it bases its forecast on 

certain general assumptions. One assumption is that there shall be no global war; the second assumption 

is, that there shall be no major depression as we knew it in the 1930‘s; and the third, that there will be no 

general change in the economic picture and policy of Canada and of the Canadian Government. Based 

on those assumptions, it forecasts a continual worsening of the agricultural position relative to the other 

industries in Canada. It is true that the Gordon Commission concedes and admits that, over the last 10 

years, there has been an improvement in farm income, both in an absolute and relative manner; but this 

situation ceased some three or four years ago, and since that time it did not remain constant or level, but 

there has been a decline, generally speaking both absolute and relative. 

 

Looking into the future and forecasting the future position of agriculture, it suggests that this trend will 

continue to even a greater extent. It is true that, in this report, they do not deal generally speaking on a 

regional basis; but, taking the agricultural industry as a whole in the Dominion of Canada, it indicates 

that in 1955 agricultural production in Canada represent 12.8 per cent of the national income. They 

forecast that by 1980 it will have declined to the point where it is 5.7 per cent of the national income. 

They indicate that at the present time (in 1955-56) there 



 

March 21,1957 

 

 

7 

is 15.3 per cent of the labour force engaged in agriculture. They suggest that in 1980, there will be only 

7.6 per cent of the labour force engaged in agriculture. In other words, while they forecast that there will 

be continued decline of the labour force, percentage-wise, engaged in agriculture, the net return of those 

people engaged in agriculture will decline relative to the rest of Canada. They forecast that there will be 

an increase in the national production over the next 25 years, an increase in the national production over 

the next 25 years, an increase at the rate of anywhere from 2 ½ per cent to 3 ¼ per cent compound 

interest per annum. They are suggesting that agriculture will not share in that increased national 

production; and I suggest that, on the present basis that the industry is in and the forecasts of the future, 

based on some of the assumptions made in this Gordon Commission, it is all the more important that 

some concrete action be taken at this particular time to improve the economic position of that industry, 

and, to improve its economic position, particular attention must be paid to the question of marketing and 

of farm income. 

 

I suggest it is imperative that something be done at this particular time, because if the forecast and 

predictions of the Gordon Commission are fulfilled to any great extent, it will mean that in the future, 

agriculture will be less potent a force both in political and economic aspects, and when we reach the 

state where agriculture as a political force, and as an economic force, has lost ground, if we cannot get it 

now, then in the future we cannot expect to receive greater consideration than we are at the present time. 

 

So I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the time is indeed short, and we must press for some drastic changes in 

our agricultural policy in Canada, and with particular respect to the marketing of our agricultural 

products. I think that the report which was submitted to this Assembly one year ago does give the basis, 

and a good basis, upon which negotiations can be commenced with the Federal Government, and with 

the other provinces of Canada, in an endeavour to hammer out an agricultural policy which will be in the 

interests, not only of agriculture, but of the whole Canadian economy. I think it was Abraham Lincoln 

who said: ―A nation cannot live half free and half slave‖; and I suggest that a Canadian economy or any 

other economy, can be for the welfare of all, if you have got part of that economy prosperous and 

another part of it in a depressed condition. 

 

In undertaking to improve our marketing position in this province, to undertake to improve the welfare 

of agriculture, I think we must keep in mind at all times as well, the welfare of the national economy, 

not only in the west but throughout the Dominion of Canada, and, as I have suggested, I do feel that this 

report does give the basis for negotiation in that respect, not only for agriculture, but for the national 

income as well. 

 

We have always recognized that there are two problems continually facing agriculture. One, you might 

say, is an emergency problem 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

8 

to which in the past we have attempted to find temporary solutions and then on the other hand, there has 

always been the chronic problem facing agriculture arising from the fact it has not received its fair share 

of the national income over a long period of years. In this we do suggest that attention must be paid to 

those emergency problems which are facing agriculture at the present time, and that temporary solutions 

must be found for those emergency problems. We did suggest in this report that one of the temporary 

solutions to one of the emergency problems might be in the form of cash advances, which is a subject of 

debate in this House, and which I will not touch upon. Another temporary solution to an emergency 

problem (if we can construe it as such) might be the adopting of a two-point system in Canada, so that 

for at least a portion of the grain sold in Canada parity price might be received and as such, a part of that 

translated back into an increased farm income. 

 

A temporary solution to what might be an emergency situation is the payment of farm storage, and the 

assisting of farmers to store this wheat on his farm, not only for the welfare of the individual farmer, but 

that we might assure that the grain under storage will be property protected, and will at some future date 

be able to be translated into food for the hungry people of the world. But, realizing that temporary 

solutions are important, that a temporary improvement of the situation as far as agriculture is concerned, 

is essential, I do not think that we can forget or overlook the fact that we must now, and certainly within 

the very near future, undertake to lay down a long-term policy for agriculture. If we are allowed to drift, 

we will see a continuation of the same situation in respect to our marketing. We can refer to the fact that 

we have lost, with the exception of grain, practically the entire export market for our agricultural 

products, and the export picture for wheat is certainly not brightening in the last two or three months. As 

a matter of fact, it has been continually worse over the last few months. When there was some optimistic 

outlook five or six months ago as far as our export of wheat is concerned, that optimistic outlook has, 

indeed, declined to a very rapid degree in the last two or three months. 

 

While, from the period August 1 to December 1, 1956, Canadian exports of wheat and wheat flour 

exceeded by some $32 million the bushel-level of export in the preceding year, you will recall, Mr. 

Speaker, and the Assembly will recall, that the period of August 1 to December 30, 1955, was indeed a 

bad year as far as exports were concerned. I think the interesting point in respect to our exports of our 

wheat (the last agricultural product that we have any market for at all) is that in the January 1 to March 

15, 1957 period Canadian exports have been some 13 million bushels below the level of the previous 

crop year. So there is some indication that, along with the loss of our other agricultural markets, we are 

indeed beginning to lose the export markets for our wheat. 

 

As an illustration, the recently announced contract with Poland calls for delivery this year of less than 7 

million bushels of 



 

March 21,1957 

 

 

9 

wheat, or about half the amount exported in the 1956 crop year. In other words, we have in that one 

instance, lost half of a market which we had in the country of Poland, and I suggest that something 

drastic must be undertaken if we are to hold the limited markets that we have, and drastic action must be 

taken to expand our markets not only for wheat, but for our other agricultural products as well. 

 

Around this conference table I suggest that a formula must be worked out by which we can obtain an 

increased share of the world‘s markets for our agricultural products. Many ways have been suggested, 

and many ways are suggested in the report which was submitted to the Legislature one year ago. We did 

in that report suggest that the Federal Government might undertake to accept, for instance, currency of 

other countries in exchange for our agricultural products; that they might undertake to accept barter in 

exchange for our agricultural products. Those are two of the suggestions which have been made, and 

two of the needs and methods which have been used by other countries in expanding their trade, 

particularly in respect to agricultural products. We could refer to the United States, where by using these 

two mediums, largely and basically, and also by the extension of long-term credit, they have been able 

to place themselves in a position where they have taken over from Canada as the No. 1 exporter of 

wheat. As a matter of fact they have been so successful in that respect that they are today considering in 

the United States taking land out of their soil bank and putting it into wheat production in order to fulfil 

commitments they have made in respect to wheat. I suggest that what has been done in the United States 

in respect to retaining and expanding their export market for agricultural products could, to a degree, at 

least, be followed by the Government of Canada, and by these means expand our markets for 

agricultural products, and return to the farmer a cash income for his products which he produces. 

 

I think we must go further than that, however. If we do succeed in getting the markets for our 

agricultural products, we must see that the people engaged in agriculture do obtain a fair share of the 

national income, or in other words, that they receive a parity price for the product which they have to 

sell, a parity price which will bear some relationship to the cost of production, and as such will place 

people engaged in agriculture on a par with people engaged in other segments of our Canadian 

economy. 

 

I don‘t want to weary the House, but I think I should just take one or two moments to refer to what we 

suggest in our report should be the ultimate basis for an agricultural price support Act, because, I do 

think, Mr. Speaker, in this report, we set out certain principles and enunciated certain principles which 

are, generally speaking, true, and which I think should receive very serious consideration from people 

sitting around a conference table. We suggest in this report that the parity price and the policy of parity 

has become known throughout Canada and throughout the world. I think anywhere where agriculture is 

engaged in, there is a 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

10 

principle of equality, but in this report we suggest that the principle of equality should extend even 

beyond obtaining equality as between industries. We suggest that a means be worked out (and a means 

can be worked out) by which we can create quality between those people engaged in agricultural 

industry itself. In other words, Mr. Speaker, it is possible, we suggest, and it is desirable and it must be 

an objective not only as people engaged in agricultural industry but as good citizens, that we must devise 

a scheme of marketing and of returns to the agricultural producer, so that there will be equity between 

the industry, and equity within the industry itself. It is only by that means, I am convinced, that we can 

perpetuate the welfare of the industry; that we can perpetuate the position and that we will have within 

that industry people who are determined to have a maximum amount of production. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I bring this resolution to the Assembly in the hopes it will receive the 

unanimous support of all sides; that we will be able, through this medium, to show a united thought and 

a united desire that we have the best interests of the agricultural industry at heart, and that we are 

determined to leave no stone unturned to assure that those people whom we represent will, in our time, 

be in a position that they will be able to take their proper place in Canada, and that they will be able to 

play their proper part in providing and producing an increased amount of food, so that we as a Canadian 

nation may play our part in the world‘s economy, in providing food for those people who need the food. 

Through that medium the Canadian national will be making a greater contribution to feed that 

brotherhood of man throughout the world. 

 

I take great pleasure in moving, Mr. Speaker, seconded by Mr. Dewhurst, the motion which I read at the 

commencement of my remarks. 

 

Mr. F. A. Dewhurst (Wadena):  It gives me a great deal of pleasure to rise to second this motion, 

moved by the hon. member from Bengough. As I have stated before, agriculture is our basic industry in 

this province. It is essential, if we are going to have sound economy within our province, that we should 

have a sound agricultural economy. 

 

Realizing, a few years ago, that agriculture was not getting a square deal, or that something was wrong 

with agriculture, this Legislature agreed to the setting up of a Royal Commission to study the 

agricultural problems. The Royal Commission made a very exhaustive study of agricultural conditions 

in this province. Many things were brought to light by the investigation of the Royal Commission. On 

that Royal Commission, which was headed by Prof. Baker, were very capable men and women. I think a 

very thorough job was done. The Royal Commission pointed out that we had a lot of uneconomic-size 

farms in our province, and that in order to have economic-sized farms, some of these farms would 

naturally fall by the wayside; but I want to say that, unless something is done to stop the trend of 

increased costs for agriculture and decreased prices for agriculture, we could never attain such a thing as 

an economic unit, because what was an economic unit 



 

March 21,1957 

 

 

11 

ten years ago, five years ago because uneconomic; what was economic five years ago, today is 

uneconomic. So it is a vicious circle the farmers find themselves in. 

 

I have no doubt in my mind that a lot of quarter-section farmers, if they were given the proper long-term 

agricultural policy for Canada, could make a good living on a quarter-section farm, but they would not 

do it by raising cereal grains. But one-quarter section of land could produce a lot of hogs and other types 

of livestock, especially if the quarter-section farmer had access to community or co-operative pastures. I 

believe that, unless we do take steps to get a long-term agricultural policy for Canada, agriculture will 

continue, as the mover of this motion has pointed out, to find itself in a more depressed condition year 

by year. 

 

Last year, realizing that things were deteriorating even more so than when the Royal Commission started 

its investigation, this Legislature saw fit to set up a Special Select committee to invite some farm 

organizations, or other interested bodies, to bring up-to-date any recommendations on agriculture. It also 

asked the Federal Government to convene a Federal-Provincial Conference on agriculture, with farm 

organizations or other interested bodies having the right to have representation at such a conference. We 

are sorry to say, Mr. Speaker, that so far no conference has been called. 

 

We are continually being told by certain Federal authorities that if agriculture is going to survive, it must 

become more efficient.; Well, I want to say that agriculture today is more efficient than it ever was. 

They tell us that one of our troubles is that we have produced five normal crops in the space of three 

years, and that is why we have such a surplus of wheat. It may be true, Mr. Speaker, taking the long-

term average, that we have produced five crops in three years, but it is also true that we have had more 

than five-years‘ expenses in those same three years. 

 

I dread to think what would have happened to the farmers in this province if they had not had an over-

production. We have had crop failures losses through flood, flood damage, and have been unable to even 

seed them. At some of the shipping points in my own constituency, in 1954, there was no crop; in 1955, 

the acreage was greatly reduced and, last year, when the eight-bushel quota was going to be accepted, 

the Federal authorities saw fit to declare all delivery points open, provided that you didn‘t deliver more 

than your specified number of bushels. What happened, Mr. Speaker? I know that, at a number of my 

shipping points we had a considerable amount of space in the beginning of July, but when trucks started 

lining up at the elevator at five, six or seven o‘clock in the morning, from 60 to 70 miles away, bringing 

in their grain because their elevators were full, in no time they had the elevators in my area full and 

plugged up. Consequently, when the new crop came in, some of my farmers have had little chance of 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

12 

delivering grain for the past few years; when the new crop was harvested, we found there was no space 

to deliver that grain to. 

 

Shortly before I left home early in February, I discussed the grain delivery problem with some of my 

elevator men. They told me they only had a one-bushel quota at some points, and over half of that was 

still out; and yet they were not able to take any grain because the elevators were plugged. Now, what are 

these people gong to do, Mr. Speaker. They had no crop to speak of for a year, and when they do have a 

crop they can‘t deliver it because the elevators are plugged, due to the lack of foresight by those charged 

with the responsibility of marketing our Canadian grains. 

 

At the same time no provision is made for them to be able to get security for grain on their farm, as is 

done in the States, whereby they can get not only the full payment for their grain, but also are paid 

storage, can get money at low rates in order to enable them to build proper storage bins. I would like to 

spend some time discussing the necessity for cash advances, but I refrain from doing so, Mr. Speaker, 

because, as we are all aware, there is at the present time a resolution on the Order Paper dealing with 

that particular topic. So I believe I may be out of order if I dealt on that point. 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek):  You‘re out of order right now. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst:  Well, that‘s your opinion, but your opinion doesn‘t cut much ice with me. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  You‘re out of order yet. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst:  Mr. Speaker, a fellow was in here this morning, and he was saying that at his 

particular point (just a siding), they have not been able to deliver any wheat since last November. These 

are fierce conditions. In my own area we have a lot more snow that the average part of this province. 

Our side roads (or a good many of them) were blocked early in December. If elevator space was 

available at the elevator, and the farmers are trying to get in one or two loads of wheat, how costly does 

it become for them, Mr. Speaker, to have to open the road from their farm, back up into their fields, and 

then from the farm to get up to the main highway in order to deliver their wheat? The whole system 

certainly needs overhauling. 

 

A year ago this Special Select Committee brought in recommendations as to what should be done, and I 

would just like (without going into details of them) to list, a few of the headings of the 

recommendations. One of them, as I have mentioned, is ―cash advances.‖ Another one was for ―farm-

storage payments.‖ They suggested, after hearing evidence from a good many organizations and bodies, 

that what farm storage should be paid on that portion of the farmer‘s grain which was not able to be 

delivered under the specified amount of the quota. As an example, if the Wheat Board 



 

March 21,1957 

 

 

13 

had agreed to take an eight-bushel delivery quota throughout the year, and they were only able to take 

four, the farmers should get storage on the other four bushels. 

 

The Committee also agreed that at the end of each crop year, the Federal Government should assume 

responsibility for all storage of grain in a commercial position. At the present time the Federal 

Government has assumed storage charges over a given fixed amount; but the Committee found, last 

year, through the evidence submitted, that all grain in a marketable position should be assumed for the 

storage at the end of each crop year, by the Federal Government. 

 

Also the box-car situation which I have been referring to is just as serious now as it was then, and the 

Committee found that the box-cars were not being distributed properly to the farmers; and also another 

recommendation was that the farmers should have the right on his permit book, to designate the elevator 

of his choice to which he would like to deliver his grain, and box-cars be allocated accordingly. 

 

They said also there should be sales on concessional terms, meaning extended loans and credit, or sales 

against foreign currency, or barter deals. A few years ago, when we sold our grain abroad we were paid 

in American funds. Tthe American dollar was at a premium over ours. Therefore when the American 

funds were transferred into Canadian dollars we got the advantage of the rate of exchange; but today, 

Mr. Speaker, with the American dollar being almost 5 per cent below the Canadian dollar, our wheat is 

still paid for in American funds and, consequently, when we transfer it into Canadian funds we are 

getting less again. We get the exchange against us instead of in our favour. These things all add to the 

increased cost of production, which makes the farmer find himself in an awful position, because the 

currency is against him, the agricultural equipment has gone up, and a lot of our equipment comes in 

from outside of Canada, and the exchange rates are against us, so all these things work against the 

farmer. 

 

I could go on for a considerable time on this topic, but I think it will suffice to say that we, on this side 

of the House, are anxious that the Federal Government should convene a Dominion-Provincial 

conference on agriculture at the earliest possible date; at the same time inviting to that conference, all 

organized farm bodies or any other body which can contribute toward bringing down a policy for 

agriculture, which will help us stabilize our agricultural economy. 

 

When we stop to look at the statistics, and see that the net farm cash income from 1953 to 1955 had 

fallen by close to $280 million, you will realize the amount of purchasing power it has taken away from 

the hands of the agricultural people of Saskatchewan; and if agriculture doesn‘t have the money to be 

able to pay their obligations, to pay their merchants, to pay the small businessman, the implement 

dealers, the taxes, and so on, then all down the line everyone suffers. 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

14 

I cannot see why it would not be in the best interest of Canada, if no other policy could be found, to 

guarantee agriculture a parity price and subsidize it from the Federal treasury if necessary. The 

American Government has done that for the past twenty-odd years, and they have found, through 

subsidizing all their agricultural commodities over a period of twenty years, it only cost them on the 

average of one dollar per capita in the U.S.A. for twenty years. I realize that our population isn‘t as great 

as the American population, but at the same time, I also believe that it is not necessary to put off the 

subsidizing to too great an extent if we will adopt a proper, sane export policy, because, as I have 

mentioned on previous occasions, this last ten years we have allowed our internal economy to become 

greatly inflated. Then if we are going to try and sell our commodities to other nations, export them to 

other nations, and another nation has kept its economy more on a stable keel, we have no right to expect, 

because we have let our economy inflate till it costs us twice as much now, we shouldn‘t ask them twice 

as much for the commodity needed to pay our inflation. There should be an export-import board set up 

whereby goods would be traded for goods and brought back into this country, and any inflation should 

be taken care of by our own economy. 

 

I could give numerous examples. As an example, if ten years ago, one bushel of wheat was worth three 

pounds of tea, if we were trading wheat for tea to a tea-producing nation, then today one bushel of wheat 

ought still to be able to get three pounds of tea; and if in our own economy we have allowed the prices to 

become different to what they were ten years ago, then our export-import board could regulate the prices 

accordingly. I don‘t see any great difficulty in doing that, Mr. Speaker, because it‘s just a matter of 

keeping one part of your economy in balance with another part of the economy, and that is what we say 

when we ask for parity prices. We ask for parity because we do not believe that 20 per cent of Canada‘s 

population, directly engaged in agriculture, should get six or seven per cent of our national income. 

 

We hear sometimes that it is the excessive prices of labour which cause the farmer to have his 

difficulties. If that were true, Mr. Speaker, then the farmer would never have been better off at any time 

in his life than he should have been in the 1930‘s. In the 1930‘s labour received little or nothing for their 

work, but the farmer didn‘t find himself well off; he was hard up them. Labour today is getting a far 

better wage than they were in the ‗thirties‘, but when you consider the fact of agricultural commodities 

in relation to the cost of production, agriculture is back now where it was in the ‗thirties. We are at the 

stage today, where we are having an agricultural depression in the midst of an industrial boom. 

 

I take great pleasure in seconding this motion and calling on the Federal Government (the only 

government with the authority to do so) to call a Conference to see what can be done about this. We are 

not asking in this resolution that these different recommendations, we have made, definitely be adopted; 

but we are asking that they call a Conference to 



 

March 21,1957 

 

 

15 

to discuss these proposals and different recommendations, and see if we can‘t come up with some 

agricultural policy for Canada, whereby agriculture can attain its fair share of the national income. 

 

Mr. Fred Neibrandt (Yorkton):  Mr. Speaker, I beg leave of this Assembly to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

FEDERAL FINANCIAL AID FOR ROAD DEVELOPMENT 

 

Moved by Mr. Kramer (The Battlefords), seconded by Mr. Thorson (Souris-Estevan): 

 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Canada to proceed with a comprehensive program of 

financial aid to the provinces that would provide assistance for roads of national and international 

importance and development roads, and that such a program should be made available to any province 

immediately that province completes its portion of the Trans-Canada Highway.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, in introducing this motion on the Order Paper, I should like to give you the outline as it 

appears there before I launch into my talk on this particular subject. 

 

This resolution reads: ―That this Assembly urge the Government of Canada to proceed with a 

comprehensive program of financial aid to the provinces that would provide assistance for roads of 

national and international importance and development roads, and that such a program should be made 

available to any province immediately that program completes its portion of the Trans-Canada 

Highway.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, as most of you know, Saskatchewan is going to be the first province in Canada to complete 

its portion of the Trans-Canada Highway this year. The agreement that was drawn up with the Federal 

Government at the inception of this agreement, made provision that this program should be completed 

throughout Canada in 1956. Some provinces have lagged behind badly, and we feel, in introducing this 

motion, that provinces which have completed their portion should be in a position, while they have their 

construction men and their engineering staff built up to handle this type of work, to go ahead with other 

development if they so wish. 

 

Roads are important, Mr. Speaker. Roads to the nation are its lifelines along which wealth, civilization, 

culture, safety, hygiene are transmitted with certain economic and social benefits. Roads have an 

important economic advantage that leads to higher productivity and national income. They 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

16 

are considered today as the main pillar for the national economy of advanced nations. Roads transport 

agricultural and industrial products with speed and economy. They help develop scattered areas by 

reclaiming agricultural areas and developing mining areas. 

 

Good roads increase vehicle life, reduce maintenance costs, tire wear and fuel consumption. Speed is 

increased with good roads; hence quick transportation, and as human production is measured in man-

hours, so speed results in higher productivity. 

 

The existence of inter-provincial road networks and neighbouring provinces and states in the various 

areas would enhance tourist trade. Travellers would be willing to spend more time travelling throughout 

the provinces if they were assured of better roads and good transportation. 

 

To give some indication of the tremendous revolution in road traffic throughout recent years, I would 

like to cite the increase in motor vehicles following the close of World War II. Statistics show that it 

took from 1904 to 1928 for the first-millionth vehicle to be registered in Canada. It took from 1929 to 

1948, or 19 years, for the second-millionth vehicle to be using our streets and highways. The assembly-

line production of motor vehicles following World War II, however, was perfected to such an extent that 

the demand for these vehicles became so great that the third-millionth vehicle was registered in 1952. In 

other words, in these four years as many vehicles were manufactured and sold in Canada as in the 

previous 19 years, or in the 24 years before that. There is no doubt that the fourth million vehicle will 

already be in sight, if not already here. This proves that, almost overnight, Canada has become a nation 

on wheels, and it is important that we have all our Federal and Provincial participation in a road 

program. 

 

I would like to give a resume at this point of the road development and the history of Federal 

participation in Canada in the Canadian road picture. 

 

The passage of the Canada Highways Act in 1919, under which the Provinces of Canada were to receive 

$20 million towards highway construction from the Federal Government, was the first real impetus 

given to highway construction in Saskatchewan. Under the terms of the Act, the Federal Government 

contributed 40 per cent of the cost of an approved system of public highways. An amount of $1,806,255 

was made available to Saskatchewan under the terms of the Act. While the amount of the Federal 

assistance was comparatively small, it did have far-reaching effects. The provincial highway system, 

substantially as we know it today, was established. The highway engineering staff was developed on a 

much more adequate basis. Contract highway construction by public tender became extensive, and the 

highway construction standards were greatly improved. The Province accepted responsibility and 

assumed the maintenance of the provincial highway system. formerly all highway maintenance had been 

performed by the rural municipalities, assisted by a small maintenance grant to each municipality. Under 

the terms of the Canada Highways Act, 1919, which was amended in 1923 to give the Provinces another 

two years to complete their schedule of highway improvements, Saskatchewan at the end of the fiscal 

year of 1925-26, had completed 2,000.8 miles of highway, of which 48.7 were 



 

March 21,1957 

 

 

17 

gravelled. The total cost was $4,997,000, approximately, and sufficient to earn the full amount of 

Federal aid available, namely the aforementioned $1,806,255. 

 

Federal aid was also received by the province of Saskatchewan during the ‗30‘s, to the tune of 

$3,573,364. Federal aid to highway construction was discontinued in 1940, and was not resumed until 

the Trans-Canada Highway Act of 1949 was agreed to by the Province of Saskatchewan in 1950. 

Payments received by the Province since that history-making date are as follows: 1950-51, $392,169; 

1951-52, $905,000; 1952-53, $1,700,000; 1953-54, $2,00,000; 1954-55, $1,900,000; and in 1955-56, 

$1,700,000. This year, I believe, Mr. Speaker, there will be a sum of somewhere around $200,000 to 

finish up. 

 

It seems to me that there is a definite need for us to carry on such a program. I think everyone in this 

House agrees that there has been a terrific benefit derived from this Federal assistance, and I want to 

point out further, that we have very good reason to expect that the Federal Government should maintain 

a program such as was instituted in this Trans-Canada program, and that they should also enlarge upon 

it. 

 

Federal assistance to the Province of Saskatchewan in connection with road building has been confined 

to three periods, 1921-27, then under the Act of 1919, during the depression years of 1930-39, and then 

on to 1950-55 inclusive, Saskatchewan received approximately $8,800,000 from the Federal treasury 

towards the construction of roads under the Trans-Canada Highway agreement. This assistance has been 

sporadic; it has been very meagre in relation to assistance provided for other forms of transportation in 

Canada. The Federal treasury has invested hundreds of millions of dollars in wharves, docks, and canals, 

and we feel that highways are as much of a public enterprise as these projects in eastern Canada. 

 

I know that there may be some argument – there usually is from the other side of the House – that we are 

making a raid on the Federal treasury, and I don‘t blame the defenders of the faith across the floor too 

much. After all, they feel that that‘s their duty, and we expect that. But I would like to give you some 

statistics to show that these moneys we hear so much about that we receive from the Federal treasury, 

are moneys that we contribute to largely in the first place. I would like to point out too, Mr. Speaker, the 

sale of automobiles and trucks and the trucking business is also a very potent factor in our national 

economy. 

 

I would like to give you some figures here in the international and inter-provincial highway traffic. A 

check of the franchise of A-licensed vehicles in 1953 in Saskatchewan showed 2,300 miles of provincial 

highway in use for inter-provincial service. This represents over one-quarter of the total provincial 

highway mileage of 8,200 miles, which, incidentally, has been increased to 8,600 miles this year through 

additions to the highway system. 

 

Secondly, a count of out-of-province public service and commercial vehicles operating in Saskatchewan 

in 1953 showed over 1,200. No record 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

18 

is available of the number of Saskatchewan truckers operating beyond the provincial boundaries, but it 

might be assumed that it would be roughly the same number. 

 

Third, motor vehicle traffic crossing the Canadian-United States boundary in 1955 totalled 15.9 million 

vehicles. This figure includes foreign cars inward 8.73 million, and Canadian cars returning, 7.14 

million. Commercial vehicles moving inward, foreign, totalled 387,043; returning Canadian 541,594. 

 

Fourth, based on motor transport traffic statistics for the provinces of Ontario and British Columbia, 

estimates have been made of truck and bus traffic be vehicles engaged in inter-provincial and 

international traffic. Estimates are for the year ending June 30, 1956, for Canada as a whole: Trucks 

weight of goods carried, 10.3 million tons; total ton miles, 4,106 million ton miles; Buses – passengers 

carried, 28.2 million passengers. 

 

Now the revenue from motor vehicles, tires and tubes in 1955, Federal motor tax on vehicles in 1955, 

sales tax at ten per cent, total $91,671,300. Federal tax on tires and tubes, sales tax, approximately 

$8,000,000. Total mobiles, tires, tubes at wholesale level, and the ten per cent excise tax on automobiles 

at wholesale level. 

 

Now if any of the hon. members care to check on these figures, the sources are ―Facts and Figures on the 

Automobile Industry, 1956 Edition,‖ Page 26, House of Commons Debates, April 5, 1955, Page 2,739. 

 

To give you another bit of insight into the revenue that accrues from the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, I‘d like to put this on the record as well. 

 

Direct taxes accruing to the Federal Government in personal income tax was (and these are again in 

millions) $1,185 million; Saskatchewan‘s portion of that was $4 million. That was in 1955-56. 

Corporation income based on the Dominion-Provincial Tax Agreement — $1,028 million, and 

Saskatchewan‘s share of that was $8 million. Succession and other duties – Saskatchewan‘s portion of 

that was another one million. Total direct taxes amounted to $53 million. Indirect taxes – customs 

duties, Saskatchewan contributed to that $27 million; Excise duties and taxes, $66 million; other taxes, 

one million. The total indirect taxes was $94 million. The total contribution from Saskatchewan would 

amount of $224 million. Again, in 1956-57 the contribution would roughly run at $211 million. So let no 

one say, ladies and gentlemen, that, in making the request for Federal aid, Saskatchewan is making a 

raid on the Federal treasury. 

 

Now I would like to make a comparison with what is happening south of the international line. The 

Government of the United States has, since the turn of the century, contributed to the building and 

maintenance of interstate highways. This program has resulted in the beautiful, well-kept highway 



 

March 21,1957 

 

 

19 

system that Canadians envy so much when visiting the United States. Canadian Federal aid has only 

been extended to the main highways, but in United States not only been extended to the main highways, 

but to the most remote side roads and market roads. Up to fifty per cent of those have also been 

maintained by the Federal Government of the United States. Added now to the millions that have 

already been spent in assisting the States to prepare their road program, neighbouring States to the 

South, tremendous amounts of money. The immediate neighbouring States – I‘ll cite those: Montana 

will receive $13,526,000; South Dakota will receive $19,979,000; North Dakota will receive 

$10,237,000. These sums will be almost twice as much as Saskatchewan‘s entire highway budget. 

 

Ladies and gentlemen, Mr. Speaker, . . .  

 

Mr. Cameron:  Is that the sort of stuff you peddle! The ‗ladies and gentlemen‘. 

 

Mr. Kramer:  I am sorry, the hon. member for Humboldt (Mrs. Batten) is not in her seat. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, we realize that the hon. members opposite feel it is their duty to 

come to the defence of the Federal Government whether right or wrong, but it is my hope that they may 

rise above their narrow partisan policy and support the motion in this particular instance. 

 

I pointed out earlier, Mr. Speaker, the tremendous advantages that our neighbours to the South have had 

in their road-building program, because of the far-sighted initiative of that program. The leadership 

given there by the national government has been the life and the heartbeat of the entire-road-building 

program. It is probably one of the main reasons that the United States today, is one of the industrial 

giants in the family of nations. Their attitude towards their road system was indicated again recently, in 

the establishment of an additional system of what is termed (and I mentioned it earlier) highway system 

 . .  

 

Mr. Cameron:  Take it as read, Kramer. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Who wrote that speech for you? 

 

Mr. Kramer:  Here, Mr. Speaker, I would again like to refer to a condensation of the United States 

Department of Commerce plans to their super-highway system, and the reasons given to the American 

taxpayers for this gigantic Federal participation in that highway program. Allow me to point out once 

again, that the program outlined herein is a new departure over and above the tremendous Federal 

participation in American highways over the last 50-odd years. I would like to quote from a 

condensation, put out by the United States Department of Commerce. 

 

―The Federal Government, through the Bureau of Public Roads, United States Department of 

Commerce, United States, are engaged in the biggest peace- 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

20 

time public works program ever undertaken in world history; construction of the national system of 

Inter-State and defence highways, criss-crossing the nation with 41,000 miles of expressways. The 

Inter-State system will connect ninety per cent of all cities over 50,000 population. 

 

―Most of the routes will be four-lane divided highways, growing to six and eight lanes in the near-

metropolitan areas. Even where two-lane roads are built, in sparsely settled areas, provision will be 

made for expansion to a four-lane divided highway when traffic warrants it. 

 

―Access will be controlled throughout the entire system, with entry only at carefully selected 

locations. Traffic interchanges, overpasses and underpasses will eliminate all grade crossings, both 

highway and railway. It will be possible to drive Coast-to-Coast without encountering a traffic light 

or a stop sign. There will be no commercial facilities with direct entrance into the Inter-State route, 

but signs will alert the motorist when he approaches connecting roads, leading to gas stations, 

restaurants and motels. 

 

―The Inter-State system, although it constitutes only little more than one per cent of the nation‘s total 

road and street mileage, will carry 20 per cent of all traffic. Design and construction are being 

planned to provide roadways that will adequately handle the traffic volumes of 1975, when more 

than 90 million motor vehicles are anticipated, as compared with 65 million in 1956. 

 

―The need for such a system was first described by the Bureau of Public Roads in a report to 

Congress in 19239, and was further justified in subsequent studies. Acting on these 

recommendations, the Congress in 1944 directed the designation of a system so located as to connect 

by routes as direct as practicable, the principal metropolitan areas, cities and industrial centres; to 

serve the national defence, and to connect at suitable border points with routes of continental 

importance in the Dominion of Canada and the Republic of Mexico. 



 

March 21,1957 

 

 

21 

―The general locations of the routes comprising the system were selected after careful study by the 

State Highway Departments, and with the approval of the Bureau of Public Roads. Federal aid funds 

provided for the construction of the system, however, were meagre in proportion . . .‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! Does the hon. gentleman want to read much more of that report? 

 

Mr. Kramer:  Mr. Speaker, . . .  

 

Mr. McDonald:  He can‘t talk, so he has to read. 

 

Mr. Kramer:  . . . Mr. Speaker, I feel that I am drawing a comparison here, between what is being 

done. There is an example being set today. The needs that the United States envisages today are the 

needs that are going to be facing us here shortly, and the plans that they are placing before the Congress 

of the United States, condensed here, I feel are of interest to this House. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  We‘ve all read it. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  You have gone a very long way already. 

 

Mr. Kramer:  Pardon? 

 

Mr. Speaker:  You have gone a very long way already. 

 

Mr. Kramer:  I haven‘t a great deal further to go. It‘s a condensation, and reading half of it is 

 

Mr. Cameron:  Just table it. We can read. 

 

Mr. Kramer:  Can you? That‘s a surprise. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Kramer:  You would never think it. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! 

 

Mr. Kramer:  ―President Eisenhower, in a bold message in 1954, proposed a far-reaching program of 

highway improvement, including completion of the Inter-State system. 

 

―The Congress, by the Federal Highway Act of 1956, implemented a program by authorizing $24.8 

billion over a 13-year period for construction of the system. The Federal funds are to be matched at a 90 

per cent to ten per cent ratio, with the State funds at $2.6 billion. 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

22 

―Is it going to be worth it, is the question they raise. The answer is pretty obvious on today‘s 

congested highways, and they say ―(I‘m still quoting, Mr. Speaker), ―we have been paying dealing for 

our inadequate roads‖, (and the Americans think that their roads are inadequate), ―not just in frazzled 

nerves and personal inconvenience, and in time and gasoline wasted, but in the price of everything we 

buy and sell. 

 

―Studies of existing freeways show that their cost is balanced out by savings in vehicle operating 

expenses in less then ten-years‘ time. The safety factor alone, is sufficient reason for building the 

Inter-State highway system; for one of its benefits will be a saving of at least 4,000 lives a year. 

Accident rates on freeways are one-third of those on other roads with comparable traffic.‖ 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we too have an accident rate this is mounting year by year in Canada, and I feel that, 

while our death rate is not nearly so high as the United States, it is very important that we consider that 

too, in thinking of an all-out national highway program. 

 

―A wide range of economic benefits will result as by-products of the Inter-State system. There will be 

many more jobs in road building, and great increases in supporting industries, such as steel, aggregate, 

cement, bituminous materials, and construction equipment and machines. All of this, will have its 

effect in terms of payrolls and purchasing power. 

 

―Of even longer range in economic benefits will be the developments along Inter-State routes. 

Existing freeways will tell an inspiring story of economic growth, both industrial and residential. Since 

an essential feature of the system is the control of access, the factories and homes which will spring up 

will feed their traffic into the main system only at interchanges, without creating slowdowns, 

congestion or interference. About 70 per cent of the Inter-State system will be built entirely on new 

locations, thus creating countless opportunities for business.‖ 

 

Mr. Danielson:  That‘s two more pages. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  Do you have much left yet? 

 

Mr. Kramer:  So, Mr. Speaker, . . .  



 

March 21,1957 

 

 

23 

Mr. McCarthy:  Take it as read. 

 

Mr. Kramer:  ―The advantages the Inter-State system will have for long-range travel, trucks, buses 

and passenger cars are obvious. Vacation and business travel will take much less time, with great 

comfort and less strain. Deliveries will be faster. Truck operation will be more productive. The routes 

will be important parts of production, assembly and distribution lines of business and industry. But, the 

system will have vast advantages for the cities, too. These broad arteries will go into and through our 

large cities, helping to wipe out today‘s traffic jams, speeding commuters and shoppers from the 

suburbs. Bypasses will take through traffic around the large cities, separating it from traffic headed 

downtown. 

 

―The system routes will by-pass smaller cities and towns, providing access . . .‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! Order! I must ask the hon. gentlemen to stop reading. The House has been very 

patient, and has allowed him to read into the record of the House. 

 

Mr. Kramer:  Well, Mr. Speaker, there is very little more there. I think I have read enough from that 

to show . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker:  You said there was very little more before, and you have read a full page since. 

 

Mr. Kramer:  Mr. Speaker, I‘ll say this. We have been following the United States: I would say we 

have been about 25 years behind them at least. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  Oh go away. We‘re ahead of them. 

 

Mr. Kramer:  The problems that have faced them will certainly be facing us in the very near future. 

Mr. Speaker, I believe . . .  

 

Mr. Danielson:  ‗Sink of inequity!‘ 

 

Mr. Kramer:   . . . I believe that the time has come, and I was very glad to hear that there were at 

least some people opposite who were prepared to agree with us in references that have been made by 

them, both publicly and privately. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, there have been some encouraging statements 

from the Federal House. The Hon. Mr. Winters, speaking in this House not so long ago, gave an 

encouraging talk, I would say. He indicated that the B.N.A. Act could not possibly have foreseen the 

tremendous revolution that we have facing us today in our way of life, and I do hope that we are not 

going to bicker in this House. The Provinces to the east and west of us, have indicated that they are 

prepared to support an all-out drive for an inter- 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

24 

national system. It isn‘t only internationally, but in our northern development. A tremendous hinterland 

to the north of us, not only in this province, but in other provinces, is crying out for development roads. 

 

I feel, in moving this motion, Mr. Speaker, that, if we are going to accomplish something in the near 

future, if we are not going to lose the Trans-Canada that we already have, we should proceed with an all-

out plan. I am not suggesting what the formula is. The second Trans-Canada, yes, is very important. the 

second Trans-Canada, I hope will beat the No. 5 through the north. I suppose other folks would like to 

have it further north, and there are others who would prefer it further south. but in any case, regardless 

of where these routes are, I am not going to suggest what the sharing formula should be; I am not going 

to suggest how much the contribution should be, but I do think that it is time we stopped hiding behind 

and bickering about constitutional law, and got on with the job. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move the above motion, seconded by Mr. Thorson (Souris-Estevan). 

 

(The motion was agreed to, unanimously) 

 

Mr. Kim Thorson (Souris-Estevan):  Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak in support of the motion 

moved by my friend from The Battlefords. I do this because I know it is something of very much 

concern to the people in my constituency. We have always had road problems in the southeast part of 

the province. Recently these road problems have been very much accentuated by the development in the 

oil industry in that part of Saskatchewan. I have been with a number of delegations to meet the Minister 

of Highways concerning our problems. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  How did you make out? 

 

Mr. Thorson:  I have held a number of meetings in my own area with the people who are most 

concerned about the roads there, and on every occasion that I had meetings with these people, they 

indicated that they feel that the Province of Saskatchewan simply hasn‘t got the money to provide the 

kind of roads that we want in our modern society, with modern automobiles and trucks. That I suppose, 

is logically followed by their contention that there should be some assistance from the Federal 

Government in the matter so much of national importance as transportation, not only on airways and 

railways, but also on roads and highway. I don‘t suppose it is very surprising because the people in my 

constituency, which runs for 100 miles along the North Dakota-Saskatchewan border, are reminded 

every day of the benefits of Federal assistance in the field of transportation for highways and roads. 

 

Some of the arguments which my friend has just presented, have also been presented to me by my 

constituents, that after all transportation on highways and roads is a national problem, that inter-

provincial trade, 



 

March 21,1957 

 

 

25 

and national development is something that just isn‘t of local concern but of national concern. I would 

like to point out, too, that the Fathers of Confederation, when they were designing the British North 

America Act, could not possibly have envisaged the invention of the automobile and the terrific change 

it has made in the way people live and carry out their economic life. 

 

I would point out, too, that the principle of Federal assistance for matters of national concern, despite 

what the British North America Act says, has been followed by a good many Canadians over the past 

decades. Assistance for welfare services, family allowances, old-age pensions are received from the 

Federal Government, and none of us deny the value and the benefit of those kinds of programs. The 

same is true in the field of public health, and to a fairly limited extent in the field of education. 

 

That, combined with the example presented by our neighbour to the south of us, is enough to convince 

the people in my constituency, and, I am sure, to convince a number of people in all of Canada, that 

Federal aid for highways is very essential, and that a comprehensive national program of highway and 

road development is long overdue. I hope that the members of both sides of the House will support this 

motion . . .  

 

Mr. Cameron:  Sit down then. 

 

Mr. Thorson:   . . . because I know that the people in my constituency are going to wonder how the 

Liberal party voted on this particular resolution. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  Sit down so we can show you. 

 

Mr. Thorson:  They are going to wonder in light of the fact that within a very few weeks we shall be 

voting again, and registering our opinion about the conduct of national affairs in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to urge all members to support this resolution, not only for the benefit of 

Saskatchewan people, but I may even say even for the benefit of the Liberal party in Saskatchewan. 

 

The question being put, the motion was agreed to unanimously. 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

26 

INTEGRATION AND ADVANCEMENT OF INDIANS 

 

Moved by Mr. Berezowsky (Cumberland), seconded by Mr. Meakes (Touchwood): 

 

―That this Assembly commends the Government of Saskatchewan for the interest it has shown in the 

problems pertaining to our Indian population and urges that the Government take steps to: 

 

(a) negotiate with the Government of Canada with a view to implementing such programs as will lead 
to an effective integration and advancement of Indians; 

 

(b) prepare drafts of legislation tending to place the Indians on a basis of equality with citizens of this 
province; 

 

(c) consult with representatives of Indian Bands throughout the province on all matters having to do 
with the aforesaid.‖ 

 

Mr. W. J. Berezowsky (Cumberland):  Mr. Speaker, in rising to move this motion, I would like to 

say that I believe a solution to the problem of our native Indian people is one of the greatest urgency and 

importance to this country of Canada, as well as to the province of Saskatchewan. Certainly any action 

that may be taken to improve the lot and the opportunities of our native Indian population is urgent and 

very timely. 

 

This Government has indicated genuine interest, I submit, in our Indian and Metis people, and the 

members, I think, are quite aware of the various programs and projects that are in effect, in so far as the 

people who are under the jurisdiction of this Government are concerned, and I am sure we are making 

very good progress. However, we have not made progress in the field where native people living on 

reservations are concerned, because it is out of the jurisdiction of the Government of this province. 

 

I believe that the programs which this Government has initiated and carried on are showing results; as a 

matter of fact, very good results. By carrying on these programs we are progressing towards the 

integration of our province. By that I mean, sir, that in building a good province, a fine province, we 

must be able to integrate all sections and all communities, so that we have. This Government should be 

congratulated, also, for continuing to negotiate with the Federal authorities, asking them to implement 

such programs and projects as will land eventually to a solution of the indigenous native problem. 



 

March 21,1957 

 

 

27 

I know that this Government has pressed for immediate action (and other provincial governments have 

done the same) to establish some kind of social and basic justice. You may call it economic and social 

justice, if you like. Members know there has been no such justice since the days of the first white man 

such as Cartier, who landed in the east, or Prince Rupert and his group in the north. I would add also that 

this Government cannot solve the problems of these people, because they have been unfortunately 

treated as wards of the Federal Government. They have been so for 100 or more years. Neither can this 

Government correct the social and economic injustices which have been perpetrated by a benevolent, 

paternalistic dictatorship in Ottawa. but to the extent that the constitution of this country, the British 

North America Act, permits this Government to do something, to that extent. I submit this Government 

should legislate. There is an opportunity for the Government of the province of Saskatchewan as there is 

an opportunity for the governments of other provinces, to take action in establishing basic justice. 

 

Some of the hon. members will recall, sir, that last year, I brought in a resolution which was passed 

unanimously by this House, suggesting to the Government that they take a good look at the situation, yet 

there has been nothing in the Throne Speech debate, or in the other debates, indicating that anything has 

been done. However, my information from the Minister concerned is that considerable progress has been 

made. There probably should have been an announcement, as I would have desired to commend the 

Government. 

 

One of the reasons why I have brought in this resolution is because I feel that our failure with these 

people has left a stain on our Christian civilization. We have not treated these native people here in 

Canada with justice. We have stolen, expropriated, vast and valuable lands and resources. We have 

concepts in a Christian philosophy of human equality and equality of opportunity. Yet though we may 

be forgiven for some of the sins of theft, murder and rape of a great and proud American people, we 

cannot expect history to forgive us if, at this opportune time, we do not act. And I say this is an 

opportune time. 

 

In case some of the hon. members want an illustration of what I mean, then let me refer to a book by 

Paul Cain. He relates an incident just over a hundred years ago, in the area which is now called Toronto, 

where the local authorities, or the Federal authorities (or whoever it was) purchased 260,000 acres of 

land from the natives for 10 shillings. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  Terrible. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky:  The hon. member opposite sarcastically says it‘s terrible. Well, sir, I have some 

feelings which apparently he has not when he interrupts with ―Terrible‖. It was a disgrace to the people 

who were in that area to offer an ignorant and an honest people such a miserly consideration of probably 

a gallon of liquor with 10 shillings, stealing from them a quarter of a million acres of land which 

rightfully belonged to them. 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

28 

Mr. Cameron:  What year was that? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky:  I can give it to you, if you so desire. I have the book here, and when I am through I 

will hand it over to you. 

 

The province of Saskatchewan with its hundreds and thousands of acres of agricultural land was 

obtained in the same way. I am not indicting the people that came in here, the immigrants, or the 

Government, they probably had to do what they did do; but they gave certain assurances, and the people 

who allowed the land to be taken away from them, and their resources to be taken away from them, had 

faith in those treaties. They believed with all sincerity that when the treaties said their children would get 

all the opportunities of education, that they would get all the opportunities of education. They believed, I 

am sure, that when they signed those treaties they would be given security as long as the rivers flowed 

and the sun shone. I really think that they believed they would have such security. 

 

But, sir, are they getting it today? Are they getting the simplest kind of justice today? I submit to you, 

they are not. They have neither the security, nor have they the opportunities for education, and they have 

no basic justice. Is it security, when these same people today are being ejected from the reservations 

because of some historical fact of having been related to a white man? Is it security, sir, for them, when 

they are overcrowded and kept on these reservations? Is it security for them that they have not the 

opportunities of education that other people in this country have? Certainly the Government in charge 

will say, ―We provide education through arrangement with institutions.‖ They used to do it through the 

churches; they still do it. They may make arrangements with this Government to provide some of the 

education, fully satisfied when that child gets up to Grade 4, or 5, or possibly Grade 8, that is sufficient 

for the Aborigines. Is that what the natives understood when they signed the treaties, or did they expect 

to get similar opportunities for education as the rank and file of Canadian citizens have? Those are the 

questions that come to one‘s mind. 

 

In short, the natives of Canada were robbed of their land, brought to degradation, established in 

concentration camps which we call reserves, and thus losing all self-respect, pride, dignity and, in 

addition, as I pointed out, we have added insult to injury because we have not carried out the Regal 

contract under the treaties which were signed, and agreed to be carried out. 

 

I say this to this Assembly: There is one law for the white man and there is one law for the native? Yes, 

right in this province. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  Why don‘t you change it? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky:  I‘ll come to that; it‘s Federal law. 

 

Take a simple case of drunkenness, and I am going to submit 



 

March 21,1957 

 

 

29 

some facts to you today, sir, to show you that there are two laws. Experience shows that Indians, of 

course, do not behave any differently from a white man under the influence of liquor. In the same way 

as we are, they are brought into the courts, and of course if found guilty they are punished for the 

offence of either being drunk, or for the offence resulting from drinking. From a report, which I have 

here, submitted by a Mrs. Hesseltine, who was Superintendent of the Women‘s Jail in Prince Albert for 

the year 1953-54, I find that the total number of prisoners for that year were 164. I want the Assembly to 

note that 140 of these were of Indian origin, from various parts of the province. From the community of 

Kamsack alone, there were 34. It is to be noted from this report, that 85.8 per cent of the convictions of 

these Indians were for nothing more than drinking. It is to be noted also, that while many of the other 

offenders were committed for much more serious offences than drinking, nevertheless the average 

sentence for all these other persons was only 42.4 days commitment in jail, while for the simple offence 

of drinking the average was 58 days commitment in jail. 

 

To indicate how unfair the laws have been to the Indian people, who are being convicted under the 

Indian Act, may I point out some specific cases in this report, and I want them to go on record. Here are 

a few people from Kamsack; there were 11 convictions, 11 brought into court, 10 convictions, all 

Indian; seven of these convictions were under the Indian Act, for intoxication – one girl age 17; another 

was the mother of several small children who was sent to jail for three months, and fined $50, and in 

default to serve one further month in jail. Under a vagrancy section a girl, 16 years old, was fined $5 and 

costs, and in default one month in jail. Here is a youngster, just a young girl, she should be in school yet. 

For obstructing a peace-officer – and quite often people obstruct a peace-officer; they are not infallible, 

and certainly some officers don‘t act towards native people the same way as they do to their own kind; 

anyway she obstructed him – a girl 17 years of age, was sentenced to four months without the option of 

a fine. Here was another girl, trespassing, also 17 years of age, fined under the Indian Act $50 or one 

month. She had another charge the same day, and they gave her another month. 

 

Just to illustrate what happens. When I say there are two laws, one for our kind, and one for the other 

kind, though there is no difference between us, being all of us, people, you will find this. Here is a 

person by the name of Mary (I won‘t mention the last names) who is convicted, she is age 27, race – 

Red. (I don‘t know what kind of race that is, but anyway the report shows her as Red). She was 

convicted under section 94 of the Indian Act to three months in jail and a fine of $50, costs $3.50, and in 

case of default an additional month. 

 

On the other hand, here you have a case of a girl 18, . . .  

 

Mr. F. E. Foley (Turtleford):  Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. member a question? 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

30 

Mr. Berezowsky:  You will have all the opportunity you like, after I am through, if you so desire. 

 

Mr. Foley:  I just wanted to say, it might help to know the offence in these cases. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky:  Oh, the offence in this case was drunkenness. Most of these I said, or practically 

all of them, are for drinking, under the Liquor Act, or the Indian Act. 

 

Here is a case of being drunk, but being fined under the city Act; only a fine of $15 and costs of $4.75; 

there was no commitment to jail. 

 

What I am trying to get at is to try and point out that, where prosecutions are carried out under the Indian 

Act, the punishment in these cases is three months, two months in jail and $50 fines. On the other hand, 

other people for the same offence being prosecuted under our provincial, or municipal laws, get away 

with $5, $15, or seven days in jail, or something like that. I don‘t need to go into all these cases. They 

are available here, and I am sure that you can look at them, if you are interested to see what happens. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  Take them as read. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky:  You will find that right through. I will go ahead and read the case history of two 

persons, very briefly. Here is a woman by the name of Hilda, age 34, Treaty Indian. Back in August 7, 

1950, she was found intoxicated, fined under the Indian Act $25 and costs; January 23, 1951, wandering 

the streets, fined $50 and costs; February 18, 1952, intoxicated, 30 days in jail; March 4, 1952, 

intoxicated, and brought into court and fined under The City Act, $5 or seven days in jail; April 1, again 

she is found drunk, and fined by the City of Prince Albert, through the provisions of the by-law, $5 or 

seven days in jail. But then on June 21, 1952 she is found intoxicated, and she is brought into court 

under the Indian Act, and got 30 days in jail. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  They put her in for her own benefit. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky:  And so it goes on. 

 

Here is a Metis, who doesn‘t come under the Indian Act, and her name is Doris. she had 36 sentences 

imposed between July, 1937, and May, 1953, mostly for drinking. Nine convictions were for seven days 

only, two were for ten days only, most of them for intoxication, which were imposed between 1948 and 

1953, after this woman had already had a great many convictions against her. 

 

Now to me it would appear that the magistrate, who tried this 



 

March 21,1957 

 

 

31 

particular case, concluded that a nominal sentence for such an offence was sufficient. But when you get 

down to the cases at Kamsack, tried by the magistrate there, and all under the Indian Act, in practically 

every case for a similar offence, the penalty imposed was three months in jail and a $50 fine, or in 

default an additional month‘s sentence. 

 

I have brought up this information because here is something that this Government can do. I have 

concluded upon perusal of this Act, though I haven‘t studied it too deeply, that we can legislate, for it 

says in Section 95, referring to drinking in Section 24. It says: 

 

―No offence is committed against subparagraph 2, of paragraph ‗A‘ of Section 93, or paragraph ―A‘ of 

Section 94, if intoxicants are sold to Indians for consumption in a public place in accordance with the 

law of the province, where the sale takes place authorizing the sale of intoxicants for a person for 

consumption in a public place.‖ ―This Section shall not come into force in any province, until a 

proclamation bringing it into force in the province is issued by the Governor in Council, at the request 

of the Lieutenant-Governor in Council of the province.‖ 

 

As I understand, sir, this Government has not yet seen fit to issue such a proclamation. But I think that, 

upon the evidence (not all of it, but some of the evidence) I have submitted, every member of the 

Government should be satisfied that it is time that something should be done to correct this basic 

injustice of one law for the Indian, and another law for the White man. Of course, it may be argued there 

are restrictions in our Liquor Act for these Treaty Indians. This may be true, but, as I pointed out, in 

view of the fact that magistrates have no other recourse, but to correct these people off the Indian 

reserves who are charged under the Indian Act, so they must be so dealt with, where fines and the 

penalties are much heavier than they are under any city by-law, or under a provincial Act. 

 

When I brought in this resolution, this is what I was thinking of there are at least five things that we as a 

Provincial Government can do, or we as an Assembly can recommend to the Provincial Government to 

do. We cannot do those things that are out of our jurisdiction. There are certain things that the Dominion 

Government should do, and of course, it will be up to this Government to negotiate with them to see 

how this whole problem can be solved. But here is something that we can do, and I had hoped by this 

time this year, that we would have had legislation submitted to us – so far none has been forthcoming. I 

say these people, being people like you and me, sir, should have the right to vote. Just how it will be 

done is up to the experts in the business; but I say that is a basic right. They live here; they may not pay 

taxes, due to the treaties that they have; but 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

32 

basically in Canada, living in this country, even if they are on reservations, they, I think, have a basic 

right to vote. 

 

I submit, secondly, that they must have the same rights under the various laws, whether it is the Liquor 

Act or any other Act, that I have, otherwise there is no basic justice. 

 

Thirdly, I say that they must have the same benefits and opportunities for education. That is the least that 

we can do for these people if there is to be equality. 

 

Fourthly, I say that they must have the same benefits under our social welfare legislation. The 

Government s can worry about where the money is gong to come from; I am thinking of people. And I 

don‘t see why an Indian on a reservation should be treated any differently from a person, say in Regina, 

and I will add that I can‘t see why a Metis up in the Northern Administration District should be treated 

differently from a Metis down here. I could say something about that at another time, but presently I say 

that they must have the same benefits, if there is going to be basic justice and equality. 

 

Fifth, I say they must have the same benefits under any public health legislation. Those people have the 

same right to be healthy, physically and otherwise, as we have. Failing this there is no basic justice, sir! 

You may call it justice now, but it is not basic. 

 

It may be suggested, of course, that we should begin studying the whole situation. That of course is a 

farce. I am sure that the Governments of this country, and the Government of Canada, have studied the 

native problem over the last 100 years. I understand there have been Commissions, I understand there 

have been parliamentary committees, and I understand, too, that it takes an average of 19 years to 

implement the recommendations of any such Commission. I think it is Professor Lasco, who is now 

deceased, who made that statement. I am not happy about any commission, for by the time we get a 

Commission working, then making a report to Ottawa, by the time the Governments get together, I will 

be far away in the grave, and the problem will still not be solved. I have no love for Commissions; yet 

there have been Commissions; there have been investigations, even this Government has had 

anthropologists or sociologists out in the field. Governments know what the answers are. They know 

that there is only one answer, and that is to give these people the same basic freedom and equality that 

everybody else has, and let the problem resolve itself in due course of time. It will never resolve itself, 

sir, if we are to continue segregating a people on a reservation. 

 

I say that once legislation has been passed to the extent that we have the power to do in a province, that 

is the proper time to carry on future studies. Then will be the time that you can set up a Committee, or a 

commission (or whatever you want to call it), because you will have real 



 

March 21,1957 

 

 

33 

problems then. You see, by putting the laws on the Statute books does not mean that the native Indians 

off the reservations are going to flock and accept the benefits. As a matter of fact, they will tell you 

today, and you will read in various reports, that they are opposed to any kind of integration, or any kind 

of assimilation. They want to be left alone. Naturally, what else can you expect them to say? What else 

can you expect them to say, when they have been degraded, and kept down all these years? I believe that 

they would rather die; but the problem is not so simply solved. These people are not dying out, as 

probably many people would have wished. They are beginning to multiply. They are getting so 

populated on the various reservations that they are being pushed off such reservations. Therefore, though 

they may argue that they are not happy to our suggestions of integration, the fact is that that problem 

will have to be solved – not solved by us, they have to find their way. All that we can do, sir, is to open 

the doors, and say to them, ―Here is the province of Saskatchewan where all people have equal rights, 

and equal justice. If you want to benefit by those rights and by that justice, that is your privilege and 

right. If you do not, then we can‘t do anything about it.‖ So I repeat: There will be problems, and that is 

the time, I believe, when these Commissions or Committees can be of value. If there is resistance in a 

certain part of the province of Saskatchewan, a study can be made how to overcome that resistance. We 

must be true to these people. We must never again betray them, as we have done in the past. 

 

If we find that there is difficulty in a certain section of the province to establish an educational program, 

or any other program, these committees could investigate, could report to the respective Governments, 

and action could be taken. Those kinds of Committees I agree with; should set up, say, a Royal 

commission, or some other kind of Commission to start studying this whole question, because it has 

been studied so much that I think too much has been studied. 

 

Even if legislation is enacted (and I hope that legislation will be brought into this House by the time we 

meet next year), I am not too hopeful that the problem will be solved within, say, two or three years, or 

even a decade. It may take two or three generations. There is something else I think I should mention in 

this House, and it is that usually a native Indian, or a Metis, trying to be accepted into our civilization is 

not accepted. I mentioned on a different occasion that when one of us goes up into the north, or goes on 

a reservation where there is good hunting, why we are the best of friends, we sleep in the same tent, we 

go out in the same canoe, we slap each other‘s back, and tell each other what good huntsmen we are; but 

when the native comes into a city, or into a community, he is ostracized; there is no place for him, and it 

is going to take a little bit of time to solve these attitudes. When we hear that in the United States, for 

example, down in the south, they have segregation and things like that, we frown at what is happening 

there, but if we are honest with ourselves, one finds we are no different. We will do as the hon. member 

from Cannington 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

34 

(Mr. McCarthy) said a while ago. He ridiculed what I said. What I said was not funny. But these are the 

kind of people we are, not honest with ourselves. So it is going to take a little time, it is going to take a 

little bit of something we must learn. We have to give a little also. We have to accept those people into 

our professions, into industry, because your anthropologists and your sociologists will tell you that in 

dealing with children, the children of the native have just as much potential as your child or my child 

has; in many cases they are more adept. For example you take mechanics, manipulating with their 

hands, doing things. They are much more expert than any of the people of European stock. And there is 

a place for them; but they have to be accepted. There is a place for them, I say, because, when you go 

down to eastern Canada and eastern United States, you will find those people as builders. There they get 

into various crafts such as carpentry and you will find they do fine work; but they will never integrate, 

and we can‘t force them to integrate, and as I said they will never integrate if we continue to treat them 

as I know they are being treated presently. 

 

Let me indicate an experience that I have had – I won‘t say where, or what, but I know this because I 

have seen it happen. When there is a job to do, a job that one of these natives can do though he may be 

an expert carpenter, he can‘t get the job. He is not fit for it, he is just an Indian! He is just a half-breed! 

You can give him a pick or a shovel, or an axe. Now that is what I am referring to. Those things are 

happening all the time, and that is why I say our own attitudes have to change if we are going to build a 

good Saskatchewan, and achieve integration of these people into our society. 

 

I have said all these things because, as I have said before and anthropologists and the other people agree, 

these people are equal to us. They have a different culture, a different background, but given the same 

opportunities and building up the same desires, you will find that in every respect they will be equal to 

us. Though there may be resistance problems, social and economic problems which will face an 

administration, and ways, of course, will have to be found to overcome these problems. It may be 

necessary to do a little more in the field where we find the Metis and native population, in education. 

We have to bring to them opportunities for adult education, mechanical courses. We have to do much 

more than we are doing generally in other parts of the province. If I am right then it is not a big price. It 

is not a big price to save 18,000 people in Saskatchewan and 150,000 in Canada. 

 

There will be many problems, as there always has been with indigenous people anywhere. But I do say 

that, by taking the steps that are recommended in the resolution, possibly – I don‘t know, but possibly – 

it may be the beginning of the solution of this whole problem of our once proud native Canadians. 

 

I therefore move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by Mr. Meakes, the resolution standing in my name on the 

Order Paper. 



 

March 21,1957 

 

 

35 

Mr. Frank Meakes (Touchwood):  Mr. Speaker, in rising to second this Motion, there isn‘t a lot that 

I feel I should say. My good friend from Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) I think said most of the things 

that I wanted to say. There are just one or two things I want to mention. 

 

In my constituency we have three Indian reserves. I would like to say here and now, amongst those 

people the name of ‗Bill‘ Berezowsky is well known, loved and respected. The problem of improving 

the lot of these Indians and the Indian population, is a large one, and, I would say, with many 

complications. But I for one, believe that the longer it is put off the worse it is going to be. We must not 

forget, as members of this Legislature, that these people are the true natives of this country, the country 

that was taken away from them by the white people. 

 

I believe that segregation of the Indians, when it was brought in, was a mistake. I think the policies of 

New Zealand in regard to the integration of their native population, was a wise one. I think it has been 

proved out. Today in their Legislatures, they have representatives from the native people. All of the 

professions are partly filled with people from the native population. In this way these people are offering 

to develop and assist in the advancement of their country. I would like to say, as a person who has lived 

all my life near the Indians (and I have had considerable to do with them) that they are a race of people 

that have qualities which I like very much. I respect them. But I do think that the method of preparing 

these people to meet the challenge of society of today is antique, very antique. 

 

First of all, I want to emphasize that this is in no way criticism of the men and women who have 

dedicated their lives, in many cases, to the educating of these people. Rather, I would say, with these 

people, it is an impossibility, with the tools that they have, I do think in this regard that I must give 

credit for within the last year or two I have seen advancements on one of the Indian reserves in my 

constituency, and I would just like to mention them for a moment. 

 

Last fall we had a new school opened on the Gordons reserve – not an ordinary school; I would say it is 

more of a composite school, a school where certain trades and home economics and such like, will be 

taught. I think that that is a very important thing. Our reserves today, in many cases, are so over-

populated, that all they are today is a place to live on, rather than for the people to make a living on. 

With these vocational schools, we are training our young Indians, who are going to have to leave these 

reserves, to go back out into society; we are giving them training, and I do say there is a lot further to go 

yet. 

 

As regards this training, I think it is too early to say yet, in my case because they have just started, but I 

do feel that it is a very important factor. They are being trained, as the hon. member for Cumberland 

said, not to give them a Grade 8 education and turn them loose, but rather to give them an education, and 

see that they have the proper health and all 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

36 

the other services. It is going to be very important. 

 

We must not forget that for many years past the Indian has been robbed, cheated, taken advantage of by 

the white man. The Indian fundamentally is honest, and he is a true socialist. I would like to remind my 

friends across the way that within their tribes, they live co-operatively. Whatever they have, they share. 

Possibly some will say that that is a bad attitude. Yet I do know that if an Indian kills a beast, the whole 

reserve is fed, and I am sure that all my friends who know Indians will agree with me. If an Indian kills a 

beast or shoots a deer, everybody has meat. I can say that for three winters, I had an Indian and his wife 

live in my yard. I got along with them good, and I can also say that there are many, many people whom I 

would rather not have live in my yard than many of the Indians, including possibly some of the members 

in this House. The Indians are a fine bunch of people. 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  The feeling is quite mutual. 

 

Mr. Meakes:  My house was never locked. At times I had 400 and 500 pounds of meat in the meat-

house, and it was always there when I came back. I want to emphasize again that, fundamentally, the 

Indian is an honest man. He is driven to many of the things that the previous speaker mentioned, not 

because he is brought up that way, but because he was hungry, because he needed some of the things 

that he had to steal. 

 

I would just like to mention, that today there is much talk about freedom and democracy. I for one will 

never feel happy to think that I live in a country, a good country such as we have here in Canada, and 

that there are some people within this country who haven‘t got the same rights and the same freedoms as 

I have. I agree with the previous speaker, in that I think this Government is to be congratulated for what 

it has done. I agree with the previous speaker I think that one thing that we can do is give these people 

the right to vote. I agree with the previous speaker that the only way we are going to get to the basic 

problem is to give these people an opportunity, and start bringing them up to our level immediately. 

 

With these few words, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that this motion should pass unanimously. 

 

Hon. J. H. Sturdy (Minister without Portfolio):  Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 



 

March 21,1957 

 

 

37 

FEDERAL AID FOR EDUCATION 

 

The Assembly resumed, from Tuesday, March 19, 1957, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion 

of Mr. Thorson: 

 

―That, in the opinion of this Assembly, the Government of Canada should, without encroaching on the 

exclusive jurisdiction of the Provinces in the matter of administration and curricula, provide increased 

financial aid to the various Provinces of Canada for the expansion and equalization of educational 

opportunities in the primary, secondary and higher institutions of learning.‖ 

 

―That all the words after the word ―Assembly‖ be deleted, and the following substituted therefore: 

 

recognizing the serious difficulties encountered by school officials in meeting the ever increasing 

demand for additional classrooms and in retaining qualified teachers, coupled with an ever mounting 

tax burden on local ratepayers, recommend to the consideration of the Government the establishment 

of a Committee of educationists to examine reports and recommendations as a result of research work 

done by Canadian School Trustees Association under the direction of Dr. La Zerte, to study 

suggestions concerning a foundation program for education, and to work in co-operation with other 

provinces in an endeavour to establish in each province a program such as would be incorporated into 

a policy through which the Federal Government may make unconditional grants.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker:  when this debate adjourned, the other evening, I reserved ruling as to the acceptability 

of the amendment, moved by the hon. member for Qu‘Appelle-Wolseley. I now rule that amendment 

acceptable and in order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer):  There isn‘t anything that I wish to say on the amendment. 

 

Mr. F. E. Foley (Turtleford):  In rising to second this amendment, I would like to associate myself 

with Mr. McFarlane and other speakers in this Assembly, who have spoken on matters of education, 

during this Session. I am sure we are all aware of the problems that we face in education today. The 

solutions, in many cases, are not nearly as clear. 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

38 

I believe that one of the problems we have is the effort being made by our larger school units throughout 

the province to meet current expenditures to a certain extent, at least, from current revenues, and I 

believe that this has been successful or unsuccessful, depending upon the economic picture in various 

parts of the province. This has brought about problems of school construction, whereby certain areas 

find it easier to finance the construction of new schools than other areas. It has also made it possible, I 

believe, for various parts of the province to solve the teacher shortage, by enlarged conveyance routes. 

The fact remains, however, that the equalization grants as they are now paid have attempted, but I think, 

to a certain extent at least have been unsuccessful in trying to balance the load on the taxpayers 

throughout the province. 

 

I know that we all looked forward with a great deal of anticipation to the school grants this year, and 

hoped that probably they would do more than we should have expected them to do. The fact remains, 

that while a substantial increase was made in grants, I believe I am right in saying that many of our 

larger units today will not be able to meet current expenditures from current revenues. Until such time as 

some legislation is passed, or some action is taken, to bring that about, then we will continue to have 

educational debts in the province. 

 

This amendment is an attempt to look at this problem more carefully, possibly, than it has ever been 

scrutinized in the past in this province. We have reached a very important era in education. I have had 

the opportunity since coming down to chat with various officials of the Department of Education, and 

discuss the story of education over the past number of years, and I think that we have been fortunate in 

many respects, in spite of dry years, and varying crop production. I believe that the young people in this 

province have not had to look with envious eyes to any other part of Canada with respect to the actual 

educational program. I believe that our school graduates rank with any in western Canada, and that in 

spite of many difficulties, we have been very fortunate. 

 

I do feel, however, that a great deal more must be done now, possibly, than has been done in the past. 

We are in a more technical age, more demands are being made upon students by industries, by the 

professions. We are asking for students of higher academic standing and, as such, the matter of 

providing the best possible education facilities is certainly one of the uppermost problems today. 

 

Now I, and I am sure, other members, may have more to say on this important matter so, Mr. Speaker, I 

beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

((Debate adjourned) 



 

March 21,1957 

 

 

39 

 

CASH ADVANCES ON FARM-STORED GRAIN 

 

The Assembly resumed from Tuesday, March 19, 1957, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 

Mr. Thurston: 

 

―That this Assembly, through the appropriate government channels, reiterate its request to the 

Government of Canada to implement a policy of cash advances on farm-stored grain as a permanent 

feature of Wheat Board marketing." 

 

Mr. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg):  Mr. Speaker, I was under the impression that I would have to 

speak this evening, so I was still working on my address, but I think I have enough material here . . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Walker:  Well, give us what you‘ve got, even if it isn‘t prepared. 

 

Mr. Coderre:  Well, let us consider very, very seriously the motion that is before the House. I believe 

there are implications – and I say implications because I personally feel that, after making such intensive 

studies in the matter, by voting for such a motion would only put the Wheat Board in jeopardy. Now I 

will, within the next few minutes – and I am not going to take the amount of time that I had planned – 

tell you the reasons why. 

 

A few years ago I saw the situation where a few farmers were in bad financial straits, and the causes 

were varied. You will find that some of them were due to over-buying; others were due to (I still say 

again) of grain; and then possibly other causes would be the improper type of grain. I have a map here of 

the protein contents of wheat in the province of Saskatchewan. From it you will find that many areas 

have a high protein content and other areas have a low protein content, with the result that there was a 

lesser movement of grain in these lower protein content of wheat areas – if that is the way to put it; and 

you find, at these particular times, people may have been inclined to be a little short of money. 

 

After considering these conditions and realizing it, particularly in my area, because we have an area that 

has a low protein content of grain, I thought that something should be done about it. So I started looking 

into the matter and had various discussions with farmer friends of mine – and some of them were not 

friends, of course; but I found that some were in favour of cash advances and a lot of them were not. 

But, in my particular area I thought we were very, very much so. But to go on with that, Mr. Speaker, 

after looking into this question very thoroughly, as I have mentioned, I found that in past years local 

elevator agents used to give a little cash cheque to the farmer, with the anticipation of wheat movement, 

and I am sure that some of the old-timers here (if I may use that expression), who have done farming, 

have found themselves just before 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

40 

the threshing time – I am going back a few years; I can go back in ancient history like the Government 

has done, back to the ‗thirties and prior to that just before the threshing machine came on the farm – a 

little short of cash, and we used to go to the elevator agent and the agent, being a good sort of a fellow, 

would give us a little cash cheque and carry us on until we made delivery. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker:  Illegal, of course. 

 

Mr. Coderre:  I am quite aware that it was illegal, but I am very, very sure, Mr. Speaker, that many 

of our farmers here in this room have taken advantage of that situation. I say that was many years ago. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  Never heard of it. 

 

Mr. Coderre:  Well, they probably wouldn‘t admit it, but I do know that has happened. It doesn‘t 

matter, but I do know, Mr. Speaker, that situations like that have happened. On the strength of that, I 

was practically convinced that a form of cash advances to the farmer was possible. 

 

A few years ago, as probably many of you have heard over the radio and through the press, there was 

such a thing as the ‗Coderre Plan‘ on the question of cash advances. Now there is a rather peculiar story 

about that. I had been looking into this question considerably and I was convinced – mind you, I didn‘t 

foster it or anything else; but a publicity agent, a friend of mine, happened to come to see me tat that 

particular time and I expounded this theory of mine, just exactly what the situation was, and he said, 

―That is a pretty good idea; do you mind if I use that?‖ Well, as far as I was concerned I was sort of 

getting into the political picture and I thought maybe a little publicity – he was telling me maybe a little 

publicity – would be a good idea, so I told him to go ahead. So this publicity friend of mine got a few 

other chaps – I think there were three of them involved. They went out all over the country and were 

expounding this cash advance or what was known as this ‗Coderre Plan‘. Now I felt pretty proud of it, 

and they were using that name on the radio, and I figured it was a pretty good boost. Of course, sir, I 

didn‘t realize just exactly the complications that they were getting into. However, I took advantage of it. 

Anyhow these publicity friends went all over the southwest part of the country where there was a 

surplus of wheat, and they started with one radio broadcast and then a few press publications and they 

didn‘t seem to get a response; so then they started a series of meetings, I presume all over the southwest 

and probably north – I don‘t know where; but apparently they had a lot of meetings and they had little 

collections. They had tremendous crowds at those meetings – sometimes 10 or 15 people! I don‘t know, 

Mr. Speaker . . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  Almost everyone in the country. 

 

Mr. Coderre:  Anyhow that situation went on for a couple of months and there was a big hubbub. To 

this day, Mr. Speaker, I 



 

March 21,1957 

 

 

41 

sometimes wonder who sent that man to me, and whether it was this Government trying to arouse the 

public to this cash advance situation, or whether it was my good Tory friends in Ottawa who were trying 

to do something. But all I could see out of it at the moment, and even today, was that it was just a stunt 

trying to create dissension amongst the farmers of the province. 

 

I am going to show you, sir, where and how they did try to create this dissension, and I say, by trying to 

push out this cash advance and everything else. However, the program was on for a couple of months 

and it stopped; I don‘t know the reasons, but I presume they are quite obvious. Anyhow a couple of 

months later I got this letter from the guy who started that, and he said he was in bad shape financially; 

he was talking to the farmers and he got the bug – he himself was short of cash, and for some reason or 

other he tried to bill me with a bill of $4,000 or $5,000 for press publicity. Well I didn‘t know why I 

should be billed. I wasn‘t in the political picture and I didn‘t know; but he said, ―can you do something 

about it?‖ Well, I went to see a few of my farmer friends around home who were particularly interested 

in this shortage of cash, and I asked them about it. I just couldn‘t get anywhere. So a couple of weeks 

later I got another letter from him and if I may, Mr. Speaker, at this point – I haven‘t got the letter with 

me but I remember this question of quoting coming up the other day reminded me of it – and I have a 

pretty good idea of exactly what it is; and I understand there are certain regulations that I cannot quote 

something unless I take full responsibility for the quotation. Well I do take full responsibility for this 

quotation: 

 

―I have spent a lot of time on this question . . . ‖ 

 

and he goes on and tells me about this cash advance: 

 

―I have spent a lot of time on this question for the farmers, but the response generally is not good. The 

farmers do not appear to have any problems in that respect. I can see that they are very well satisfied.‖ 

 

Well this gentleman, Mr. Speaker, had been all over a good part of the province where there was 

supposed to be a surplus. He had been trying to rouse the farm population to that extent as this 

Government is trying to do that today; and he had no response. But I believe that he was . . .  

 

Mr. J. Gibson (Morse):  Would the hon. member permit a question? 

 

Mr. Coderre:  After I am finished speaking, I think you may on that subject, because I think I am 

quite conversant with it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  He‘ll be out of order then. 

 

Mr. Coderre:  I believe that he was speaking from a more general picture 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

42 

than I had. I mean he had been all over the province; he had seen the picture on this cash advance 

question. But, personally, I wasn‘t satisfied, Mr. Speaker. I still figured that something should be done. I 

felt that I should dig into this subject a little more, so I wrote to many of my friends – and I have some 

friends, even though the boys across the room may not be friends of mine. I wrote to Fort William. I 

wrote to Sudbury, Windsor, Ottawa, St. John, N.B., Prince Edward Island . . .   

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough):  What about Quebec? 

 

Mr. Coderre: Well, I‘ll leave the province of Quebec out for the time being; probably being of 

French extraction, we‘ll just leave that out for the time being. But anyhow I was explaining to them the 

situation of the wheat and I wanted to get their views as well. Now before I go on with that, I would like 

to bring a little point to mind. The duty of M.P.s or M.L.A.s, it doesn‘t matter where they are, is to try as 

best as possible to satisfy the electorate. Now whether you are from the east or from the west or from the 

middle, it doesn‘t matter; we have to go ahead and do the best we can for that matter. So I just thought I 

would bring that to mind for the moment. Anyhow, I received letters from these friends of mine and, 

incidentally, one of them was an M.P.; and another thing that I would like to bring to mind, Mr. Speaker, 

is that some of these friends of mine were violent opponents of the same political belief that I have; but 

still I got their point of view in this matter. They all explained to me, in their own words, that the Wheat 

Board was an institution that was put there for the convenience of the western farmers, and only at the 

wish of the people of Canada. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have the opinions of these few people gathered from here and there across the 

country. They have expressed – let‘s call it the Gallup Poll, if you wish; but these few people have 

expressed their opinion in so far as the Wheat Board is concerned. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  Call it the ‗Coderre Poll‘. 

 

Mr. Coderre:  Now many of them went on to say that many of the CCF Government in 

Saskatchewan, their CCF M.P.s at Ottawa, had been crying and hollering and mentioning that the farmer 

this and the farmer that and all that sort of stuff, crying and beefing, indicating, or giving them the 

impression, that we are dissatisfied with the Wheat Board. Maybe some of the members of Parliament at 

Ottawa don‘t think so, but it is giving this impression to the electorate, to the people of eastern Canada. 

If we believe in democracy we believe that a majority rules and that many people in the parts of Canada 

where they are not dealing with wheat feel that if we are seeking, for some reason or other, to give the 

impression to the electorate that we are not satisfied with the Wheat Board, several of them went so far 

as to mention that, saying, ―if you are not satisfied we will take great pleasure in mentioning to our 

representatives in the House that we can do away with the Wheat Board.‖ And this has been the 

impression of the electorate where there is no wheat-growing. They are concerned with that; and that is 

the impression they are getting. They are of 



 

March 21,1957 

 

 

43 

the impression that we are not satisfied about the way the wheat is handled, Mr. Speaker, and for that 

reason I say personally, I believe that the Wheat Board is a great institution, one that assists all the 

farmers and business people of this province, and also all the people of Canada. I made it very, very 

clear on that matter and I, personally, Mr. Speaker, will do everything I can not to put the Wheat Board 

in jeopardy. I was going to quote a few pages from the Wheat Board Report here, but I see that time is 

flying, Mr. Speaker . . .  

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough):  Oh, there‘s lots of time. 

 

Mr. Coderre:  But, the other day, the key point of that that hurt me was when the hon. Minister of 

Agriculture (Hon. Mr. Nollet) of this province got up and said, ―You know, in the States they have a 

cash advance on farm-stored grain.‖ Well, Mr. Speaker, I am not denying that. I know they have. I am 

not going to deal with what they have, or their troubles over there, in the U.S.A., but the hon. Minister 

goes on to suggest that we should adopt a plan similar to that in the States. There is one thing the hon. 

Minister seems to have forgotten – or I don‘t know what he was trying to imply. In the States they have 

a cash advance, but they have not a Wheat Board; so, therefore, they can go into all sorts of plans 

without putting a wonderful institution like the Wheat Board in jeopardy. The hon. Minister seems to be 

more concerned with trying to gain political capital than with trying to firmly assure himself and the 

people of Saskatchewan that the Wheat Board is a great and wonderful institution and is doing a 

wonderful job under the most adverse international wheat policies of the other countries. They are doing 

a wonderful job, and I could go on quoting from the Canadian Wheat Board report, Mr. Speaker, to 

prove that. 

 

No double many of my friends on this side of the House and on the other side would probably like to 

have cash advances. Unfortunately, my good friend here from Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) is not here, but he 

and his associates have between 40,000 and 50,000 bushels of oats. Well I am sure that the hon. 

gentleman would like to have a cash advance on that. And then we have the hon. member from Wilkie 

(Mr. Horsman); he has tremendous piles of wheat, and I am sure he wouldn‘t mind having that cash 

advance. But at whose expense, Mr. Speaker? At the expense of the small farmer who has not got any 

wheat. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker:  Oh, come now. 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough):  You don‘t believe that. 

 

Mr. Coderre:  There is no denying, Mr. Speaker, that across this province about 70 per cent of the 

farmers only produce 30 per cent of the grain. These are not my figures. These are figures that have been 

picked up from the Bureau of Statistics or anywhere you wish, and you can find that. That 70 per cent 

may have 1,000 or 2,000 bushels of wheat on hand, and I believe it has been recommended by your 

universities 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

44 

or your planning experts that a farmer should have a year‘s wheat ahead on his farm, so I don‘t believe 

that the question of farm surplus is a big problem there. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to go on speaking at any greater length on this. We have a choice to 

make here today, and I am sure that, if we go ahead with these cash advances, I would like to ask every 

member here, Mr. Speaker, to be sure that we are doing the right thing when we support a motion like 

that. We have a choice to make; let‘s call it a choice between two evils or two goods – it doesn‘t matter 

– we must choose one; but if we choose the wrong one we could put both in jeopardy. 

 

I personally find, Mr. Speaker, that it is not wise to support a motion like that, and I hope that I have 

made clear what my reasons are . . .  

 

Mr. Kramer (The Battlefords):  Clear as mud! 

 

Mr. Coderre:   . . . because if we try to establish a cash advance through the Wheat Board, I am sure 

that many of the people of Canada who are not directly connected with the agricultural section of 

Canada would not tolerate that; and, as I have previously stated, the Wheat Board is there at their 

pleasure. 

 

And another thing, Mr. Speaker, I do not believe that the Wheat Board‘s advisory council has 

recommended that yet. For the reasons I have given, Mr. Speaker, I cannot possibly support that motion. 

 

Mr. Gibson (Morse):  Would you answer a question? 

 

Mr. Coderre:  I‘m no expert, but I‘ll try. 

 

Mr. Gibson:  Well, you were quoting a letter from memory. Will you mind telling us who wrote that 

letter that you were quoting from memory? 

 

Mr. Coderre:  I said several letters. 

 

Mr. Gibson:  But you were only quoting from one. 

 

Mr. Coderre:  I had written several of those letters. It‘s a man by the name of Borgaard – I think that 

is who it was. 

 

Mr. Gibson:  It wasn‘t Father Branch? 

 

Mr. Coderre:  No. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  Disappointed, aren‘t you? 

 

The motion was agreed to, on recorded division, by 37 votes against 11. 



 

March 21,1957 

 

 

45 

SECOND READING 

 

The Assembly resumed from Tuesday, March 5, 1957, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 

the Hon. Mr. Walker: 

 

―That Bill No. 45 – An Act respecting Conditional Sales of Goods – be now read the second time.‖ 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker (Attorney General):  Mr. Speaker, I intend to exercise my right to close the 

debate, and if I have your permission I will do so now. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  It is my duty to inform the members that the Hon. Mr. Walker is about to close the 

debate and anyone who wishes to speak must do so now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker:  Mr. Speaker, there were two or three matters raised in the debate which I think 

perhaps I should clear up. In the first place, I would like to remind the House that this Bill went through 

three public drafts, the first of which was submitted to Benchers, some 18 practising lawyers, senior 

members of the profession; the second again was submitted to them, and also to the Motor Dealers‘ 

Association, the Implement Dealers‘ Association, and the final draft has been sent out to all the 

barristers in Saskatchewan, some three weeks ago. They were invited to submit suggestions for changes 

and improvements, and I think I can say without fear of contradiction that there never has been a Bill 

that owes so much to so many as this one. This Bill has had very extensive discussion and consideration 

by the people who use it most, the legal practitioners, the mortgage companies, the finance companies, 

the implement dealers, motor dealers and so on. 

 

There are one or two things which I should say in reply to statements which were made in this debate so 

far. First of all, I am pleased to know that there is unanimous endorsation of the principle of central 

registration. That has been the experience that we have had in circularizing the lawyers; there has been 

unanimous approval by them of the principle of central registration. There were a couple of questions – 

my notes are fairly meagre, I am not sure if I have them right. One question was, would it be possible to 

phone for a search. The answer is yes. It doesn‘t matter where you are in Saskatchewan you can phone 

the central registry office, you can have a search made, and you can have the answer on the same phone 

call as to whether or not there are any liens charged against that particular name that you search. 

 

It will also be possible to follow the usual procedure of going to the courthouse and getting a search 

made by the court officials. The practice among barristers, very largely now is that they don‘t always 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

46 

go to the courthouse to make a search; they simply phone the Registrar, have it charged to their account 

and get the information over the telephone. 

 

There is one feature of the Act which was raised and that is the question about dispensing with the name 

of the vendor and requiring registration, notwithstanding the fact that the vendor or manufacturer has his 

name endorsed or painted or engraved on the article. That section was taken directly from the uniform 

legislation. However, we felt there was need for some latitude there, and in circularizing the barristers 

we asked them to give us their views on it, and we finally got the opinion that registration should be 

dispensed with in those cases where the possession prepared for submission to the House in Committee, 

I can assure you now, which will provide that the manufacturer will not be required to register under a 

conditional sale every article which he passes on to his dealer. However, the fact that he does not 

register it will not prejudice the claim of any person who buys it from the dealer on the strength of the 

register. The only people who will take second place to this informal kind of registration (or reliance on 

engraving the name on the article) are the judgment creditors of the dealers, and the trustee and 

bankruptcy of the dealer. 

 

It was very strongly submitted to us that the dealer may take good on credit and his credit may not be 

first class. He may be sued, and these goods would then be taken by the trustee in bankruptcy or the 

execution creditors of the dealer, and the manufacturer would be deprived of his lien. Well, that lien will 

be preserved without the necessity of registration. This does not affect members of the general public 

who buy the article from the dealer in good faith for valuable consideration; it doesn‘t interfere with 

their good title. It only protects the manufacturer or the wholesaler against the trustee in bankruptcy or 

execution creditors of the dealer. That was a point which was made by the hon. member for Humboldt 

(Mrs. Batten). It was also submitted to us by the Dealers‘ Association and concurred in by most of the 

lawyers, and is being submitted by way of a House amendment. 

 

One of the members raised the question of registration of a lien against the land, and reference was made 

to the section which provides for the filing of a form in the Land Titles Office where the goods are not 

paid for; and the inference made by the member was that this resulted in a lien upon the land, and some 

question was raised as to whether this was just to the owner of the land. The suggestion was made that 

this filing of a notice in the Land Titles Office might prejudice the right of the owner of the land, 

particularly if the land was occupied by tenants. I would draw attention to Section 15 of the present 

Conditional Sales Act which says: ―where the goods have been affixed to realty they shall remain 

subject to the rights of the seller as fully as they were before being so affixed and shall not be realty so 

long as the claim of the seller against the goods remains unsatisfied, but the owner of the realty or any 

purchaser or mortgagee thereof shall have the right as against the seller or bailor or 



 

March 21,1957 

 

 

47 

against any other person claiming through or under him to retain the goods upon payment of the amount 

owing‖. This means that, as the Act now stands, the owner of the land cannot claim the goods that were 

affixed to the land by a tenant. The rights of the vendor of the goods are preserved, notwithstanding the 

fact that there is no notice to the owner of the land. 

 

This section does not change that principle. I think I should clear up the inference which was made, that 

this section provided that there was a lien or encumbrance on the land. This section does not provide that 

the vendor of the goods has a lien or mortgage or encumbrance on the land at all. It only provides that 

there shall be a notice endorsed on the title, giving notice to the owner, or any purchaser from the owner, 

that these chattels are the subject of a conditional sale. We must not forget that, under The Mechanics 

Lien Act, for example, if these goods are permanently fixed to the land, that Act does give the unpaid 

vendor a claim upon the land itself, and can require that the land be sold by the sheriff to satisfy that 

claim, even if the goods were affixed by a tenant thereof. This Bill does not go that far. It only provides 

for a notice to be registered on the title, without any other legal significance. It merely serves as a 

warning to any person who goes to the Land Titles Office and looks at the title, that there are some 

goods affixed to that land which are not yet paid for, and the owner of the land may, since he has notice 

of that unpaid vendor‘s claim, pay out the unpaid vendor, and acquire title to the goods, or he may 

require that the goods be removed from the land. And the only remedy which the unpaid vendor has is to 

remove the goods, unless the owner of the land chooses to pay for them. 

 

There is one other suggestion that was made, and that was about goods removed into Saskatchewan. As 

the Act presently stands, the vendor of goods from another province, who hasn‘t been fully paid, and 

who has a conditional sale registered in the courthouse of the proper Judicial District in that other 

province, may have his lien defeated by the purchaser simply taking the goods into another province and 

selling them to a bona fide purchaser for value. This is the law now. The only protection which a vendor, 

for example, in the province of Alberta has today, is that, within 20 days after the goods are removed 

into Saskatchewan, if he knows they were moved into Saskatchewan (and he must know that before he 

can take the benefit of this provision) he can register his claim in the proper Judicial District in this 

province. If he does it with 20 days, the effect of his lien goes right back to the date when the goods 

were moved into this province. This means that, today, if you buy a second-hand automobile that has 

been in this province less than 20 days, and the finance company in Alberta has a lien on that automobile 

and registers that lien in this province within the 20 days period, the purchaser of that automobile takes 

his interest subject to that lien. If the Alberta vendor fails to register his lien within 20 days, then, of 

course, his lien has no effect against the subsequent purchaser. 

 

We are proposing to change that section, in the first place, 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

48 

to extend the time to 20 days, and, in the second place, to give foreign, outside vendors the right to 

register under our Act, not just within 30 days after the removal of the goods into Saskatchewan, but any 

time after the agreement is made. This will mean that a vendor in another province can absolutely 

protect himself against the danger of his goods being moved into Saskatchewan and sold, by taking the 

precaution of registering his lien in this province as soon as it arises, and then it can‘t be defeated. By 

giving to the outside vendor that privilege, we think that we are giving him as much protection as we can 

give under this Act. 

 

It has been suggested by some that we ought to say that he has 30 days from the time when he has notice 

of the goods being moved into this province, and it might be fair to a vendor to give him 30 days from 

the time he has notice of the goods being removed; but I would point out that he may not have notice for 

six months or a year. He may have been completely careless, negligent, in getting notice. The purchaser 

may have neglected to make 12 months payments, and then bring the goods into Saskatchewan and sell 

them and get cash for them. The vendor may have neglected his own interests, and the result would be 

that, even though the goods may have been in Saskatchewan for a full 12 months and an innocent 

purchaser may have bought them sometime within that 12-month period, the Alberta vendor would be 

able to come in and defeat the interest of a bona fide purchaser. We think that, when it comes to a choice 

between protecting vendors from outside the province, and purchasers who reside in this province, our 

first obligation is to protect the innocent purchaser who may buy the goods in Saskatchewan. We feel 

too, that we are not being unfair to the unpaid vendor from Alberta or British Columbia, if we say to 

him, you could have protected your interest if you had chosen to register your documents at the time of 

the sale, in this province. 

 

Saskatchewan is the only province which will offer other vendors in other provinces this privilege. 

 

As long as we had in this province 21 registration districts, the only way we could have given that 

privilege to vendors outside was to have given them the privilege of registering in everyone of the 21 

Judicial Districts in Saskatchewan. By virtue of the fact that we will now have central registration, we 

are able to give them a privilege and a protection which would have been impossible without central 

registration. 

 

So we say that we have gone farther than any other province in protecting the rights of vendors who are 

unpaid, and at the same time we have not jeopardized the rights of the people of this province who may 

buy a second-hand article, not knowing that it is subject to a foreign lien. 

 

The suggestion was made that this Bill had not been submitted to the Law Society. I may say that there 

was no opportunity to submit it to the Law Society in annual convention, but it has been submitted to the 

Law Society as far as circumstances will permit. Their individual comments were 



 

March 21,1957 

 

 

49 

appraised and incorporated into the succeeding drafts, and then the final draft was submitted to every 

member of the Law Society of Saskatchewan, and out of their submissions we will have some eight 

House amendments. 

 

That may sound like a lot of House amendments, but I assure the House that what we have done in this 

particular case with this Bill, we have got all of the amendments which we would likely be making from 

year to year in the next five years. We have got them all now, I think, and they will be incorporated in 

the Act itself. 

 

I have confidence that this will be the best Conditional Sales Act in Canada. This Act incorporates 

features which aren‘t to be found in any other Act in Canada, and these special features that we have 

incorporated into this Act have met with the universal approval of the people who will use the Act. I am 

confident it will give the people of Saskatchewan better protection than they have ever had before under 

legislation of this kind. 

 

(Motion for second reading agreed to, and Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at next sitting) 

 

TIME PLEBISCITE 

 

The Assembly resumed from Monday, March 11, 1957, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 

the Hon. Mr. McIntosh: 

 

―That the detailed results of the Plebiscite on the Time Question held concurrently with the 1956 

Municipal Elections throughout Saskatchewan be referred to the Select Standing Committee on 

Municipal Law, with instructions that the said Committee shall have power to pursue its study of the 

question in such manner as it deems fit, and to report from time to time its observations thereon; 

 

and, further, that, for purposes of the said study, the Committee be augmented by the addition of the 

following members: Messrs. Walker, Kramer and Cameron.‖ 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition):  Mr. Speaker, since the Time Question has first 

been brought to the attention of the members of this House, I find that we have had a great deal of 

difficulty in keeping even the clocks around this Chamber running. 

 

As for the question of time in the whole of the province, 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

50 

it seems to me that we have spent a great deal of time. I think we have had three Committees set up now 

to discuss this problem, and to endeavour to come up with an answer to it. Then last summer we had the 

Plebiscite taken during the municipal elections, and at that time spent almost $27,000, and the people of 

the province apparently made their choice. Now it would appear that the Government is not prepared to 

act upon the advice that has been given to them by the electorate of this province, and I can see no 

reason for going back into Committee again. I doubt if you are going to come out of that committee with 

any concrete proposals, or any actions that this Government are prepared to take. 

 

Therefore, I am not prepared to support the motion asking to set up a Committee, as I can see little of 

value coming out of that committee. We could quite possibly be out of Session here with the next two or 

three weeks, and, after studying this question for three or four years, I doubt very much if the 

Government are prepared to take the necessary action to solve this question. Therefore, I am not going 

to waste the time of the Legislature in discussing it any further, Mr. Speaker, but I will not support the 

motion. 

 

The motion was then agreed to, on division. 

 

SECOND READING 

 

Bill No. 70 – An Act to amend the Co-operative Guarantee Act. 

 

Premier Douglas:  This, Mr. Speaker, is a Bill to amend The Co-operative Guarantee Act. As the 

hon. members know, under The Co-operative Guarantee Act we can place a Government guarantee up 

to a certain percentage behind loans which are made by The Co-operative Credit Society. This is 

particularly to help co-operative associations of various types, which borrow money from The Co-

operative Credit Society which in turn gets guarantees in varying amounts, most of which are up to 50 

per cent of the value of the loan. 

 

This amendment removes the limit on the percentage which can be guaranteed in respect of co-

operatives in the far north. We have been endeavouring for the last two or three years, and particularly in 

the past 12 months, in trying to interest the people of the far north in co-operatives. A Fishermen‘s Co-

operative, a Retail Co-operative, and various co-operatives of that type, which have been of interest to 

the people in the far northern part of the province have been established. 

 

We have had excellent co-operation from the Co-operative Credit Society, and from the other co-

operative groups, particularly the 



 

March 21,1957 

 

 

51 

Federated Co-operative, the co-operative wholesale. But when we asked them to go into the far north 

and to make the loans there, the board thought they were not in the same position as when they are 

making a loan to a co-operative in the south in an established community. When we ask them to go up 

and make loans to people who have had little or no experience in co-operatives, we try to keep some of 

our staff there to help them, such as at the Black Lake Co-operative, and the Fort Black Co-operative at 

Ile-a-La-Crosse. We have kept a man here for almost an entire year helping them to run the co-

operative, and we are now turning over the management to them. 

 

I think the hon. members will see that the chance of success of a co-operative under those circumstances 

is not as good as that of a co-operative in the southern part of the province. Yet we believe that if we are 

ever to help these people help themselves, the co-operative movement is probably the answer. We feel 

that in loans made to co-operatives of that nature, we ought to be able to guarantee a larger percentage 

than the 50 per cent. It may be necessary to guarantee 70 per cent, or 80 per cent; in some cases it might 

be necessary to guarantee 90 per cent or 100 per cent, in order to get a co-operative of that nature started 

among the native people of the far north. 

 

The details of the Bill I will be glad to discuss in Committee, but that is the general principle. I, 

therefore, move second reading. 

 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington):  I would just like to ask a question. Is this going to be confined to the 

far north, or, after it goes through, will it be applicable all over the province? 

 

Premier Douglas:  No, it will just be the far north. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  Was there a line drawn? 

 

Premier Douglas:  Yes, the Northern Administration Area. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  Oh, I see. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats):  On the amount that you hand out to co-operatives, are there any specific 

regulations to safeguard the loans? 

 

Premier Douglas:  Well, we are going to discuss that in Committee, Mr. Speaker. They are subject to 

regulations. They are subject to being passed, of course, first by the Co-operative Guarantee Board, 

which makes the recommendations to the Cabinet. They also would have to be passed by the Co-

operative Credit Society Board, which will be putting up the money. It is not our money; we simply 

guarantee a loans made by the Co-operative Credit Society. 



 

March 21, 1957 

 

 

52 

Mr. Loptson:  But they wouldn‘t be interested, if the Government is guaranteeing 100 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! I think the question raised by the hon. member for Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) can 

be answered in Committee. 

 

(The motion for second reading was agreed to, and Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at next 

sitting) 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o‘clock p.m. without question put. 


