



















































Hansard: February 22, 1957


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

7th Day 

 

Friday, February 22, 1957 

The House met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

Debate on Address-In-Reply 

 

The House resumed from Thursday, February 21, 1957, the adjourned debate on the proposed Motion of 

Mr. Wood (Swift Current) for the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker (continuing): — Mr. Speaker, when I was addressing you last evening, and giving a 

report of the work of the Attorney General‘s Department, I summed up the work done by each of the 

Branches of the Department and the intended policy of the Department with respect to the coming. 

 

I want to say now something about general conditions which prevail in the province of Saskatchewan, 

and conditions which I am sure my constituents and the people of this province will consider me remiss 

if I did not bring to your attention and to the attention of the House. 

 

Throughout the past year or two Canada has been flooded with newspaper reports and so on of the 

growing and expanding national economy. We have seen from month to month and year to year a 

continual growth in the gross national product of our country. We have seen all the familiar indices of 

expansion showing a steady upward climb. Car loadings, bank clearings, employment figures all show 

the country to be prospering as never before, and yet a large part of the province of Saskatchewan is 

comprised of agriculture and agricultural people. Throughout my constituency, which is predominantly 

an agricultural constituency, I find that conditions are not as good as they were five or ten years ago. 

They are definitely worse. We read reports that the income of our rural people is falling off; I know we 

read conflicting reports on this subject, depending sometimes on who the author is. I have here a 

clipping from the ‗Saskatoon Star-Phoenix‘ headed: ‗Living Standards Are High, Says Gardiner‖. Well, 

I am not acquainted with any of the ‗high-living farmers‘ as far as Hanley constituency is concerned. I 

think this is an attempt by the Federal Minister of Agriculture to try to gloss over and cover up the 

failures of his Government to evolve some constructive agricultural policy which will ensure that 

agriculture enjoys some parity with the rest of the country. 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
2 

The Canadian Federation of Agriculture and the Farmers‘ Union have made submissions to the 

Government of Canada, and in answer to their demands the Hon. Federal Minister of Agriculture says 

that parity is presently being received by farm people. In a clipping from ‗The Leader-Post‘ of 

December last: 

 

―Gardiner says parity received. Canadian farmers are receiving parity prices now, Agriculture Minister 

James G. Gardiner told delegates at the Saskatchewan Liberal Association convention on Saturday.‖ 

 

Well, I guess it doesn‘t matter much what you tell Liberals. They are a pretty uncritical lot when it 

comes to matters of what is true and what is false; they are willing to accept any kind of statement that 

the Federal Minister of Agriculture wants to make. So he tries to tell them that is true. Minister of 

Agriculture wants to make. So he tries to tell them that is true. But I have in my hand a clipping from the 

‗Financial Post‘ of the same month, and the heading is: ‗Why Ottawa Doesn‘t Favour Farm Parity Price 

System.‖ 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if they would talk with the same tongue in the west that they do in the east, 

it would give the farmers here an opportunity to realize where the true facts lie, and how the Liberals 

stand on this important question. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — What does ‗The Financial Post‘ say? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — According to the Dominion bureau of Statistics, the net farm income for the past 

five years amounted to an average of $409 million per year. For the year 1956 the figure is $395 million, 

or a reduction of $14 million from the average of the preceding five years. 

 

This net farm income figure is derived by taking the gross income and subtracting farm costs. It should 

be remembered that gross income includes inventories of grains held, and treats such amounts as though 

they were income in the year in which they were grown. The farmer has at the present time almost an 

entire year‘s income unsold, and for which he has not been paid. 

 

The farm costs are comprised of the actual expenditures that the farmer has made in operating his farm 

for the year. Every farmer knows that, in recent years, he has not been able to repair or keep up to date 

the machinery on his farm. He is, in fact, using his depreciation reserves to live, during recent years. The 

fact that farm costs are lower in 1956 than they were, for example, in 1952, shows that the farmer simply 

is not meeting his farm costs as they become due. 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
3 

The figure of $14 million of reduction in net farm income, therefore, does not tell his story. The farmer 

has not received his money, which he is assumed to have gotten out of his inventories, nor has he kept 

his farm machinery standards up to the level of 1950. In spite of the fact that the figures are grossly 

misleading because of the factors which I have just mentioned, there is still a reduction of some $14 

million in net income. It should also be born in mind that the $395 million net income shown for the 

year 1956 represents only about half of the buying power of the $553 million income which he enjoyed 

in 1951. We are told by the Party opposite that the problems of the farmer arise out of the high 

provincial and local taxation. 

 

Total taxes for school and municipal purposes, in 1955, amounted to just a little less than $29 million – 

less than 5 per cent of gross farm income. Farmers, like anyone else, have to pay taxes and don‘t mind 

paying taxes when they are paying for services which they and their families can enjoy. The biggest 

complaint I hear among the farm people in this province is that they can‘t afford to pay more taxes and 

get more services for themselves and their families. 

 

Some Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — The education of farm children, provision of roads for farm population and these 

things are things which farmers are entitled to enjoy on the same basis as anybody else in the 

community. Yet, because of these policies which are compelling small farmers to abandon their farms, 

these policies resulting in a lower municipal population (and I attended a council meeting in one 

municipality, last year, where they told me that the farm population in the last twenty years, had fallen 

by more than 50 per cent) . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — That‘s what your Commission told them to do. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — . . . a higher burden of taxes for municipal services falls upon those who remain, 

with the result today that most of my rural constituents are required to contribute three to four times as 

much for the cost of educating their children in a one-room rural school as urban residents have to pay to 

educate their children in modern city schools. 

 

This Government is doing something about that problem, Mr. Speaker. This Government by 

reorganizing the school system, is attempting to provide the facilities for greater equality of opportunity 

for rural children. I am sorry to think of the conditions which would exist throughout most of my 

constituency today if the Larger School Unit had not been inaugurated eight or nine years ago in this 

province. The Leader School Units have been able to meet these problems and to bring about a better 

measure of equality between urban and rural children. But, as I say, this loss of 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
4 

population is resulting in a higher burden of taxes to rural people. The obvious problem, then, is the 

declining farm population. You don‘t have to ask anyone but a farmer to find out why farm population is 

declining. You don‘t have to go to statisticians and experts on the subject. They can tell you that they 

can‘t afford to live on a half-section or a quarter section or a three-quarter-section farm that would 

support them adequately twenty-five years ago. Low quotas, low prices and high farm costs have 

combined to bring about that result. 

 

This Government is doing something to meet that situation. This Government has faced, for the first 

time in the history of this province, courageously and with foresight and vision, the problem of 

reorganizing local services so that rural people can provide themselves with a better standard of rural 

services. And what assistance is the party opposite giving? The people of this province are determined 

that our rural areas are going to be organized on the most efficient basis possible. They are determined 

that the rural people are going to get equality of treatment with all the people of this country, that they 

are going to provide themselves with better roads, better schools and better local health services, 

agricultural services and so on; and if municipal reorganization is necessary to accomplish that end the 

rural people are going to demand that that be done. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — You had better tell that to your rural municipalities. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I have, and they agree with me. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker. . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Where do you stand on the problem? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — . . . in this province any government which was not prepared to take a 

progressive, enlightened outlook in the face of these problems would be letting down our rural people. 

But I want to say that no matter what we do to make more efficient, to make less costly and more 

productive, the rural services, they cannot solve our agricultural problems. When it comes to dealing 

with a budget of $29 million or $30 million (which is what our schools and municipalities have to deal 

with, you are dealing with only 5 per cent of the total agricultural income. The real solution to this – and 

I am not one who says we should, out of hand, condemn everything that the Federal Government has or 

has not done; I believe that this problem requires a joint approach by the provinces and the Federal 

Government. We on this side of the House are prepared at any time to sit down with the Federal 

authorities to work out an agricultural policy which may or may not be on all fours with the one which 

we advocate as a political movement, work out a Federal policy which will insure the solvency and the 

development of our agricultural industry. We have asked from time to time, and last year this 

Legislature unanimously asked, that such a conference should be called and that these problems should 

be studied in an objective fashion. We are not suggesting that we have no responsibility 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
5 

in these matters. We are prepared to assume our responsibility, and have assumed our responsibility by 

issuing the call for such a conference, as we have within the last two years. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — That‘s as far as you want to go – to call a conference. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — We recognize that many of the things which will come out of such a conference 

would require joint federal and provincial action; and it is because we know that joint action is the only 

way of approaching these problems that we are prepared to play our part in evolving such a policy. It is, 

in my opinion, a very grave harm that is being rendered to our province when political parties, like the 

party opposite, try to make these agricultural problems strictly a petty political issue. We are asking that 

the C.C.F. Government of Saskatchewan and that the Liberal Government of Canada come together and 

come to grips with this problem and evolve a policy which will solve this problem. We are not trying to 

make political advantage out of the serious conditions existing in some of our rural areas. We believe 

that this is too big a thing for mere petty party advantage. And if the Liberal party come along with such 

a proposal, I am confident that something can be done in this regard. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Why don‘t you propose it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I suggest that this problem is not insoluble, because the Liberal party has 

managed to solve this problem for a great many other people in our country. The Liberal party doesn‘t 

hesitate to place the credit of Canada behind a little group of foreign investors who want to build a 

pipeline. They don‘t hesitate to give cash advances. . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — What about the cement company? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — As a matter of fact, the grain companies had no difficulty getting cash advances. 

When they take the grain and put it into the terminal elevators they are paid for it. All we are suggesting 

is that the same treatment be meted out to farmers. I say that it is a myth perpetrated by the Federal 

Minister of Agriculture that cash advances will cost the farmer money and that he should pay interest on 

them. I suggest that the farmer is now paying interest so that cash advances may be enjoyed by the grain 

companies on the grain in terminal elevators. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — The consumer, too? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — The consumer doesn‘t pay for the grain until it is received in the foreign markets, 

yet the grain companies are paid for the grain as soon as they get it into an exportable position and it 

may 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
6 

lie there for twelve months. In the meantime, they have had a cash advance and the producer has paid 

the interest on that cash advance. The same benefits ought to be available to the farmer who puts his 

grain into a deliverable position on his farm. 

 

The Liberal party has shown itself very adept at solving the problems of other groups in Canada. The 

manufacturers have enjoyed high protective tariffs, enabling them to sell their products on Canadian 

markets at inflated prices – prices above world prices; but the wheat producer, the ‗forgotten man‘ must 

sell his grain not only for foreign exports, but for domestic consumption, at a price equal to the lowest 

price prevailing anywhere in the world. I suggest that if the Federal Government is prepared to meet 

with us, to work out a solution to this problem on constructive lines, that protection to the farmer can be 

given equivalent to the protection which they now afford to most other economic groups in the country. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — They‘d have to be as crazy as you are. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I believe, Mr. Speaker, that it is only proper that we should enunciate our policy 

with regard to this agricultural situation, because joint action by us and the Federal Government will 

undoubtedly be required in any long-term program. And that is not talking Federal issues; that is a 

provincial issue, and we in Saskatchewan are prepared to face that issue. I ask the members opposite if 

they are prepared to face that issue and to go along with some kind of conference to evolve a joint 

program to meet this problem. I suggest that the Liberal party at this time ought to rise above itself. It 

ought to come to the place where province; instead of which they go up and down this country decrying 

the economic prospects of Saskatchewan, denouncing the efforts that are being made in this province for 

industrial and economic development. I suggest that they should forget about petty party political 

advantage and fact this problem and be prepared to shoulder some of the responsibility for finding a 

solution. 

 

I will support the Motion. 

 

Mr. C.H. Thurston (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate, I first want to join 

with previous speakers in congratulating the mover and seconder on the excellent way in which they 

presented their speeches; and also, sir, to congratulate you on your elevation to the Speaker of this 

Assembly. I know that you have the respect of all the members of this Chamber, and I hope, sir, that as a 

new member I will so conduct myself that I will be of a minimum of trouble to you. If I should become 

out of order, it will be in ignorance of the House rules, rather than deliberate on my part. 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
7 

I would also at this time like to pay tribute to my predecessor, Mr. W.F. Thair, who so ably represented 

this seat for 12 years. I only hope that I will be able to gain the respect, not only of the people of 

Lumsden constituency but also of the member =s of this House, that Mr. Thair enjoyed over the years. 

Mr. Thair has had a serious illness earlier this winter, and I am sure that I can speak for all members, 

particularly those who knew him, when we wish him a speedy recovery back to his vigorous self, and 

hope that he will have many years to enjoy the fruits of his labour. 

 

Now, sir, I believe it is customary for a member to have something to say about his constituency. First, I 

would like to say that I am indeed honoured in being elected to represent Lumsden, and I hope that I can 

live up to those responsibilities placed on me. 

 

As you know, sir, Lumsden constituency surrounds the city of Regina and also Moose Jaw, and that 

gives a lot of benefits to my constituents. As you know, we have access to the large city hospitals, and 

that is a distinct advantage; the doctors in the cities have a better chance to diagnose and treat people, 

and if surgery is necessary they have better equipment to operate with in the large hospitals. 

 

In the field of education there is also an advantage. Many of our rural boys and girls have been able to 

attend city high schools, and have had the benefit and the use of the up-to-date classrooms and 

experienced teachers. Particularly in the Regina area where so many of our rural school =s are closed, 

the local school boards have been able to arrange with the city school boards for the elementary 

education. 

 

Then, too, there is the advantage of being fairly close to the large market centres. This is an advantage to 

farmers, particularly those farmers who are engaged in livestock and dairying and poultry; and, as 

members know, most of the large machine companies have their branch-houses in Regina, and I believe, 

in some cases in Moose Jaw. This enables the farmers in this area to have a more adequate supply of 

repair parts, and also if they are closer to these branch houses, they have more chance of getting experts 

to come out and help them in the operation of their farm machines. 

 

A look at a highway map will show that Lumsden constituency has its fair share of the provincial 

highway system. I think that it is only natural that any highway system will emanate from the large 

centres. The fact that we have these highways goes a long way to making a grid road network in the 

municipalities around these cities, and I can say to the Minister of Highways that we appreciate having 

the highways leading out as they do. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have just mentioned a few of the advantages that we have in being close to these 

cities. On the other side of the ledger there are a few disadvantages, and without seeming to be 

contradictory, I would say that one of the troubles that we have is having these 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
8 

highways. We have a problem in these municipalities around these cities of the trucks overloading and 

trying to use our municipal roads in an attempt to dodge the weigh-scales; and, as you know, sir, 

municipal roads are not built to stand this heavy traffic. I know that the Municipality of Sherwood, in 

which I live, this past two years has had to engage a man to try to cope with this problem of the trucks 

using our roads. 

 

Then, too, there is another problem as the cities expand. Naturally as cities expand they need more land, 

and this causes some problems in the area. It naturally cuts into school districts as they have to change 

the boundaries; it lowers the school assessments and lowers the municipal assessments, and that does 

cause a problem. 

 

Then, too there is a problem in a city of the size of Regina in the sewerage disposal. Last fall the farmers 

in the Regina area became alarmed when the city council gave consideration to setting up a lagoon-type 

system of disposal. The proposal was to take out some 2,400 acres of our best wheat land for this 

disposal plant. A delegation of farmers (of which I was one) met with the city council and raised our 

objections to this type of disposal. I can say that the council met us well and listened to our objections; 

and I believe the objections that we raised at that time will be an influence on the final decision that the 

city council may make. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have just mentioned a few of these disadvantages. I don‘t believe that they are 

problems that can‘t be solved. I believe these problems we have between the rural areas and the cities 

can be worked out by mutual understanding and co-operation. But I want to say that any disadvantages 

that we may have, I think, are far outweighed by the advantages. 

 

Now, sir, up to this point I have been fairly agreeable, but I find that I must disagree with the Leader of 

the Official Opposition (Mr. McDonald). He stated the other day that the Throne Speech was so thin that 

he couldn‘t find very much to talk about. I, too, sir, have read the Speech and I find so much in it of 

interest to me that I would like to talk about, but times doesn‘t permit me, this afternoon, to go into all 

the aspects of the Throne Speech, so I will confine my remarks to just two or three departments that I am 

keenly interested in. 

 

First, I would like to congratulate the Power Corporation on the job that they have done in bringing 

power to the farmers in Lumsden constituency. I believe, sir, that all the area coverages have been 

completed. Naturally, there are some areas, some individual farmers within an area, that have not been 

connected; but I hope in the not too distant future that those farmers desiring power will be able to be 

hooked up. Living close to Regina as I do, and associating with the people in Regina as much as I do, I 

sometimes think that my city friends wonder why we farmers make so much fuss 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
9 

about power. Mr. Speaker, I don‘t know a single thing that takes away the isolation from a farmstead 

like power. Not only does it make a cheap chore-boy around the farm, but it enables us to have many 

conveniences that we otherwise would not be able to have, and that is particularly to the farm housewife. 

I met a lady the other day in our Co-op store and I said, ―It‘s cold‖. She said, ―Yes, but we don‘t mind 

that now; the roads are open.‖ She said, ―Thank to Mr. Douglas; we can plug our car in, and if we want 

to go to town the next day, the motor will start.‖ She said, ―You know what that used to be. We used to 

have to tow our cars around and around; now we just plug them in.‖ And I am very pleased that the 

farmers are being placed in the position where they can have some of the conveniences that our friends 

in the cities have. 

 

At this point I am not going to go into whether we paid too much for the power or not, but all I know is 

that the farmers in my constituency are very happy indeed that they have got power. I can say that they 

wouldn‘t have that power disconnected for many times the price that they paid for it. 

 

Another department, Mr. Speaker, that I am keenly interested in is the Department of Education. I am 

not going to attempt, this afternoon, to deal at any length with the Department of Education. We have 

the Minister yesterday give us a pretty detailed account of the Department of Education. But one thing 

that I would like to say is that not all our problems are in the larger school units. The Regina West 

Superintendency is nearly all (except one little portion of it) in the constituency of Lumsden. As the 

members will know, that area, the West Superintendency, is not a larger unit, and from time to time I 

have heard grumblings around this area as to the difference in mill rates and the difference in taxes paid. 

After hearing these grumblings and complaints, I thought I would check into the issue and see if it was 

justified. Mr. Speaker, I have the figures on my desk, and I have never in all my life seen such a 

conglomeration of figures. I find that the assessments in rural areas (that is in the Regina West 

Superintendency) vary from a low of $50,000 to a high of over $600,000 and in the villages and towns 

from $48,000 to over $450,000. The mill rates vary in the rural areas from nil to 32.4 and from 10 to 36 

in villages and towns. These mill rates do not give a clear picture of the taxes paid unless you break 

them down into areas of equal assessment. Breaking down the figures on this basis I find that, for 

example in the Municipality of Sherwood, their assessment varies (and that is, the school districts) from 

$124,000 to over $517,000, and a variation in mill rates from nil to 11.5. This means, sir, that some 

people are paying over $50 school taxes per quarter, while others are getting off scot-free. 

 

Another example is in the Edenwold area. Some districts in the Edenwold area are assessed at over 

$3,000 and the mill rate is 32.4. Their school tax amounts to over $90 per quarter. I could go on, sir, and 

quote many instances. I could quote, for instance, in the Lumsden Town district, there is an area south in 

the heavy land, the $5,000 assessed land where their 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
10 

mill rate is 23.4 mills. I could go on and quote more over the whole area – it is just a variation in these 

taxes. All I can say is that this does not lend itself to good feelings to the people in this area; and I can 

say to the Minister of Education that more and more people are coming to me and asking me to use my 

influence in having the Regina West Superintendency established into the larger units. I have told the 

people that by The School Act, there must be a vote taken. We have not asked for a vote, and I have 

assured them that, if the Trustees or the Association asked the Department of ‗Education for a vote, the 

Department of Education will set up the necessary machinery so that a vote can be taken. 

 

We hear so much today, sir, about the larger units closing the school s. There is no doubt that a lot of 

schools have been closed in the larger units. What is the position in the Regina West Superintendency? 

We have 97 rural school districts in the Regina West Superintendency, and 32 of these schools have 

been closed. So you can see, sir, that we can‘t lay that on the doorstep of the larger unit. These schools 

are being closed, and I note from the schools around this area that there are more and more of these 

schools going to have to close in the next few years. There is negotiate thing though that I think we 

should keep in mind when we are closing these schools, and the Minister mentioned it yesterday: when 

the records of the larger units and adding to what we have in our own superintendency, I find by closing 

the rural schools, it makes a net saving of nearly 600 teachers. I will agree with the Minister that the big 

job we have to do today is not only to encourage and keep the teachers that we have now in the field and 

the profession, but we have to take steps to encourage more and more of our young people to take up 

teaching as a profession. 

 

Now, sir, there are many other things that I would like to have dealt with. I would like to have dealt with 

hospitalization and car insurance, and above all, I would like to have dealt with the plight of agriculture; 

but I don‘t feel that I will take the time of the House now, but I hope to have an opportunity to deal with 

this agricultural plight in other debates during this Session. 

 

Another thing, I am keenly interested in is industrial development. I am not going to try and add to what 

the Premier said the other day on the progress that is taking place in our province, but in my own 

constituency, sir, things are being done. On the outskirts of Regina, we have the Cement Plant; we have 

three light aggregate plants, and there is a new steel plant, just two or three miles north of the city, going 

up, and we hope it will be completed this year. We are sure that more of these plants will come in. I 

would just like to say to the Premier, as Minister in charge of the Industrial Development Office, that 

when they are encouraging industry to come into the province and are locating sites, not to –pass up the 

beautiful town of Lumsden. As hon. members know, Lumsden is situation on a good highway; 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
11 

it‘s on a railway, and to me it is one of the beauty spots of our province. We have a very active and 

progressive Board of Trade in the town of Lumsden, and I am sure that the Board of Trade and local 

citizens will co-operate in every way possible with the Development Office in trying to interest people 

to locate there. In that respect, some member =s of the Board of Trade had already taken steps to do 

something. As members know, the valley around the town of Lumsden is noted for the high-quality 

potatoes they produce. As I said, some of these members have been giving thought and investigating the 

feasibility of starting a potato chip plant. In talking with the chairman of the Board of Trade not long 

ago, he said that he would appreciate any help and technical advice that they could receive from the 

Development office. All I want to say is that I congratulate those people in Lumsden for their forward 

thinking, and if they go ahead with this project, or any other projects, I wish them success in them. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to mention something about farm taxes. We seem to hear a lot on 

that subject nowadays. We hear that taxes are driving farmers off their farms. Now I do not say that 

taxes are not important, or that they do not have a bearing on farm costs, but I do suggest that they are 

not the reason for putting farmers out of business. For example, I have taken my own case. I have added 

up my land tax, my hospitalization tax, my gasoline tax, my licence fees for my car and truck and the 

compulsory insurance, and I have tried to estimate what I would pay on the 3 per cent Hospitalization 

and Education Tax. These add up to a fair amount, but I want to say, sir, that if I don‘t soon start getting 

a price for my produce that bears some relationship to the cost, I am going to go broke even if all those 

taxes were paid back to me, and I am desperately afraid that I will have plenty of company. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to me this is the crux of the whole matter. If we are going to have better roads and better 

education facilities and more social services, then we must raise the money for these services. The only 

way that local or provincial governments can extend these services is by getting more money, and the 

only way that I as a farmer can pay those taxes, whether or not they are ten cents an acre, or a dollar an 

acre, is to get a price for my products which we are not now getting, that will enable us to meet our cost 

of production and have a decent standard of living. In other words, I think we should be striving for the 

farmer to get his fair share of the national pie. 

 

I make no apology by being an M.L.A. and talking this way, and I want to say I will support in this 

House and out of this House any motion or Bill that will help the farmers to obtain their fair share of the 

national production. 

 

I see that my airtime is up, and being a good co-operator (as I am), I will not encroach on the speaker 

who follows me. Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion. 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
12 

Mrs. J.E. Cooper (Regina City): — Mr. Speaker, first I would like to associate myself with the 

previous speakers in congratulating you, sir, on your election to the very important office of Speaker. I 

would also like to congratulate the mover and the seconder of the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from 

the Throne, and to say a work of welcome to all the new members in this Legislature. First, I think I 

should say I am very glad to be here to be able to welcome you, thanks to the good sense and 

intelligence of the Regina voters who once again returned three C.C.F. members with very sizable 

majorities. 

 

I have a very special word of welcome for the Member of the Legislature from the constituency of 

Humboldt (Mrs. Mary J. Batten). I am very glad, Mr. Speaker, to see another woman in this Legislature. 

I have sat over here for four years now facing the Opposition, and I have had a growing feeling that 

there was something missing over there – perhaps it was the feminine touch. You know, Mr. Speaker, 

every since I have been elected to this Legislature, a great many people outside the Legislature, and even 

some of the members in the Legislature, have kept on telling me that it was my special duty to try to 

keep the men in order. Now, that is a sizable assignment. . . 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — You‘ve done a fair job, too. 

 

Mrs. Cooper: — Now, with one of us on each side of the House I think we should have a very peaceful 

and a very quiet session, although I could suggest a very simple change in seating arrangement that 

might help. If the lady member could be placed between the member from Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) and 

the member from Arm River (Mr. Danielson) I think it might help. 

 

I also notice, Mr. Speaker, that the lady members are placed about as far apart as possible in this 

Legislature. I wondered, of course, if there was any malice aforethought in that. You will have noticed 

that, in the June election, the ladies in this Legislature increased their numbers for 100 per cent, and I 

think that is pretty good going. If we can keep up this record, Mr. Speaker, by about 1972, the women 

will be in the majority, and then you will see what happens. The first thing we will do will be to pass 

legislation giving two weeks‘ holidays with pay, eight statutory holidays and time and a half for 

overtime for all housewives, and once we do that I am sure our position in the House will be secure. 

 

Turning now to the Speech from the Throne, it is something of a thrill for those of us on this side of the 

House to realize that our C.C.F. Government has now been in power for three terms of office and are 

starting our fourth term. I am sure it must give a great sense of satisfaction to the hon. Premier that, after 

12 years in office, the people of the province have shown their confidence in this Government by re-

electing it to office with such a healthy majority. It has been a most interesting 12 years in the history of 

Saskatchewan, and certainly we have seen great changes during these 12 years in almost every phase of 

our economy. Perhaps the most dramatic 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
13 

change – the one that has received the most attention – has been the great amount of economic 

development that we have seen in the province, and the industry that is coming into the province. 

 

The hon. Premier, in his address on Wednesday, gave a very comprehensive and a very thrilling picture 

of what has been going on in these fields in the province of Saskatchewan in the development of oil and 

gas, potash and uranium, and other minerals, and of the various industries that are located here. I feel, 

Mr. Speaker, that we should certainly give the Industrial Development Office, which was set up by this 

Government, a great deal of credit for the very thorough and competent job they have done in research, 

trying to find out what industries can hope to operate successfully in the province, and encouraging them 

to come here. I have very vivid memories of when the Industrial Development office was set up, of the 

scepticism and the criticism with which it was greeted by the members of the Liberal Opposition – we 

were ‗wasting money‘, ‗more planners‘, and that sort of thing; but I think now perhaps even the 

Opposition will agree that setting up of the Industrial development office was a very fine thing for the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

While we are giving credit for some of these industrial development s, we must not forget that a large 

share of the credit must come to the hon. Premier of this province for the marvellous job he has done in 

selling our province and the province‘s opportunities. He never misses a chance to talk about 

Saskatchewan wherever he is, and certainly his influence has been very great and has done a great deal 

to help get industrial development of this province. We can look forward with a great deal of optimism 

to the future. but I think it should be remembered, Mr. Speaker, (and the hon. Premier pointed this out, 

too) that industrial expansion and the material prosperity that accompanies it do not in themselves 

provide a vigorous and a healthy and humane society. It is merely a means by which such a society can 

be produced. It is only when wealth is applied to creating a better standard of living for all of us, and 

when it is used to produce people who are physically and mentally health, and who have access to 

greater culture through broader education, and who have learned to accept social responsibility for other 

people; it is only in this sort of society that democratic maturity is reached. While I certainly do not 

under estimate the tremendous value of economic development, I realize it is necessary for building that 

kind of sound economic base that we must have to finance health and welfare, education, highways and 

all the other functions of government. 

 

Yet in looking back over the past 12 years, Mr. Speaker, I find some of the most interesting and some of 

the most worthwhile and, I feel, some of the most lasting developments in other areas, developments 

which, I feel, are designed, and have been purposely designed, by the C.C.F. Government to build that 

kind of a society which I have just been talking about. A very good example of what I mean is in the 

field of health. To my way of thinking, Mr. Speaker, the job done in the health field by the C.C.F. 

Government has been the most imaginative, the most courageous and the most effective 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
14 

job ever carried out in any province in the Dominion of Canada. We are leading the way not only in 

Canada, but on this continent, in the field of cancer care and cancer treatment. We are leading in our 

mental health program, in our hospitalization plan, and we were the first province to institute a 

hospitalization plan in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

There has been a tremendous job in this province in hospital construction, and we now find modern, 

well-equipped hospitals in almost every area of this province. We have reached the place where our per 

capita hospital bed capacity in Saskatchewan is the highest in the Dominion of Canada. We have one 

Health Region, which was mentioned by the member from Swift Current (Mr. Wood), where we not 

only have hospital care, but complete medical care. We have other regions where there is a very find 

preventive program going on, and we hear from the Speech from the Throne that more health regions 

will be set up fairly soon. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, we have provided speedy access to hospitals, particularly for those people in 

outlying districts, through out Air Ambulance. We are now giving free care to the aged, dependent 

people – our old-age pensioners, people on mothers‘ allowances – and for those illnesses that take long 

periods of very expensive treatment, and where early diagnosis and care are so all-important – cancer, 

polio, mental illness, where hospital and mental care are given to the people of this province, free of 

charge. Also, Mr. Speaker, we now have our own Medical College, where our own Saskatchewan young 

men and women can train to become doctors, and we hope many of them will continue to practise right 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Along with that Medical College we have our University Hospital which anyone will recognize as one 

of the finest hospitals in Canada. We are leading the way in the field of health, and certainly all eyes 

have been on the health program in Saskatchewan, and it is well known that many people from all parts 

of the world have come to Saskatchewan to see what we are doing here. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, it is no 

secret that it was the success of Saskatchewan‘s Hospitalization Plan that forced the Federal 

Government to take another look at health insurance and make its proposals to the provinces for a 

National Hospital Plan. 

 

We are one province, Mr. Speaker, that is ready to enter a national hospital plan right away and I can see 

no logical reason why we should have to wait until other provinces, who lag behind, are ready to 

participate. If the Federal Government would be prepared to extend its plan immediately to those 

provinces which are ready to participate, I think you would find it amazing, Mr. Speaker, how quickly 

many other provinces would find they could speed up their program and be ready to come in. 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
15 

The same approach could be used as was used in the old-age pensions. When old-age pensions were 

introduced, you will remember that Ottawa agreed to pay 50 per cent of the cost in any province where 

that province would put up the other 50 per cent, and certainly the same could be done with health 

insurance. You will remember that Saskatchewan was one of the first provinces to enter, and gradually 

the others came in; people public opinion forced them to come in. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — That was the Liberal Government. 

 

Mrs. Cooper: — If the Federal Government was really anxious to see national hospital insurance come 

in, and come in rapidly, if they are not giving merely lip service to this proposal, this method certainly 

could be used very effectively. Certainly it has been long enough in getting to this first major step – 

national hospital insurance. 

 

By the way, I noticed a report in ‗The Leader-Post‘ where the head of a private insurance firm was 

bitterly criticizing the Federal Government for undue haste in instituting hospital insurance. I don‘t think 

that is fair criticism, Mr. Speaker. I think it is about since 1919 that we have been promised it, and I 

hope when we do eventually get our hospital plan, we won‘t have to wait another 40 years before we get 

the complete health insurance plan for which the C.C.F. Government has been working for years. 

 

Coming back to Saskatchewan and looking ahead to the future, the first think I would like to suggest is 

that we get an early start (and I mean a very early start) on the construction of small mental hospitals as 

recommended by the Canadian Mental Health Association and by experts in the field of mental health in 

Canada and the United States. I am certainly not unmindful of the great advances that have been made in 

Saskatchewan in the care of the mentally ill. I know there has been a steadily and rapidly increasing 

allocation of funds to look after the mentally ill. Certainly we have pioneered the field, and I am most 

anxious that we are able to keep in the lead. I visited Weyburn recently, and I must say that the changes 

that have been made in that institution are really remarkable, and the program of modernization is going 

along steadily. We can be very well proud of the new wing there for the tubercular patients who are in 

the mental hospitals. The training school at Moose Jaw was a very good step in the right direction. We 

have excellent mental health clinics set up throughout the province, and we have the new psychiatric 

wing in the University of Saskatchewan Hospital. All of these things have made very great 

improvements in the Mental Health program, but we do still face a very serious situation of over-

crowding of our mental hospitals. And so, in spite of all the improvements that have been made, we are 

not doing the job we are capable of doing because of the overcrowded conditions. When we get as many 

as 100 people in one ward, it is absolutely impossible to carry out the kind of program we should have. 

There is no hope for any kind of privacy; every individual in 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
16 

this world needs a certain amount of privacy, and particularly sick people need a certain amount of 

privacy. 

 

We also know it is not too good to have to treat psychotic patients with mental defectives, and it is 

impossible under existing circumstances to make the necessary segregation. I do know that the 

Government is giving a great deal of consideration to building these small mental hospitals and I know 

plans have been talked over, and I hope we will soon get through the planning stage and be ready to 

enter the construction stage – at least one hospital on an experimental basis. I am quite sure that it will 

not only be a humanitarian act when we can reduce the overcrowding, but I am quite sure that it also 

will, in the long run, save money, because certainly with less overcrowding there would be a better 

chance for patients. I think the stay in the hospital would be much shorter, and I am sure we will be able 

to send many more patients home cured. 

 

Already the effect of our better treatment is showing. I am very pleased to be able to say that, in 

Saskatchewan, we find that the number of people in our mental hospitals is going down, while in most 

provinces the number is going up. That is something we can be proud of. 

 

When we do get around to building these hospitals, Mr. Speaker, I would like to suggest Regina as the 

site of one of these hospitals. I believe there are some 500 Regina people in Weyburn, and one of the 

purposes of these hospitals is that people may be treated near their own communities, where their friends 

can come and visit them. That is important, not only for the sake of their friends and relatives, but also 

for the sake of the mental health of the person who is ill. So I hope Regina will be considered as the site 

for one of these hospitals. 

 

I want now to turn for a moment to education. Certainly there have been many changes also in the field 

of education, and I think the most significant change was the introduction of the larger units. That was 

the step, Mr. Speaker, that took courage but was certainly a step that paid dividends; and in spite of the 

constant sniping we have heard from the Liberal opposition in the Legislature, and from some of their 

henchmen outside the Legislature, educationists will tell you that the introduction of the larger unit has 

been the greatest single factor in improving educational opportunities in this province. Certainly the 

Saskatchewan Teachers‘ Federation gives the units their unqualified approval. 

 

We are moving in Saskatchewan very steadily towards our goal of providing more equality of 

opportunity among all children for an education. I am not going to outline the many ways in which we 

are doing this, but there are many ways – through equalization grants, for one. Certainly there are better 

high school opportunities, and I was thinking how much it must mean to people living on farms today 

where there is such a shortage of cash, to be able to see their young people continue right through to 

Grade 12 without 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
17 

having to leave home, and without having to put out the additional money to pay board and room. They 

can go by bus, and certainly the number of young people who are completing their high school 

education shows that this program has paid. 

 

I could also go on and mention other ways in which we are equalizing opportunities: through our Loan 

Fund over 4,000 students have been helped to attend university, and through building schools in the 

north. There is one program I would like to mention, because I don‘t remember it being mentioned in the 

House before, and that is the progress that is being made throughout the province in music education for 

young people. This again is particularly valuable to the rural areas and the small towns. This 

Government appointed a Provincial Director of Music, Mr. Rj Staples, and I do think all the members of 

the Legislature would very much enjoy going and seeing Mr. Staples‘s music studios right in this 

building, and seeing the work that is being done. You will find there a shelf with a very excellent 

lending library of music books that can be had upon request, and also two shelves of records, tape 

recordings of teaching lessons in music, and these are very, very valuable to rural schools. Also Mr. 

Staples each year at Teachers‘ Institute has a workshop on music where he gets the teachers together and 

gives them a lot of assistance in how to teach music in the schools. The work of our director is 

recognized far beyond the borders of Saskatchewan. You will be interested to know that our director has 

been asked to visit many states in the Union, and to lecture on what is being done here, and also many 

other places in Canada. Much of the work he is doing here is now being adopted in many of the states of 

the Union, and I think that is something we can be proud of. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, I believe there are very few things in this life that give more lasting and more 

permanent enjoyment than the ability to understand and to appreciate music. Even if we can never 

become musicians ourselves, the appreciation of music is a lasting thing, and I do believe that this better 

opportunity for rural students in music education is really important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we get our new technical college, it will open a whole new avenue of opportunity for 

Saskatchewan young people. There is a crying need for skilled technicians and skilled tradesmen, and 

we certainly want our own Saskatchewan boys and girls to have the opportunity to qualify for these 

better jobs. When I speak of the technical institute, I would like to suggest that Regina is certainly the 

local location for this institute. There are a lot of good reasons why. We have the largest population in 

Regina from which to draw students and that is important. Certainly, employment opportunities are 

going to be much greater here where we have this large centre, that‘s sure. And it is quite conceivable 

that in a diversified program like the one that is going to be carried out in this institute, we are going to 

need part-time instructors in skilled trades and 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
18 

certainly it will be easier to find those skilled people who can give part-time instruction in Regina, 

where we have so many industries – the head offices of the oil companies, where the centre of the gas 

distribution is; certainly it would be much easier to get part-time qualified instructors. Then also, of 

course, Saskatoon, as you know, is the second largest city, but it has the university, so it would balance 

things up a lot if we could have the technical institute here. I would also like to say that students who 

enter the professions and are contemplating a four, five or six-year university course probably have on 

the average, more financial resources back of them than some of the students who will be entering the 

technical college, and certainly costs will be a great factor in the number of people that will register and 

be able to attend the Institute. 

 

I think, too that it would be very fine if we cold have a technical institute and a university in every city, 

but of course we know that is impossible. So it would seem to me the reasonable thing to do would be to 

put the technical institute where it will do the greatest good to the greatest number of people, and 

certainly, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister of Education, Regina is the answer to that. 

 

While it is very tempting to trace the progress that is taking place in all departments of government, I 

don‘t want to dwell too long on the past, because I realize that our responsibility is to the future, and I 

have certain suggestions I would like to make that I would like the Government to consider for future 

action. I am not suggesting that all these things can be done this year, but they are things that perhaps 

could be done during this term of office. I am very interested in the work that is done during this term of 

office. I am very interested in the work that is being done in the corrections program, in penal reform, 

and certainly I think that Saskatchewan can be very proud of the progress we have made in this field. In 

the gaol we find a completely changed atmosphere and the whole program is geared to rehabilitation, 

and we have an excellent staff-training program which has gained wide recognition. I think we are very 

fortunate to have some of the most able people in the Dominion of Canada on the staff of our penal 

institutions here, and I hope we will be able to keep them and to recruit more of the same calibre. We are 

somewhat hampered in this program by the old type gaols we have; that were built in the days when a 

gaol was just a lock-up – some place to get a person out of the way, out of the view of the public, and 

there was very little emphasis on rehabilitation and the personal needs of the inmate. Today I think we 

can be well assured that within the limits of the present building, Saskatchewan is doing an excellent job 

within the gaol. I think we are going to have, sooner or later, to face the problem of new gaols. I am well 

aware that a commission was set up by the Federal Government to go into this whole matter of 

responsibility for gaols, and they have recently released the report know as the Fauteux report. I realize 

that some of the recommendations in that report, if they were ever implemented, would certainly affect 

Saskatchewan‘s responsibility as far as gaols are concerned. However, we have no guarantee that any of 

these requests will be implemented, 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
19 

and also I would like to forecast that even if they are implemented, it would be a great many years 

before any of these recommendations are put into force.\ 

 

I would like to point out that, as far as the women‘s gaol in Prince Albert is concerned (the gaol that was 

authorized in the last Session of the Legislature), these recommendations will not affect the women‘s 

gaol. One of the recommendations I should have mentioned in the Fauteux report is that the Federal 

Government would take responsibility for all the people in gaols who have sentences of no longer than 

six months. I would like to point out that it will not affect the women‘s gaol, because in the women‘s 

gaol the sentences are mostly 30 days, or 60 days, very few, if any, for six months, and only one 

prisoner with anything more than six months‘ sentences. So even if these recommendations were to be 

implemented, it would not affect the women‘s gaol. 

 

Looking ahead I would like to suggest that the next major step in this field should be an extended parole 

and probation program, because no matter how good a job we do in a gaol, it can be completely 

frustrated unless we have trained people to follow up that work in the community. This is one aspect of 

our corrections program that I think we could look into and do a good deal more, because I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that an adequate system of parole and probation as an arm of the Corrections Branch would 

certainly pay dividends. Certainly modern thinking is running along these lines more and more. England 

has had phenomenal success with such a program and it has succeeded in reducing their gaol population, 

and we find a very marked decrease in the number of repeaters. Sweden has used it extensively with a 

good deal of success, and many of the states in the United States have developed an excellent probation 

and parole service. It has always been found that, wherever such a service is set up, it does speed up the 

process of rehabilitation. It cuts down the numbers in the gaols, and certainly cuts down the number of 

repeaters. 

 

For certain types of offenders, probation or early parole, rather than a long gaol sentence, is very much 

more effective, and certainly it cuts down on the drain of the public treasury when a man is serving his 

sentence out in the community, under the direction of a guidance officer, rather than having to be 

supported by the state in an institution. It is not only from the financial point of view, because no matter 

how hard you try, there are very unhealthy influences in a gaol which very often create bad mental 

attitudes from which a prisoner perhaps never will recover. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, I do realize that the protection of society must be the first consideration in any 

corrections program, and great care would have to be exercised. Nevertheless, we have to realize that 

there are very few prisoners who are sentenced for life. They are going to come back into the 

community anyway, and it is very much easier to bring them back and to get them integrated into a 

normal life if they are under the dir- 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
20 

ection of a guidance officer, rather than putting them in gaol for long periods of time, then they come 

out with no one to look after them and immediately they get into trouble again. I quite believe that, if we 

could have an adequate staff to handle parole and probation, it certainly would be used a great deal by 

our magistrates and judges. Certainly that has been the experience elsewhere. Your parole officer has the 

advantage of being able to follow a case right through from the time the crime is committed until 

rehabilitation is complete. His first duty is pre-sentence investigation, where he looks into the 

background of the person who is in trouble, and finds out what made him get into trouble; also finds out 

something about his physical health, mental health and so on; and this pre-sentence report is very, very 

helpful to a judge or to a magistrate. 

 

I realize the success of such a program will have to depend upon the quality of workers that we can 

attract, and I know it is very difficult to get the required number of personnel; but with the emphasis that 

is on parole and probation these days, a great many more social workers are specializing in this field. 

The competition for their services is very keen and they are going to go to the provinces where they feel 

they will have the most opportunity for advancement, and where they will be allowed to carry on a 

program entirely in their own field, instead of having their services dispersed over the whole field of 

social welfare. Once they are assured that Saskatchewan was going to carry out this kind of a program, I 

am sure we would be able to recruit good people, and we might be able to look for help to the National 

Parole and Probation Association. 

 

There is one more program I would like to say something about before I sit down. I have also been 

watching with a good deal of interest what has been happening with our Bureau of Alcoholics. It was set 

up, I believe, two and a half years ago and like any new venture, it takes a little while to get a sense of 

direction and find out the scope of its activity; but certainly there has been substantial progress in this 

field. There has been some very excellent work done. The Bureau has been very helpful to Alcoholics 

Anonymous, and they have been doing a good work of interpretation that alcoholism is a disease and 

needs understanding and treatment; but I think now, Mr. Speaker, we are in a position where the work of 

this Bureau could be usefully expanded. At present we have only two workers, and I believe one 

stenographer. It is estimated that there are 7,000 alcoholics in the province of Saskatchewan. To me that 

is rather a frightening number, and experts tell us that this number of alcoholics is going to continue to 

rise. If you look at the statistics in the Bracken Report and see the rising curve in the number of 

alcoholics all across Canada, certainly it should give all of use cause for real concern. Saskatchewan has 

fewer alcoholics than many provinces, but 7,000 is no small number, and, although the Bureau is 

working to capacity with the present staff, it is impossible to meet all the requests and do the kind of job 

that needs to be done. 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
21 

It seems to me that this bureau divides itself very naturally into three areas – research, education and 

active work in rehabilitation. It would seem to me, also, that if we could possibly have a director for 

each of these three divisions, we would make a good deal of progress. Certainly we need more research. 

The Bureau is doing some, but they have not enough staff to do the necessary research. There is 

certainly a full-time job in the field of education, and at present our treatment and rehabilitation facilities 

are not quite adequate, and possibly we could set up a rehabilitation centre in Regina and Saskatoon as a 

start. Now, admittedly, Mr. Speaker, this will cost money, but after all, our Government has taken over 

the controls of the sale of liquor and I think we took in something over $10 million profit. Certainly I 

feel we also have a responsibility to try to do anything that we can to rehabilitate the lives and the 

families of these people whose lives have been completely wrecked by over-indulgence of alcohol. 

 

It is estimated by the greatest experts in the field that, of those people who drink even moderately, six 

out of every hundred will become alcoholics or problem drinkers. If this is correct (and I have no reason 

to think it is not; these figures come from psychiatrists and from the Yale School of Narcotics, which is 

the best evidence that we can get), six out of every 100 who drink will become alcoholics. Certainly 

until we are prepared to do a more effective job than we are doing today anywhere in Canada in the field 

of prevention, we are going to have to do something about this problem of alcoholism. 

 

I think we could be doing a much better job in prevention than we are doing today. Our preventive job is 

extremely weak. I know there is some good work done in the schools, but it is spotty, and it depends 

upon the interest of the teacher and the interest of the superintendent as to how much is done. I think we 

are missing a bet that we are not doing something about this problem in our own Health Education 

Division, because certainly this problem is a health problem, both from the viewpoint of physical health 

and mental health. As far as I know there is nothing being done in the Department of Adult Education on 

this subject. Again, a good deal could be done. Certainly, the Highway Traffic Board is a good place for 

education. I know a little is done, but if there was a little more money in the budget for this aspect, I 

think this is one place you would get a lot of public support, because the public are very worried about 

the toll of death and injury on the highways through impaired and drunken driving. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don‘t very often quote Manitoba favourably. It isn‘t that I don‘t want to, but I cannot very 

often find the occasion. I do notice however, that the province of Manitoba this year are spending 

$50,000 on advertising in an attempt to cut down the amount of alcohol consumption. They are doing 

this as a direct recommendation from the Bracken Report, and I have here some of the advertisements 

they are using, and I think they are pretty good, too. Here is one of them: ―Can You Really Afford to 

Buy Liquor?‖ and it gives the reasons why you shouldn‘t buy too much. 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
22 

The next one: ―How Much do you Know About the Effects of Alcohol?‖. This is a very good one. It 

shows the effects of a certain number of drops of alcohol per thousand drops of blood, and we have the 

picture here – one or two drinks, he is still in pretty good condition; three or four he is beginning to 

stagger; four or five, he is getting pretty slow; five or six, he is down on his knees; seven or eight, he is 

flat on his face. Also here is another one: ―Are You Going to Let your Family Down This Christmas?‖ It 

is a series of advertisements, and I think perhaps there is a good deal of merit in it. I hope the 

Government will take a look at this and see if they think it is worthwhile doing here. 

 

I am quite certain, Mr. Speaker, that there could be an extremely effective educational program carried 

on all across Canada if there was sufficient interest on the part of the public, and if the Governments 

would take this problem seriously. The kind of program I am talking about is the same type of 

educational program that is carried on in these great health drives. The same sort of thing that is done by 

the Canadian Mental Health Association for mental health; the Cancer Association for cancer. If we 

could get a coordinated effort like we do in other health matters with the Federal Department of Health 

and Welfare, our own Departments of Health and Welfare, the schools and churches working together, 

we certainly could work out a very effective program, particularly if it was worked out by people who 

know something about psychology and people who understand advertising techniques, using television, 

the radio and all other such media. There is no question in my mind that a good educational program 

could be carried out. Now, all of us say that the only answer is education. Let us get busy and do a 

thorough job in education. I feel that this is an important problem. I feel it should be done, and I am 

equally sure, Mr. Speaker, that it won‘t be done until the people of Canada really take this problem more 

seriously. 

 

There is a great deal more I would like to say, but I see I have talked a long time and I imagine I will get 

around sooner or later, one way or another, to the other suggestions I wanted to make. Mr. Speaker, I 

will support the motion. 

 

Mrs. Mary J. Batten (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, I wish, first of all, to congratulate this Assembly on 

having you for a Speaker. It is a high office that you will fill admirably. 

 

I enjoyed very much your chairmanship of the two banquets you gave to the students who were the 

guests of this Assembly and, if I may say so, your sense of humour, sir, is delightful. Of course, sir, a 

sense of humour I have found, even a very famous sense of humour, is not always a guarantee of 

impartiality. In your case, however, Mr. Speaker, I feel certain we can rely both on your good sense and 

your fair play. 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
23 

I am cognizant, Mr. Speaker, of the graciousness and the kindness that I have received from the lady 

member from Regina (Mrs. Cooper). It is indeed a great compliment to her that in spite, or even 

because, of her long association in the market place of politics and with the members of the Government 

side of the House, she has remained a lady. 

 

The Premier has stated that there are implications of progress outlined in the Speech from the Throne. 

There are many implications in the Speech from the Throne; and in listening to this Speech from the 

Throne I am reminded of the one that this Government handed down, last year. I listened to it and to the 

debates on it in my own home. Because of the division of radio time, I heard, sir, many speakers from 

the Government side of the House. My four-year old daughter was in the library with me, and she was 

listening, too, and she was assuming a very perplexed face. She listened to all these members who talked 

about the natural resources, the fish we have in Canada, the uranium we have in Canada and so on and 

so forth, and when they had finished she said to me in a very poutful tone: ―Mummy, who made the 

world? God, or the C.C.F.?‖ I would not, sir, be at al surprised that after listening to themselves some of 

the members of the Government have become confused in their theology. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move the adjourned of the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

SECOND READING 

 

Bill No. 9 – An Act to amend The Crown Corporations Act. 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, this is probably the shortest Bill the House 

will consider. It has one clause. One section of the Crown Corporations Act is to be repealed. It has to 

do with confiscation. Many of our friends in the Opposition have been going about the country, 

throughout Canada, telling about this legislation being in the Statute books, and frightening them. The 

Premier told us last year of one Corporation that his office had been able to persuade to come to 

Saskatchewan, but because of statements made by certain members of the Opposition and publicity in 

the press, they had about made up their mind not to come to Saskatchewan, they were about to leave and 

had to be persuaded to come back again. 

 

Now, in order that we will be able to take away from our friends in the Opposition the great pleasure 

which they have had throughout the many years of being able to quote this Section, because we have no 

intention 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
24 

of using it whatsoever, and it is not necessary, therefore, we are suggesting that it be repealed. I move 

the second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, may I ask my hon. friend a question? What is the purpose of 

this section in the first place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if I may answer the question – I will assume that I haven‘t sat 

down and will answer the question, and I will do it in an orderly manner. 

 

The reason was that we followed the legislation which had been passed by the Liberal Government, in 

the years before, when they set up their Corporations. That was legislation which was to be found in the 

old Power Commission Act, in The Telephone Act, in The Highways Act and in The Public Works Act. 

It is in all these pieces of legislation that were passed by former Liberal administrations. I suppose the 

officers, when drafting the legislation, just assumed that this clause should be put in the Act, because it 

was in all these other Acts. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Are you going to delete it from other Acts, to? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Sure you will – to be honest with yourself. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — There are about 20 of them. I asked my friend if he proposes to delete it from the other 

Acts? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Moved by the Hon. Mr. Fines that Bill No. 9 be now read a second time. Is the House 

ready for the question? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — As I am the only member on this side of the House who was in the House when this 

legislation was brought in, I can clearly remember the arrogance and the over-bearing attitude of this 

whole C.C.F. Group. They were sitting over here and had this whole corner filled with C.C.F., and 

anything we said was laughed out of court absolutely, no matter what it was. We had the former Premier 

of the province, and Mr. Proctor. We had another lawyer over here – Mr. Hooge – and myself and Mr. 

Marion. That was the whole Opposition at that time. Well, Mr. Speaker, previous to the bringing in of 

this legislation – you had already expropriated or confiscated the Box Factory at Prince Albert on the 

basis of the principles involved in this legislation. This was a very handy thing, and after this legislation 

was placed on the Statute books, Mr. Speaker, immediately after the session was over, I have knowledge 

that the Premier went down to Manitoba and it was one of the things that he said there; and it came very 

natural, of course, because he was very proud of this legislation, and every C.C.F.er considered it the 

cornerstone of the edifice that he was going to build. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Hear! Hear! 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
25 

Mr. Danielson: — Now, the Premier made a speech and he said that he had laid first the foundation of 

the socialistic edifice in the province of Saskatchewan, and from then on, he was going to build the 

superstructure of this great undertaking. That is what he said, and no doubt he meant it. He meant it 

because that was his policy, that was the program upon which they were elected. They were going to 

eradicate the capitalists and they were going to take over all these things. They proposed that a long time 

before, not for one year, but for several years. Mr. Coldwell, and all the rest of them, were going to do 

these things. They were going to get rid of the hucksters and the shysters and the bankers and all these 

fellows who were sucking the life-blood out of the people of this province. That was their program and 

they had, no doubt, an honest intention to put it into effect, and I am dead sure, Mr. Speaker, that the 

thousands and thousands of gullible voters throughout the province of Saskatchewan who voted for 

them, believed that they were going to do these things. Let us go further. Every session until now that I 

have been sitting in this House (and that is 12, since this Government came in), they have got up on the 

floor of this House, particularly the Premier, and he has doubled up that little rabbit fist of his and he has 

said that this is the greatest political document ever written, and that he stands 100 per cent back of it, 

and that he is going to fight until the principles contained in that document are implemented in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, what has he done now? Have you ever in your life, Mr. Speaker, seen such a terrific turnover? 

Have you seen anyone who has so completely deserted his supporters and the principles on which he 

had been elected. When he ran the first time he was a Tory, he was a Social Credit and he was a C.C.F. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — He doesn‘t know what he is, yet. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He doesn‘t know what he is yet; but there is one thing he isn‘t now, and that is a 

C.C.F. if you believe what he says. Of course, I have heard so many things said by him that I don‘t 

believe anything he says; I have sat there too long, Mr. Speaker. You don‘t need to worry, I‘ll be here 

for a few years yet – and you won‘t like it, either/1 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what is the result of this legislation? The result of that legislation has been that 

millions and millions of dollars of investment would have come to this province has gone elsewhere 

where they could trust the government to be protected in their investments. That is one result. Thousands 

and thousands of young men and women have been going out of this province into the other provinces 

and other parts of Canada and the United States to find employment for their services which we could 

have had in the province of Saskatchewan. That is another thing which this legislation has done. 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
26 

This Government has scuttled and abandoned every single plank of their platform on which they were 

elected; every one of them. And they have thrown overboard not only the principles contained in their 

platform, but they have thrown overboard the fellow who supported the platform in previous elections. 

Don‘t for one minute, Mr. Speaker, think that I or anybody else who has any reason to think for 

ourselves, thinks that they are doing that because they don‘t believe in this socialistic business, that they 

don‘t believe in this confiscation and this eradication, of the hucksters and the shysters of this province. 

It‘s a peculiar thing, Mr. Speaker, this Provincial Treasurer went to bed with them last year, and he is 

sleeping with them right now. He took $5 ½ million of the people‘s credit of this province and gave it to 

the Cement Company here in Regina when the bank wouldn‘t take them on. That $5 ½ million would 

have set up at least 2,000 young farmers in the business of farming in the province of Saskatchewan. but 

he had to look after his ‗shyster‘ friends, and he is sleeping with them right now. That is what this 

Government has done. 

 

The reason this Bill is coming in is to try to save their own political skins. They know that they are 

fading away and will never return. For a few years the memory will linger perhaps, for some of us older 

people, but they will be gone and you will never know of them anymore. This province has been cursed 

for the last 12 years with this Government and the result is apparent everywhere. So, Mr. Speaker, this 

Government is making a belated attempt to save their political skins and their good jobs, and they now 

come forward with this Bill in this Legislature, and the Provincial Treasurer has the audacity – I‘m not 

blaming him for thinking we have no intelligence over here, but certainly he should have more respect 

for his own crowd over there, when he says that this section was put into this Act, because it was in 

every other Act. If he means anything and he isn‘t trying to fool the members of this House, it is his duty 

now to go to work and remove that expropriation clause out of every other Act, where it has been and 

where it remains as you well know, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is a sorry day for the C.C.F. It is a funeral dirge for the C.C.F. It is bound to be that, because any 

political party, any other organization that is engaged in any work that is for the general good and 

welfare of any people, when they abandon the principles on which they are founded and on which they 

are elected, they are gone. They are going as sure as the suns sets today, and if it could ever be said that 

any political party has ever ‗eaten crow‘, it‘s the C.C.F. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, before the hon. member 

sits down, could I ask a question? 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
27 

Mr. Danielson: — Sure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Is he going to support the motion? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Ha, ha, ha! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — May I say a few words on this motion. I thought it was rather an interesting 

situation when the hon. member rose in his place, and it was very hard to tell whether he was talking for 

the motion or against the motion, and I had to ask him the question, to find out which side he was 

arguing on. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — You wouldn‘t know, anyway. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: —Of course, the hon. member knows very well why this legislation is being 

repealed. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Sure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — It is being repealed for one reason only, and that is because the Liberal 

party is completely without ethics. That is why it is being repealed. 

 

Some Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You are without ethics. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Under other Acts, the Government has just as much power. The former 

Liberal Government in this province had just as much power to take property as they have under this 

Act; but because this Act was made uniform with the other Acts, then the Liberal members and the 

Liberal campaigners throughout this province and throughout Canada, not caring what damage they did 

to the province of Saskatchewan, quoted this, advertised it, and did all the hard they could with it. Now, 

it is being repealed, and what makes the hon. member from Arm River aggravated at this point, Mr. 

Speaker, is the fact that he won‘t be able to do this any more. That is what makes him mad: because he 

cannot now go out and quote the sections from The Public Works Act and The Highways and 

Transportation Act, or some other Act, because the Liberal Government passed that legislation, and that 

is the only thing that is worrying the member for Arm River. I would suggest to him that, in spite of his 

worry, he should support the motion. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. Minister a question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Sure. 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
28 

Mr. Danielson: — Why has he waited for 12 years to remove that section, when we had asked them 

repeatedly to do it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, we believe in humanity. We have a great faith in humanity, 

even to the extent that we had hoped that some day the hon. members in the Opposition would come to 

recognize treating this legislation decently, and as it should be treated. I am sorry to say that after 12 

years we gave up that hope. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Unregenerate. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask my hon. friend a question. Where in the world 

would this section apply to any humanitarian? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Confiscating property! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The hon. member for Saltcoats would not have asked that question if he had 

understood what I was saying. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a few words. It is going to be the shortest 

speech that ever was made in this House. The Provincial Treasurer made the greatest admission that I 

have ever heard of a member in the office that he holds having made. He convicted himself and his 

action by the effect of this Act when he said that he knows of companies who have refused to come to 

Saskatchewan as a result of this Act being on the Statute Books. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — That is not true. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, you said that. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — . . . and you blame it on the Liberals. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — I must insist that that statement be withdrawn. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — No. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, I am on the floor, will the hon. gentleman sit down? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — No, I have the right . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Will the hon. member please sit down while the Provincial Treasurer states his point 

of privilege? 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
29 

Mr. Loptson: — What is his point of privilege? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — The privilege is that the hon. gentleman attributes to me the statement that I said 

some company had refused to come to Saskatchewan because of this legislation on the book. I made no 

such a statement. What I did say was that companies, after the Industrial Development Office had got 

them to come here, because of statements made and because of press reports, had questioned whether or 

not they should remain, and it was only after the influence was brought to bear upon them by our 

Premier and the Industrial Development office that they decided to come. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, will the Provincial Treasurer give us the names of the companies 

referred to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, I shall certainly give no names. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Yeah! Just cooking something up. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! The hon. member for Saltcoats had already taken his seat. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — What‘s the matter, Mr. Speaker? You ordered me down, because he stood up on a 

point of privilege, and now you say I can‘t go on. I won‘t stand for that sort of stuff. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Make your speech. You have the floor. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well, I just want to say this. There is one thing I want to make clear to the hon. 

Provincial Treasurer, if he thinks that the Liberal Opposition is so powerful that they can so convince 

companies who have attorneys and all the legal advice as to the legal set-up in every province, that they 

are going to take political speeches from other political parties which will prevent them or scare them 

from coming into any province in Canada, or any province in the North American continent. The very 

fact was that they knew this thing was on the Statute books; they also know that it can be put back on the 

Statute books next year. They also know that while the Premier and the pts are now convinced 

themselves that private enterprise and capitalism is a pretty good thing, they still know that there are 

thousands of their supporters still believing in the old doctrine of the ‗Manifesto‘, and it is just a 

question of whether this thing is going to do very much good in inducing people to come in with more 

money. I don‘t think it will make any difference, because the Premier may not live forever. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb (Minister of Public Health): — We‘ll try to make it a difference. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — The Provincial Treasurer may be kicked out, and who is liable to come and take their 

place? 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
30 

Some Opposition Member: — Mr. Walker. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Mr. Walker? He would soon put it back again; and I venture to say that it wouldn‘t 

make any difference as far as I am concerned. I will support the Bill, sure; that section should never had 

been there. 

 

Mr. Isaak Elias (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, my neighbour said he would make the shortest speech. 

Well, I will make a shorter one still. 

 

I will be speaking on behalf of my colleagues and me in saying that we, as Social Crediters, were guilty 

of drawing the attention of the people of Saskatchewan to this section that is going to be withdrawn from 

The Crown Corporations Act. However, we don‘t feel guilty about it, and we are not aggravated either 

by having this section being repealed; but rather we feel greatly rewarded already that through our 

efforts this section is going to be repealed. I will support the Bill. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Leader of the Official Opposition ): — Mr. Speaker, with regard to the repeal 

of Section 8 of The Crown Corporations Act, I too, want to say that if one is guilty for pointing out the 

weaknesses of legislation, or what one considers to be weaknesses of legislation, then I am certainly 

very guilty for the speeches I have made both in and outside the province of Saskatchewan, and I have 

no apologies for making them, with regard to Section 8 of The Crown Corporations Act. Had the 

opposition, be it Social Credit, Liberal, Conservative, or any political party that is in opposition to a 

Socialist Party, not continuously brought to the attention of this Government and of the general public, 

the people of Saskatchewan, and of Canada and of the whole world, this Section 8 of The Crown 

Corporations Act, then it would have remained in the Statute books of this province. I am proud to have 

pointed out to the people of Saskatchewan and to the people of Canada just what legislation we had in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Naturally I am going to support the repeal of this section from The Crown Corporations Act. Why 

wouldn‘t I? I feel the same as the Social Credit; that we are the people responsible for the repealing of 

this legislation. I want to say here and now that if the Provincial Treasurer wants to come into this House 

and say that certain companies have been hesitant about coming into Saskatchewan because we 

continuously told them of legislation that existed in this province, then I think, if he wants to make those 

kind of remarks, he should name the companies to this Legislature. 

 

As far as I am concerned, people have approached me from other parts of Canada, asking about Section 

8 of The Crown Corporations Act. Am I supposed to say, ―Oh no, it isn‘t there?‖ Mr. Speaker? Certainly 

I am not. 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
31 

It is my duty to point out to anyone who asks me what legislation exists in this province, to point out that 

legislation to them and to tell them exactly what it means. 

 

This Section 8 of The Crown Corporations Act, it is quite true, has hindered the development of this 

province more than even the ‗Regina Manifesto‘. The ‗Regina Manifesto‘ as I told you a few days ago, 

is like all documents that are produced by a prince or someone who thinks they have large powers. It 

doesn‘t mean very much until such time as it is backed up by legislation; and that Section 8 is part of the 

social security legislation that was passed by this Socialist Government, legislation that was responsible 

for keeping millions of dollars in investments out of this province, and creating a condition whereby 

thousands of young people in the province of Saskatchewan were forced to go elsewhere to receive 

gainful employment. I am certainly going to support the amendment in the Bill, and I am not going to 

feel the least bit sorry for having pointed out to the people of this province and to the people of Canada, 

that this legislation existed in this province, and in my opinion, it should be repealed at an earliest 

possible date. 

 

We have been attempting to tell this Government the feelings of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, and the feelings of people who have money to invest with regard to Section 8 of The 

Crown Corporations Act now for 12 years. How come it has taken them 12 years to realize the harm this 

section was doing to this province? Why didn‘t you repeal it last year? Why didn‘t you repeal it the year 

before? Why didn‘t you repeal it in 1946 or why did you ever put it in there in the first place? Mr. 

Speaker, the only reason it was ever put on the Statute books of this province was to back up the policy 

that was enunciated in the ‗Regina Manifesto‘ – now they want to compare the Manifesto to the 

‗Winnipeg Declaration‘. Well, if they are going to back up the political enunciations of the ‗Winnipeg 

Declaration‘, then you are going to need another Section 8 of some kind to back it up. Mr. Speaker, I 

will be pleased to support the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, before the hon. Leader of the Opposition sits down, he would like to 

have names given. May I ask him to give the names of the companies involved in the hundreds of 

millions of dollars that have been cast out of this province? Could he give us the names of those 

companies? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You give me yours first. In answering the question, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that 

if the Minister of Agriculture (Hon. Mr. Nollet) and the Provincial Treasurer (Hon. Mr. Fines) will 

supply the information that I have asked from the, then I will certainly supply the information that he 

asks now. 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
32 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): — Mr. Speaker, if you will permit me I would like to ask the hon. Leader of 

the Opposition a question for the purpose of information. To what extent does the member believe the 

repeal of this Section will reduce, change or alter the power of expropriation that the Government has? 

To what extent will it change the power that we have of expropriation? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You are as able to read the Act as I am, and I suggest you read it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is the House ready for the question? 

 

Premier Douglas: — I would just like to say a word, and that is to assure the House that, in spite of the 

blustering of the Leader of the Opposition, hundreds of millions of dollars have not been kept out of the 

province by this legislation. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You certainly have. 

 

Premier Douglas: — If the hon. member doesn‘t mind I will say what I said; I don‘t need him to state 

what I said. He doesn‘t say what he has to say himself very well, and I don‘t need any help from him to 

tell me what I said, or what I am going to say. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — He is more truthful than you are. 

 

Premier Douglas: — No one would ever accept the member from Saltcoats as being an authority on 

truth. I can‘t imagine any commodity to which he would be a greater stranger. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I can prove my statements; you can‘t prove yours! 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, there haven‘t been firms with hundreds of millions of dollars kept 

out of the province. I don‘t need to go over, and argue, that point. There has never been as much money 

invested in Saskatchewan in industrial development of various sorts in any 10-year period as there has 

been during the last 10 years. I don‘t need to go back and argue that. It is bordering on the hypocritical 

to make a great fuss about this Section 8 of The Crown Corporations Act because there isn‘t a provincial 

government in Canada, Alberta included, that does not have wide-powers of expropriation. I suggest to 

my friend from Rosthern (Mr. Elias) that he read, for instance, the Alberta Power Commission Act, 

which gives very wide powers not only to expropriate land, but to even expropriate a company and to 

take over its staff. Those are powers about which I am not complaining. I am simply pointing out that 

those powers exist and are possessed by every provincial government in Canada, and by the Federal 

Government. There has been, in many cases, a malicious campaign to fasten on this particular section, 

while completely ignoring the fact that similar sections obtained in 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
33 

other provincial legislation in almost every province in Canada. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — Oh, bunk! 

 

Premier Douglas: — Therefore, since the Liberal Party and some of the Liberal press have seen fit to 

try to make this section the cause of disquiet in any part of the country, then we feel that, in that case, we 

would be better to take it out. Because of the type of publicity which has emanated from some Liberal 

editorial writer. . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — What a confession! 

 

Premier Douglas: — . . . whose articles have gone into the papers in various parts of eastern Canada 

and the United States, we feel that we might just as well make our path easier rather than more difficult. 

But I say that industry has not been kept out, and I say that the powers possessed by the Government in 

this Section are powers which are no broader than powers that have been possessed by every 

Government in Canada. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Why take it out, then? 

 

Premier Douglas: — Therefore, if we are going to be faced by a partisan press and by partisan 

politicians who are going to endeavour to hurt the province for the sake of any political advantage, then, 

of course, we are better to take the section out. And I can understand the vituperation and the venom of 

the member from Arm River (Mr. Danielson). We are taking his rattle away from him! 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — You don‘t need a rattle. 

 

Premier Douglas: — The little baby is losing his lollipop. He isn‘t going to have something to brandish 

up and down the Arm River constituency. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That‘s right. 

 

Premier Douglas: — He‘s not going to have something to make speeches about. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I don‘t need it. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, after 12 years he is going to have to make a new speech. Won‘t that 

be an experience: the member from Arm River with a new speech and a new text! It‘s going to be an 

earth-shaking event, and I can understand my friend feeling so badly that we have taken it away from 

him; but when he has supported the Bill (and I hope he will) and the House has passed it, he can start 

tomorrow morning on a new speech, a new text and scripture. I shall support the motion. 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
34 

Mr. McDonald: — The Premier could use a new one, too. 

 

Mr. B.L. Korchinski (Redberry): — I was really surprised to hear the Premier call this Section a 

‗baby‘s rattle and a lollipop! 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege. I don‘t intend to be misquoted by the hon. 

gentleman who apparently is not able to follow what I was saying. I was not speaking of the Section 

when I talked about lollipops. I was talking about the favourite argument and the favourite cliché of the 

member from Arm River. That is what I was referring to when I talked about the lollipop. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier said that this particular Act, or Section of the Act, was 

used as a lollipop or as a rattle. The thing is recorded; I suppose it is in the records. We can get the 

records tomorrow of what he said, exactly. I think it is quite a known fact there is a general Socialist 

retreat all over the world. I think it started with Mr. Krushchev going down to Mr. Stalin. 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — We‘ll be in Russia in just a minute. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Well, we don‘t have to go to Russia; we have them here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — You were there four years ago. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — It doesn‘t matter. I‘m back again; you don‘t have to worry about that. We have here 

an admission from two or three Ministers of the Government that this was a wrong Section to have on 

the books . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Oh, no. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — . . . and that the press and the Opposition had succeeded in creating an atmosphere 

where it forces them to withdraw the principles for which they stand. That is exactly what happened here 

today – an absolute admission that they were wrong, that they had been wrong for 12 years, and finally 

have come to their senses. I will support this motion. 

 

(The Motion for Second Reading of Bill No. 9 was then agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee 

of the Whole at next sitting.) 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
35 

Bill No. 17 – An Act to amend The Contributory 

Negligence Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker (Attorney General): —Mr. Speaker, there is a new principle in this Bill by reason of 

Section 3 of the Act where two tort feasors have been sued jointly for a tort and the Court finds that both 

are at fault it may attribute the damages, or award the damages against the two tort feasors in proportion 

to the amount which the Court feels they are at fault. 

 

This amendment provides that such an adjudication can be made by the Court even where one of the 

joint tort feasors has settled the claim and has not been assisted by the other joint tort feasor; so the first 

one may sue the second for a determination of the fair division of responsibility for the tort. This will 

have the effect of making it possible for insurance companies, for example, to settle claims brought by 

other persons, by persons who are injured, and then if the other person at fault is not prepared to make a 

reasonable contribution to share the damages, the damages can be determined by an action in the Court. 

As it is now the only way the Court could possible adjudicate the responsibility between the two tort 

feasors is where one of them has been sued. We want to eliminate the necessity for suit in cases where a 

reasonable settlement is offered and this will eliminate the need for insurance companies waiting to be 

sued in order to have the liability of the other tort feasor determined. I moved Second Reading of the 

Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Could it not be done before with court action between companies? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I am afraid the hon. member has misunderstood me. Settlement could be made, 

but, in the event that an other person had contributed to the injury, if the settlement was made there was 

no way of making the other person contribute his fair sharer of the liability. Once the settlement had 

been made the matter was out of the hands of the Court and there was no explicit provision in the Act to 

allow the one who had settled to bring the matter before the Court, after settlement had been made, to 

arrive at a fair division of the costs. The result of it was, of course, that where two people were at fault 

and one was willing to settle, he would naturally have to refuse to settle until he had been sued in order 

to get the matter before the Court and have the degree of liability established by the courts. There was no 

way of having that degree of liability established by the courts except by waiting to be sued by the 

person who was injured. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — It doesn‘t seem reasonable, does it? 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
36 

Mr. McDonald: — Has this amendment been requested by some company or some organization? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — This amendment is in line with an amendment which had been introduced to the 

Tort Feasors Act in the province of Ontario two years ago. A check was made to see what the situation 

was in other provinces, and in Alberta and Manitoba roughly similar legislation is provided. In order to 

bring ours into line with that in the other provinces we recommend this amendment. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Is this similar to the Ontario legislation? Would it be closer to Ontario than that of 

Manitoba or Alberta? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Yes, that‘s right. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Well, if you don‘t mind my asking: what is the difference between the proposed 

amendment here and the existing legislation in – I think it was Manitoba and Alberta you mentioned? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: —The only difference is a choice of words. We think the effect is the same, but we 

chose the Ontario words because we thought they were clearer; and further, we chose the Ontario 

section because there have been some cases in Ontario where these words have been judicially 

interpreted, and we weren‘t able to find any cases in Alberta or Manitoba where those words had been 

before the court. We preferred to take the wording which had been subject to some judicial test and 

examination. 

 

Mrs. Batten (Humboldt): — May I ask a question? I assume this means that the tort feasor who is 

suing his fellow tort feasor would have to prove the liability as well as the damages. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — That is right. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — In the second court? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — That‘s right. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — And is there a limitation? Does the Statute of Limitations apply, or are you putting in a 

separate section for a limitation of time in which the first tort feasor can bring action? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Well, as I understand the limitation, it only applies to the person who is injured, 

or killed in a fatal accident. Such person must bring the action within the time limited, and that is only 

six months in the case of a motor vehicle, or two years in the case of a fatal accident. The general period 

of limitations 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
37 

would apply to an action brought under this Section because the Statute of Limitations wouldn‘t apply. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — My question, Mr. Speaker, would be whether the limitation that would apply is that the 

limitation for a tort action or is this an action contra-active? I would suggest that it is not actually an 

action in tort. 

  

Hon. Mr. Walker: — The Contributory Negligence Act, of course, applies primarily to tort actions. 

This would have no application in contract. I would think – offhand I shouldn‘t be giving legal opinions; 

but the Section is designed to merely extend the rights of a defendant or a person against whom damages 

have been awarded under The Contributory Negligence Act, and would apply to tort actions. I would be 

glad to look into any question you might want to raise on the matter and consider it in Committee. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — My question is: the first tort feasor is not suing in tort, strictly speaking – and what 

limitation does apply? 

 

(The Motion for second reading was then agreed to, 

and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at next sitting.) 

 

Bill No. 23 – An Act to amend The Land Contracts 

(Actions) Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker (Attorney General): —Mr. Speaker, as all members know, the Mediation Board has 

certain powers in actions pertaining to land contracts under The Farm Security Act, pertaining to 

mortgage foreclosures, foreclosures of agreements for sale and so on. All foreclosure actions, however, 

must first of all be launched before the local master who is usually the district court judge in the district, 

and his consent must be obtained before a Writ of Summons can be issued in any foreclosure or 

cancellation action. The result is that anyone seeking to foreclose a mortgage must apply to the local 

master, giving (I think it is) 14 days‘ notice (or is it 21?) of hearing, and the local master may adjourn 

the thing from time to time for a period of either eight or nine months, and then, if he consents, a Writ of 

Summons may be taken out and court proceedings started for foreclosure. At that point the Mediation 

Board is notified of the action, and when that has happened the mortgagee or vendor has already 

incurred considerable expense. He has gone to the expense of making application to the local master for 

which he cannot recover costs against the defendant, and very often the Mediation Board, at that stage 

(after the summons has been issued) is able to effect a compromise arrangement to the mutual 

satisfaction of the vendor and purchaser, or mortgager and mortgagee. 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
38 

Such a compromise is always made more difficult by reason of the fact that the vendor or mortgagee has 

already incurred a large legal bill (not large in proportion, but substantial legal fees in the matter), under 

The land Contract (Actions) Act. 

 

It is intended, by this amendment, to notify the Mediation Board immediately the application is made 

under The Land Contract (Actions) Act, which brings the Mediation Board‘s facilities and services into 

play at the very beginning of the action – at the beginning, in fact, of the intended action before the local 

master, which will relieve mortgage companies and vendors of the necessity of being uncertain, 

throughout the period of three to eight or nine months, as to what the Mediation Board can do to effect a 

settlement. And since foreclosures and mortgages are the only actions that require this preliminary step, 

or at least the main body of actions requiring this preliminary step, it is in that field particularly where 

the services of the Mediation Board are most often needed. It is felt that the Mediation Board should 

have an opportunity to consult the parties and to try to effect a settlement at as early a stage as possible, 

namely, when the vendor or mortgages first gives his notice of intention to start a foreclosure action. I 

move Second Reading of this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mrs. Batten (Humboldt): — This amendment to the Act, in my opinion, is unnecessary. It is an 

expensive procedure, a cumbersome procedure, and what is more I think, Mr. Speaker, it is an insult to 

the local master who heard these applications. I don‘t know if the hon. Attorney General has had many 

applications of this nature. 

 

I don‘t pretend to be a spokesman for mortgage companies. My relationship with mortgage companies 

has been rather unpleasant – I have usually been the mortgager that they are after. In many cases in the 

part of the country where I practise law an old gentleman retires, and when he retires he sells his farm 

and, under present conditions, you, sir know very well it is impossible to get cash payments in many 

cases. He sells the land; he gets an agreement for sale, and then comes the time when, if the purchaser is 

unscrupulous, he will often listen to political speakers, often on the Government side of the House, who 

tell him that he is protected and he no longer has to honour his payment under an agreement for sale. I 

have heard this evidence in court, under sworn testimony, as no doubt has my hon. friend if he has had 

any experience in court. And the suggestion now is that they go before the Provincial Mediation Board. 

Well I submit, Mr. Speaker, that no mortgagee, no vendor of land, ever comes directly to a master, goes 

to the court and asks to cancel an agreement unless he has tried over and over again, by negotiation with 

the purchaser, to reach some type of agreement. 

 

In my opinion there is no action ever commenced, or any action that would be entertained by any local 

master, unless the man who is coming 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
39 

in and asking for an order to commence action for foreclosure could show that he has endeavoured to 

compromise, endeavoured to give extensions of time and that those endeavours have been frustrated. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, when they come before the local mater, they are there visibly – they can give 

evidence at the courthouse that is closest to their place of residence, in their own judicial district. They 

don‘t have to travel all the way to Regina. They swear their evidence. 

 

I have had many things to do with the Provincial Mediation Board, and if it happens that one party that 

is being negotiated with is unscrupulous, there is no reason why they can‘t lie in their letters and say, ―I 

have no crop‖, when they have a crop, and so on and so forth. This often happens. In sworn testimony 

and affidavit evidence they cannot do that, and I submit, Mr. Speaker, that the only place for this 

evidence is before the local master. If you are not gong to give the local master that jurisdiction; if it is 

first going to go to the Provincial Mediation board you might just as well take the jurisdiction away from 

him, because he is not serving any useful purpose. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, if I speak now I will be closing the debate. Do I take it that I have 

leave to proceed? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If the hon. member speaks now he will be closing the debate. Anyone wishing to 

speak on it must do so now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, I have a good deal of sympathy with what the hon. member has 

said. I know of many cases where the local master has been able to effect settlements of these matters, 

and my experience with them has been very satisfactory. I hope that this won‘t be construed anywhere 

as being a slap in the face at the local masters. As a matter of fact, I took the liberty of inquiring of some 

of them as to their opinion on this proposal and I found that it merited their approval; but, of course I 

haven‘t consulted with all of them, and I wouldn‘t care to use that as an argument because I am not 

prepared to reveal my conversations. But one of the problems which has perplexed local masters in the 

handling of these applications is that, in a great many cases, the intended defendant doesn‘t show up for 

the hearing, and I have several times had cases brought to my attention where, after the final order of 

foreclosure has been obtained, it has been brought to my attention that some of these people want 

protection; they didn‘t appear before the local master, whether it was because they believed the political 

speeches of some of us that they thought they didn‘t need to, or just what the reason was, I don‘t know; 

but the Mediation Board doesn‘t wait for them to come to Regina in these matters. They write them and 

if they get no reply, or there is no interest shown, 



 

February 22, 1957 

 

 
40 

they telephone and they go out to the farm and see the situation and make inquiries, make direct 

inquiries in many cases, and in many cases they do this where the defendant wouldn‘t have attended the 

hearing at all. 

 

I would not introduce this if I felt this was going to result in any hostility on the part of the local masters. 

They have done an excellent job; but I think the hon. member will concede that the powers contained in 

The Land Contracts (Actions) Act and the things which the local master may take into account doesn‘t 

necessarily exhaust the whole field; there are still other matters which might fairly be taken into account 

but which aren‘t contained in The Land Contracts (Actions) Act. I can think of several things. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — What are they? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I haven‘t got the Act in front of me, but the Board has the power to look much 

further afield than the local master. And this will not deny the jurisdiction of the local master, because, if 

the Board decides that it cannot effect a compromise or a settlement, then the proceedings will go on just 

as they have always done before the local master – get his consent, issue the writ and proceed to 

foreclosure. So this doesn‘t take away from him any jurisdiction except in those cases where settlement 

can be voluntarily reached by the vendor and purchaser or mortgager and mortgagee by the Board. 

 

We are not seeking this with the idea of seeking wider powers for the Mediation Board at all. It is only 

to get the Mediation Board into the picture at as early a date as possible so that if their good offices do 

prevail it will save the parties the legal expenses up to that point, and that is the purpose of the thing. It 

doesn‘t increase the powers. It only puts them in at an earlier stage of the proceedings. 

 

(The Motion for second reading was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at next 

sitting.) 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 5:30 o‘clock p.m. 


