



















































Hansard: April 04, 1957


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

36th Day 

 

Thursday, April 4, 1957 
 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

CONCURRENCE IN TIME REPORT 

 

Moved by Mr. Stone, seconded by Mr. Thorson, 

 

“That the first Report of the Select Standing Committee on Municipal Law be now concurred in.” 

 

Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon City):  Mr. Speaker, as Chairman of the Select Standing Committee on 

Municipal Law, the Committee had an opportunity to study the results of the Time plebiscite which was 

taken last fall, and to say there were varied opinions is putting it very mildly. there was some 

consideration as to whether we could extend the two Time Zones that presently exist, or whether we 

should try to bring about one time zone for the whole province. In the consideration of the Committee it 

was felt that we should at least introduce a modified form of one Time Zone: 

 

I don’t think the Committee was unanimous. There were some who possibly were opposed to the idea, 

but at least we did get a reasonable support for the recommendations contained in the Report, which are 

as follows: 

 

1. That the whole Province of Saskatchewan be placed in the same time zone, and that Mountain 
Standard Time obtain during the winter months and Central Standard Time during the summer 

months. 

 

2. That the necessary legislation to give effect to the said recommendation be prepared with all 

convenient speed for presentation to the Assembly at the earliest date possible. 

 

The motion was agreed to, on division, by 28 votes against 21. 



 

April 4, 1957 

 

 

2 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 96 -– An Act to Amend the School Grants Act. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Minister of Education):  Mr. Speaker, this Bill to amend The School Grants Act 

is the first of three bills necessary to give effect to the proposed grant changes of which I have 

previously spoken in the Legislature. Since, during the Budget debate, I did speak at some considerable 

length with regard to the basis of the proposals which will govern all of these three Acts, and since I 

have, since that time, distributed considerable information to all the members with regard to the 

proposals and the way in which they will be affected, I think it is not necessary for me to speak at any 

particular length at this time. 

 

The Act to amend The School Grants Act will provide the changes in so far s the schools which operate 

under The School Act are concerned, but which are not in school units or not in secondary school 

groups, and The School Units Act will provide changes for the other group. In short, then, for that group 

of schools, Mr. Speaker, this provides for the increase in the basic grant of $300 a year, making our 

minimum grant for elementary schools $900 and for high schools $1,100, and provides also for a basis 

of equalization for those districts which qualify. 

 

I would move second reading of the Bill. 

 

Mr. F.E. Foley (Turtleford):  Mr. Speaker, do we have an opportunity of questioning on Second 

Readings? Can I speak to the motion? 

 

Mr. Speaker:  You cannot ask questions relating to specific sections. 

 

Mr. Foley:  I just was concerned about the part where it suggests the equalization basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  The question must be reserved for the Committee of the Whole. 

 

(Motion agreed to, and Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at next sitting.) 



 

April 4, 1957 

 

 

3 

Bill No. 97 –- An Act to Amend The Secondary Education Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd Legislative:  Mr. Speaker, as I intimated previously, this provides for the increased 

grants to those districts operating under The Secondary Education Act. Just a brief word of explanation 

as to what and where the schools are. In a number of our centres we do have, in addition to the public 

school and secondary school districts, a secondary school district, and this secondary school district 

provides for the whole community classrooms of high school grades. 

 

There is a secondary district in each of our cities, and in some of our towns. The remaining districts 

which operate high school rooms do so, some under The School Act and some under The School Act 

and The School Units Act. The same provisions apply here, and I would move Second Reading of this 

Bill. 

 

(Motion agreed to, and Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at next sitting.) 


