



















































Hansard: March 25, 1957


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

28th Day 

 

Monday, March 25, 1957 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

SECOND READING 
 

Bill No. 79 – An Act to authorize the Government of Saskatchewan to enter into a Tax Rental 

Agreement with the Government of Canada. 
 

Hon. C. M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer):  Mr. Speaker, this is the Tax Rental Agreement with the 

Federal Government. During the Budget Address I outlined in some detail the terms of this Agreement. I 

also did so a year ago. Therefore, because it is all on the record, I feel there is little to be said at this 

time, except that this is an Agreement under which we rent our three major fields of taxation – income 

tax, corporation tax and succession duties – to the Federal Government for a period of five years, from 

1957 to 1962. 

 

This Agreement is in some respects better than the previous one. Had we continued under the old 

Agreement we would have received, this year, approximately $31.4 million, whereas under the 

Agreement as it is now we shall receive approximately $34 million; so we are going to be about $2½ 

million better off by this new Agreement. 

 

The basic differences in this Agreement and the old one is that the old one fixed a definite minimum, 

and then the payment to the Province went up according to the population of the Province in relation to 

the population of the Dominion, and also in relation to the increase in the gross national production. 

With this, what we do is to simply take the yield that would be obtained with the tax being applied in the 

Provinces of British Columbia and Ontario – or in other words, the two provinces that get the highest 

return – and then every Province is given this amount per capita. I could go on to discuss the different 

ways in which this is made up, but, to put it very simply, it means that it is determined what each 

Province would collect were they levying the standard tax rate and then they will get, by way of 

equalization payment, the difference between that and the per capita payment I have referred to paid by 

the Federal authorities. 

 

So we expect, this year, to get $34 million, and if the gross national production continues to go up, and if 

business continues to go up in British Columbia and in Ontario so that their yield is particularly high, 



 

March 25, 1957 

 

 

2 

and if our population is maintained at its present level, or increases, we will naturally get more year-by-

year. 

 

There are weaknesses in the Agreement. We would like to have seen more attention paid to the principle 

of equalization. We would like to have seen, for example, those Provinces which are away below the 

national average and that haven’t taxing power in other fields, get more. I think, for example of the 

Maritime Provinces; and that is one of the things that we endeavoured to get into the Agreement but we 

were not successful in doing so. 

 

However, on the whole there is no question but that it is in the best interests of Saskatchewan that we 

should have this Tax Rental Agreement. We in this province do not have many large incomes. It is true 

we pay a great many of these large incomes to people who reside in the province of Ontario and the 

province of Quebec, where the head offices of these big corporations are. The same is true of our 

corporation tax. We do not collect large amounts, and would not be able to collect large amounts of this 

tax; yet there is no doubt but that the people of Saskatchewan do pay a tremendous amount toward the 

income of these corporations, which enables them to pay the tax. the same is true, one might say, with 

respect to succession duties. Because we haven’t a great many wealthy people here, and because many 

of the wealthy people, after they have made their fortunes, go out to the west coast to die, the result in, 

of course, we do not get their succession duties. 

 

So, from our point of view, we are one of the Provinces that benefit under the Tax Rental Agreement, 

and because it is in the best interests of the province and because it will at least do something towards 

ironing out the differences in income between the different parts of Canada, and because it does at least 

have some element of equalization in it we were very happy to agree to enter into this Tax Rental 

Agreement. 

 

I must apologize to the House on behalf of the Premier and myself, for both stating, without getting the 

consent of the House, that we would recommend this to the Legislature, Mr. Speaker, but naturally it 

had to be done. It couldn’t wait. I would move the second reading of this Bill. 

 

(Motion agreed to, and Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at next sitting.) 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:35 o’clock p.m. 


