




















































Hansard: February 14, 1957


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

1st Day 

 

Thursday, February 14, 1957 

 

10 o’clock a.m. 

 

This being the first day of the meeting of the First Session of the Thirteenth Legislature of the Province 

of Saskatchewan for the despatch of business, pursuant to a Proclamation of His Honour the Honourable 

William John Patterson, LL.D., Lieutenant-Governor of the Province, dated the Eleventh day of January, 

1957, George Stephen, Clerk of the Legislative Assembly, Commissioner designated by His Honour the 

Lieutenant-Governor for administering the Oath to the Members of the Legislative Assembly, attending 

according to his duty, Horace Stanley Lee, Clerk of the Executive Council, delivered to the said George 

Stephen a Roll containing a list of names of such Members as had been returned to serve in this 

Legislature, as follows, viz: 

 

OFFICE OF THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL, SASKATCHEWAN 

REGINA, JANUARY 15, 1957 

  

To: George Stephen,, Esq., 

  Clerk of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan: 

 

This is to certify that by reason of the dissolution of the Twelfth Legislative Assembly of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, and by virtue of Writs of Election dated the eighth day of May last, and addressed to the 

hereinafter mentioned persons as Returning Officers for the Constituencies in the Province set opposite 

their respective names, for the election of Members to represent the said Constituencies in the 

Legislative Assembly, the following persons have been gazetted as duly elected to represent the 

Constituencies set forth below, as appears by the Returns to the said Writs deposited in my office, viz: 

 
Constituency Member Elected Returning Officer 

   

Arm River G.H. Danielson J. Flynn 

Athabaska J.J. Harrop R. King 

Bengough A.L.S. Brown W. Surdia 

Biggar W.S. Lloyd A.G. Vetzal 

Cannington R.A. McCarthy N. Wallace 

Canora A.G. Kuziak P.E. Crokenko 

Cutknife I.C. Nollet A. Bullock 

Cumberland W.J. Berezowsky E.B. Arnason 

Elrose M.J. Willis W.D. McKaig 

Gravelbourg L.P. Coderre R.H. Baragar 

Hanley R.A. Walker S. Dwornik 

Humboldt M.J. Batten O.J. Buschmann 

 



 

February 14, 1957 

 

 
2 

 
Constituency Member Elected Returning Officer 

   

Kelsey J.H. Brockelbank R. Wilson 

Kelvington P.A. Howe R.H. Boyes 

Kerrobert-Kindersley E.A. Johnson W.H. Chrysler 

Kinistino H. Begrand H. Paine 

Last Mountain R. Brown W. Hamilton 

Lumsden C.H. Thurston H. Witkowski 

Maple Creek A.C. Cameron J.A. Trew 

Meadow Lake A.P. Weber C. Woodman 

Melfort-Tisdale C.G. Willis D.J. Vansickle 

Melville J.W. Gardiner D. Senft 

Milestone J.W. Erb E.B. Moats 

Moose Jaw City W.G. Davies  

 D.H.R. Heming N. McKinnon 

Moosomin A.H. McDonald N.W. Noren 

Morse J. Gibson P. Unroe 

Nipawin L.N. Nicholson J.A. Kuchapski 

Notukeu-Willowbunch K. Klein O. Knops 

Pelly J.R. Barrie A. Klimchuk 

Prince Albert L.F. McIntosh J.J. Wheaton 

Qu’Appelle-Wolseley D.T. McFarlane D.K. Ramsay 

Redberry B.L. Korchinski D. Michayluk 

Regina City M. Cooper  

 C.M. Fines C.S. Martin 

 C.C. Williams  

Rosetown J.T. Douglas J.M. MacEachern 

Rosthern I. Elias A.G. Dyck 

Saltcoats A. Loptson V. Rooke 

Saskatoon City A. T. Stone  

 J.H. Sturdy D.S. Newsham 

Shaunavon T.J. Bentley S. Hanna 

Shellbrook J. Thiessen V.W. Davies 

Souris-Estevan K. Thorson C.M. Ching 

Swift Current E.I. Wood L. Carefoot 

The Battlefords E. Kramer A. Peterson 

Touchwood F. Meakes F.N. West 

Turtleford F.E. Foley A.E. Jacques 

Wadena F.A. Dewhurst C.W. Roberts 

Watrous J.A. Darling J. Riben 

Weyburn T.C. Douglas P.G. Barrett 

Wilkie J. Horsman W.A. Haight 

Yorkton F. Neibrandt J. Popoff 

 

H.S. L 

Clerk of the Executive Council. 

 

The said Commissioner having previously administered the Oath to the Members who appeared, and the 

Members having subscribed the Roll containing the Oath, they took their seats in the Assembly at 3 

o’clock p.m. 



 

February 14, 1957 

 

 
3 

3 o’clock p.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor entered the Chamber and took his seat on the Throne. 

 

The Honourable Mr. Brown, Provincial Secretary, then said: 

 

―I am commanded by His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor to inform you that he does not see fit to 

declare the causes of the summoning of the present Legislature until later today, when the Legislative 

Assembly shall have elected a Speaker, according to law.‖ 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor then retired from the Chamber. 

 

The Honourable Mr. Douglas (Weyburn), addressing himself to the clerk, moved, seconded by the 

Honourable Mr. Fines, that James Andrew Darling, Esquire Member for the Constituency of Watrous, 

do take the Chair of this Assembly as Speaker. 

 

The question being put by the Clerk, it was 

 

Resolved, nemine contradicente, that James Andrew Darling, Esquire, do take the Chair of this 

Assembly as Speaker. 

 

The Clerk having declared James Andrew Darling, Esquire, duly elected, he was conducted to the Chair, 

where, standing on the upper step, he returned his humble acknowledgements to the Assembly for the 

great honour they had been pleased to confer upon him by choosing him to be their Speaker. 

 

Thereupon he took the Chair, and the Mace was laid on the Table. 

 

3:15 o’clock p.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor re-entered the Chamber and took his seat upon the Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker then addressed His Honour to the following effect: 

 

May it please Your Honour, —  

 

The Legislative Assembly have elected me as their Speaker, although I am but little able to fulfill the 

important duties thus assigned to me. 

 

If, in the performance of those duties, I should at any time 



 

February 14, 1957 

 

 
4 

fall into error, I pray that the fault may be imputed to me and not to the Assembly whose servant I am, 

and who, through me, the better to enable them to discharge their duty to their Queen and country, 

hereby humbly claim all their undoubted rights and privileges, especially that they may have freedom of 

speech in their debates, access to your person at all seasonable times, and that their proceedings may 

receive from you the most favourable consideration. 

 

The Honourable Mr. Brown, Provincial Secretary, then said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, —  I am commanded by His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor to declare to you that he 

freely confides in the duty and attachment of the Assembly to Her Majesty’s person and Government, 

and not doubting that their proceedings will be conducted with wisdom, temper and prudence, he grants, 

and upon all occasions will recognize and allow, their constitutional privileges. 

 

I am commanded also to assure you that the Assembly shall have ready access to His Honour upon all 

seasonable occasions, and that its proceedings, as well as your words and actions, will constantly receive 

from him the most favourable construction. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor was then pleased to open the Session with the following Speech:– 

 

Mr. Speaker and Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my privilege to welcome you to the First Session of the Thirteenth Legislature of Saskatchewan. 

 

Last year the third largest crop in the history of the Province was harvested. Due largely to low wheat 

quotas farmers reduced their wheat acreage from the previous year. Continued restrictions on grain 

deliveries plague the agricultural industry with a shortage of ready cash to meet current farm expenses. 

It is regretted that the request of this Assembly for cash advances on farm-stored grain has been ignored. 

However, on a long-term basis the most serious threat to agricultural solvency is rising farm costs and 

falling farm prices. 

 

Last year the Select Special Committee on Marketing and Farm Income made recommendations to meet 

an emergency situation in respect of declining farm income and to meet chronic or recurring farm 

income problems related to pricing and marketing. My Government regrets that the Government of 

Canada has not seen fit to adopt the measures recommended by this Committee and approved by the 

Legislature. 

 

It is gratifying to note an increase in the acreage devoted to forage crops and a corresponding increase in 

livestock production. The Government will again submit for your approval clearing and breaking, 

irrigation and drainage programs designed to further develop the diversification and stability of our farm 

economy. 



 

February 14, 1957 

 

 
5 

My Government continues to recognize that the construction of the South Saskatchewan River 

development project will contribute materially to the stabilizing of the provincial economy. The 

Government is willing to co-operate with the Government of Canada to undertake the construction of 

this project immediately and will pay its fair share of the cost as soon as the Federal Government is 

prepared to proceed. 

 

My Government has continued to discuss federal-provincial financial relations with the Government of 

Canada. Legislation authorizing the Government to enter into a new agreement providing for the rental 

of personal and corporation income taxes and succession duties to the Government of Canada will be 

submitted for your approval. 

 

Last December a conference was held with representatives of local governing bodies to discuss 

problems faced by local governments. It is gratifying to note that the delegates to this conference 

endorsed in principle the establishment of a continuing committee representing all the participating 

bodies to study re-organization and re-allocation of finance and responsibilities. It is hoped that all 

organizations representing local governments will agree to the setting up of the continuing committee. 

 

During 1956 the number of wells capable of producing oil or gas increased at a rate of fifteen per week. 

The 1956 production of oil and gas in our province exceeded in value the total of all previous 

production. Approximately 2,500 wells produced over twenty million barrels of oil and almost twenty 

billion cubic feet of natural gas. It is expected that 1,200 wells will be drilled in 1957 and that oil 

production will reach thirty-five million barrels. 

 

The number of mineral claims recorded continues at a high level. Claims staked last year reflect a shift 

from the concentration on uranium prospecting to a greater emphasis on the search for nickel and 

copper. The value of uranium production almost doubled in 1956. Uranium milling facilities in Northern 

Saskatchewan have been increased from 1,950 to 3,650 tons per day. 

 

A third mill, designed to process uranium ore from other mines in the Beaverlodge area, will go into 

operation in the spring. The total production of minerals continues to set new records. Last year the 

value of mineral production in our province exceeded $110,000,000. 

 

Several industrial concerns interested in the production of wood pulp, blockboard and wallboard have 

signed option agreements. This is indicative of the changing emphasis in the forest industry of our 

province from that of a saw-timber economy to a more intensive utilization of our timber resources. 

 

The fishing industry of our province continues to expand. The construction of a new filleting plant at 

Wollaston Lake will make possible a more continuous fishing operation and will bring a greater measure 

of economic stability to the people of this area. The completion of a new fish hatchery at Fort 

Qu’Appelle will enable the Government to carry on a more extensive program of fish culture. 

 



 

February 14, 1957 

 

 
6 

Fur production remained at a high level in spite of the sharp decline in market prices. The number of fur 

farms increased during the year. 

 

Last year the road construction program in Northern Saskatchewan was the largest ever undertaken. 

Development roads were constructed in the Buffalo Narrows, Otosquen, Lynn Lake, Martineau River 

and Swan Lake areas. This program will be continued in 1957 to facilitate the further development of 

resources in the North. 

 

The industrial potential of our province continues to be developed. In 1956 a new record was established 

in the number of new companies incorporated. Last year a cement plant and a wire and cable plant were 

brought into operation. This year a pipe manufacturing plant, a wallboard plant, a paper bag plant and a 

sewer pipe plant will be completed and brought into production. The announced intention of the Potash 

Company of America to proceed in the spring with the construction of a mill and refinery near 

Saskatoon forecasts an important step in the development of our potash industry. 

 

A provincial conference on industrial development was held last December. The large and representative 

attendance at this conference is indicative of the growing awareness of the industrial potential of our 

province. 

 

The Government’s objective to serve 40,000 farms with electricity by the end of 1956 was exceeded. 

Last year’s farm electrification program brought power to more than 7,800 farms, a single-year record 

unequalled anywhere in Canada. The farm electrification program will be continued with a view to 

bringing power to a total of 65,000 farms by 1961. 

 

This rapid growth of power consumption by farm, domestic, and industrial customers has made 

necessary an unprecedented expansion of generation facilities in the province. Additions were made to 

several existing plants and new major generation stations are being constructed at Estevan and 

Saskatoon. 

 

During 1956 major construction programs to extend natural gas to additional communities were 

completed. By the end of the year 20,500 natural gas customers were being served in five cities, eleven 

towns and thirteen villages. Plans are under way to supply natural gas to the City of Regina, the Town of 

Kerrobert, and several other communities this year. 

 

In 1956 Saskatchewan Government Telephones set two new records in expanding telephone service. 

During the year more than 11,000 additional telephones were installed and 24,000 circuit miles were 

added to the Corporation’s long distance network. conversion to automatic operation will be completed 

in Kamsack and Eston in 1957. Preparation for later conversion is being made at Wynyard, Wadena and 

Shaunavon. 

 

The Saskatchewan Government Telephones will complete its section of the Trans-Canada microwave 

radio relay system in 1957. This will result in additional long distance circuits being made available and 

in live television programs being relayed to television stations in Saskatchewan. Work has 



 

February 14, 1957 

 

 
7 

commenced to make Regina one of the two regional centres in Canada for the continent-wide dialling 

plan. 

 

It is expected that increased interest in preventive health services will result in the establishment of one 

or more additional health regions in 1957. Preventive programs in dental health will be expanded. 

Continuation of the Salk vaccine programs against poliomyelitis is planned as increasing amounts of 

vaccine become available. 

 

My Government has consistently stated that the health needs of the people of Canada could only be met 

adequately by a comprehensive National Health Insurance Program. It is regretted that Federal 

Government's offer is confined to hospital insurance. It is noted that even this offer does not include 

hospitalization for patients suffering from mental illness or tuberculosis and therefore covers less than 

one-half of the hospital service required in Canada. Nevertheless, Saskatchewan was among the first of 

the provinces to indicate that it would be prepared to enter into the proposed plan. 

 

The University Hospital has continued to improve the quality of medical and hospital care throughout 

the province. For the first time medical doctors will graduate from the University of Saskatchewan this 

spring. 

 

Continued improvements have been made in mental hospital buildings. Extensive work which is 

proposed will further increase their efficiency. Constant advances are being made in treatment programs 

and in the training of professional staff. These programs have put Saskatchewan in the lead in this field 

and have resulted in a reduction in the mental hospital population despite the continued rise in the 

number of admissions. Intensive studies of the future needs for the mental health program are in 

progress. Research in to the fundamental causes of mental disease is continuing and hopeful signs of 

major discoveries are emerging. 

 

Commendable progress is being made by a considerable number of towns in the installation of modern 

sewer and water facilities. Preliminary surveys now in progress indicate that this program will be 

accelerated with continued technical and financial assistance from the Provincial Government. 

 

During the past year local housing projects for senior citizens were completed providing accommodation 

for some four hundred people in hostels and self-contained housing units. It is anticipated that during the 

coming year projects now in the construction, planning and development stages will provide living 

accommodation for an additional 2,000 senior citizens. 

 

A committee appointed to enquire into the principles and procedures followed in the Remission Service 

of the Department of Justice of Canada reported to the Minister of Justice in April, 1956. This report 

contained a number of recommendations which, if implemented, would require fundamental changes in 

the province’s correctional program. The recommendations of this Commission are being carefully 

studied by my Government. 



 

February 14, 1957 

 

 
8 

The new three-hundred-bed Provincial Nursing Home, situated on the Legislative Building Grounds, is 

expected to be ready for occupancy early in the new fiscal year. Fifty beds for rehabilitation purposes 

will be provided in this Home and will be operated in conjunction with the Physical Restoration Centre. 

 

During the year the Murray Memorial Library at the University was completed. Construction was 

commenced on a building on the University campus to accommodate the Saskatchewan Research 

Council. 

 

The Government welcomes the announcement by the Federal Government that increased financial 

assistance will be made available to Canadian universities. The proposed creation of the Canada Council 

is also welcomed. Useful as these measures may be, my Government feels that further federal aid to 

education particularly toward capital costs of school construction, is highly desirable and will continue 

to advocate this policy. 

 

The problems of school administrators remain severe. Because of increased costs, the need for more 

facilities and the shortage of trained personnel, my Government has already announced its intention to 

recommend a large increase in school grants. 

 

The traditional pattern of education in Saskatchewan has been to have Indian children attend schools 

separate from those attended by other children. However, during recent years several schools, providing 

for the education of all children in certain northern communities, have been erected and operated with 

costs being shared by the Provincial and Federal Governments. The most recent agreement of this kind 

will provide for additional school facilities at Lac La Ronge. These facilities will make possible some 

degree of vocational education in this area. 

 

You will be asked to approve amendments to The Teachers Superannuation Act. 

 

The municipal grid road program was well received, with 200 municipalities participating in the first 

year. This program will increase in 1957, for which you will be asked to provide additional financial 

assistance. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan has continued its efforts, in co-operation with the other western 

Provinces and the Maritimes, to resist the application of the railway companies for a further increase in 

freight rates. In spite of the strong representations made, a further rise in the general level of freight rates 

has taken place. 

 

In accordance with the provisions of The Time Question Plebiscite Act, a vote was taken at the time of 

municipal elections last fall. The results of this plebiscite will be placed before a Committee of this 

Legislature for study and recommendation. 

 

The growth and plans of many Saskatchewan communities make necessary a new Community Planning 

Act which will be submitted for your approval. 



 

February 14, 1957 

 

 
9 

During the past year work on the provincial highway system made satisfactory progress. Work 

completed totalled 532 miles of grading, 100 miles of bituminous surfacing, 206 miles of oil treatment 

and 2,000 miles of gravel surfacing. Good progress was made in the construction and repair of 

provincial and municipal bridges. You will be asked to approve estimates to provide for another 

program of extensive highway improvements, which will include the completion of Saskatchewan’s 

section of the Trans-Canada Highway. This project is an outstanding example of the benefits of 

Federal-provincial co-operation in the field of highway construction. 

 

The co-operative movement made good progress during the year and continues as an increasingly 

important force for improving the economic and social life of the province. More attention will be given 

to research respecting the operating problems of co-operatives. Additional assistance will be given to 

agencies established for the training of managerial and administrative personnel for co-operative 

organizations. To meet the needs of Northern Saskatchewan and extension will be made in the program 

of co-operative education and organization. 

 

As a result of the growth of the credit union movement, legislation to facilitation investments by credit 

unions and to outline more detailed procedures regarding certain phases of their lending operations will 

be introduced. 

 

Trade union membership reached an all-time high of approximately 42,000 during the past year. 

Industrial relations remain good. During 1956 there was very little time lost due to industrial conflict in 

those areas of labour relations which come under the jurisdiction of the Province. 

 

With a view to providing a greater measure of protection not only for employees but also for employers 

who pay fair wages, the Government will propose certain amendments to The Minimum Wage Act. 

 

Increased interest in tourist development in our province has been evidence during the past few years. 

The formulation of regional tourist associations and the work of the province-wide tourist advisory 

council reflect the determination of our citizens to aid in the building of the travel industry. 

 

The demand for accommodation at provincial parks continues to grow. Requests are increasing for 

various forms of assistance by local community organizations to help in the development of smaller 

resort areas. 

 

Because of the growing importance and potential of our tourist industry and the necessity of providing 

extensive and accurate information about our province, an Act to establish a Department of Travel and 

Information will be introduced. 

 

Amendments to The Conditional Sales Act and The Bills of Sale Act will ensure greater certainty of title 

for chattels by providing for central registration of all bills of sale, chattel mortgages, conditional sales 

agreements and lien notes. 



 

February 14, 1957 

 

 
10 

Legislation will be introduced to permit tenants whose leases have been terminated and who have been 

unable to dispose of their grain to remove it at any time before July 31st, 1957. 

 

For the better protection of mortgagors and purchasers under agreement of sale, legislation will be 

introduced to amend The Land Contracts (Actions) Act to provide for notice to the Provincial Mediation 

Board of every intended foreclosure or cancellation action. 

 

Amendments to The Provincial Lands Act, The Farm Security Act, The Automobile Accident Insurance 

Act, The Vehicles Act, The Real Estate Agents Licensing Act, the Cemeteries Act, The Saskatchewan 

Insurance Act, and The Companies Act will be submitted. 

 

The Public Accounts for the last fiscal year, together with the estimates for the year beginning April 1, 

1957, will be submitted. 

 

I leave you now to the business of the session with full confidence that you will favourably discharge 

your duties and responsibilities. May Divine Providence continue to bless our Province and guide the 

Legislature in all its deliberations. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor then retired from the Chamber. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 3:40 o’clock p.m. 


