



















































Hansard: February 18, 1957


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

3rd Day 

 

Monday, February 18, 1957 

 

The House met at 2.30 o‘clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

TRIBUTE TO CAMPBELL BROTHERS CURLING RINK 
 

Mr. Cliff H. Thurston (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, 

and on behalf of my colleague, the Minister of Public Health (Hon. Mr. Erb), I wish to draw your 

attention to something that took place over the weekend. The Campbell curling rink of Avonlea defeated 

the Hayhurst rink from Saskatoon, winning the right to represent Saskatchewan in the curling finals. 

 

You will remember that it was just two years ago that the Campbells started off our Jubilee year by 

winning the Brier Championship. I am sure we all wish them well, and, win or lose, I am sure we will be 

proud of them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I think members of the House will be interested in hearing of a 

tribute paid to the Campbell brothers from outside our province. I think it was Sunday I received a wire 

from the President of the International Bonspiel, which was held in Quebec City. I think it was the most 

encouraging wire I have ever received. He said that the Campbell brothers had not only won the three 

top events in the International Bonspiel at Quebec City, but had also won the hearts of Quebec and had 

done more to advance interest in the game of curling than any group who had ever come to their 

province. He wound up his telegram by saying that ―you have never sent to Quebec better ambassadors 

of goodwill than the Campbell rink.‖ I thought the House would be glad to know about that tribute to 

these people from someone outside our province. 

 

VALENTINES FOR THE LADY MEMBERS 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Minister of Public Works (Hon. Mr. C.G. 

Willis), I would just like to draw attention to the belated Valentines on the desks of our two lady 

members. This is the first time in the history of our Legislature that we have had two lady sitting 

members at the same time and we, the male members, would like them to accept these Valentines on 

behalf of all the male members in the Legislature. 



 

February 18, 1957 

 

 
2 

Mrs. J.E. Cooper (Regina City): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the lady members I would like to thank 

the Department of Public Works very much for these Valentines. I think it is rank discrimination in 

favour of the ladies, but we appreciate it very much. Thank you. 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

Address in Reply 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all we here this afternoon are very 

fortunate people, along with very nearly 900,000 other people who are fortunate enough to live in this 

great province of ours, the province of Saskatchewan. This is a wonderful country with its rolling hills 

and plains, park lands and forests, and perhaps sometimes we think it is a little fickle; there are times 

when it can be very, very cold. I am sure we will all agree with that. We will remember the days when 

we were out with the teams and the snow was so cold it was almost like sand under the runners; it sort of 

squeaked. The temperature was away down so far that you could hardly see the red part of the 

thermometer, and the stars seemed to be a long way away. Then at times we have seen it when it was so 

hot it just seemed to melt the seams out of everything until they were just simmering. And we have seen 

it so dry that even gopher holes were standing up in the air and were all blown away until there was just 

nothing there. We have seen it so wet that all it was was just a lake; we didn‘t need to use cars; we didn‘t 

need anything as much as we needed a boat to get around; we have been flooded out in so many parts of 

the country so many times. We have seen it so windy that anything that wasn‘t nailed down was 

flattened, and we have seen the times when there was a calm; the sun was shining nicely and everything 

was running along so sweetly and so nicely that, after all, we decided it is a wonderful country, and we 

are awfully glad to be here. In spite of all the things we have in Saskatchewan, some of these things, we 

are agreed it is a wonderful place to be. 

 

It is my privilege this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, to move at this time the Address in Reply to the Speech 

from the Throne. It is quite apparent that the basis for this selection is not the speaking ability nor the 

personal aptitudes of the mover, but rather the qualifications of the constituency he represents. I wish at 

this time, Mr. Speaker, to thank those responsible for this honour in the name of the people of the Swift 

Current constituency. 

 

Before going any further, please permit me, Mr. Speaker, to compliment you upon the appointment to 

the honourable position which you now hold. In speaking with those who have known you and worked 

with you through the years, I am convinced that no other choice could have been so admirably suitable 

as yourself to replace our beloved Tom Johnston. We 



 

February 18, 1957 

 

 
3 

trust that your noted qualities of equity and your love of fair play may benefit this Assembly for years to 

come, and may benefit our deliberations here. 

 

I am sure that each and all of us here, this afternoon, think that our own home town is just a little better 

than any other place in the world, and I myself think that Swift Current and the surrounding country is 

outstanding. Situated as it is south of the South Saskatchewan River, astride the meandering Swift 

Current Creek, on what is known as the bald prairie, Swift current and district have a history of cowboys 

and Indians, soldiers and Mounties that would warm the heart of any youngster. That pioneer spirit of 

friendliness is alive today in towns, cities, and the farmsteads of that district, although Swift Current 

today is a city of nearly 11,000 people with a bustling business section, and tree-shaded streets. 

 

We are here this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, to discuss the business of the province and not to grow 

rhapsodical about our own home town, and I am very sorry I don‘t have time to tell you about this city 

of Swift Current, which is the fastest growing city in Saskatchewan, having increased some 40 per cent 

in population since 1951. I am very sorry indeed that I cannot tell you about our boys‘ band which has 

traveled the country from Calgary to points east and down into the States, and which has won many 

trophies for excellent performance and acted as goodwill ambassadors, not only for the city of Swift 

Current but for all of Saskatchewan. I am sorry, too, that I cannot tell you about our July celebration — 

our Frontier Days — which is second in size only to the Calgary Stampede, as a Rodeo, in all of Canada. 

I am sorry I cannot tell you about our new Radio Station, CKSW, or our newspaper, ‗The Sun‘, which in 

the last 20 years has 16 times won the trophy as the best weekly newspaper in the senior circulation 

class in Saskatchewan, and in 1955 won the prize for the best editorial page in the senior circulation 

class for weeklies in all of Canada. 

 

It gives me deep regret that I cannot tell you of such towns as Cabri, which is situated in one of the best 

wheat-growing districts of Canada, or such towns as Gull Lake which makes a prevaricator out of the 

man who said that a certain town in Manitoba is the only one that is situated on a lake of oil. But I will 

take time out this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, to thank the people of Swift Current and district for electing 

me to represent them in this Legislative Assembly. We have been represented here for the last 12 years 

by my good friend, and the next member of Parliament for the Swift Current-Maple Creek constituency, 

Mr. Harry Gibbs. Although I may not be able to quite keep up to his record and the standard that he has 

set here, I will do my best to serve the Swift Current constituency to the best of my ability. 

 

I am proud of my constituency, Mr. Speaker, and I am proud of my province. It seems to me that, having 

to face the hardships of the west and the rugged climate from which they have won a livelihood has 

developed here a breed of men and women who for courage, self-sufficiency and friendliness are not 

found everywhere; and also I am proud of the Government 



 

February 18, 1957 

 

 
4 

of this province. In the twelve years they have been in office they have shown they have a definite 

program for progress. They have shown courage to tackle a job and do it, and they have the vision to see 

and to plan a future for this province which is worthy of the dreams of our pioneers. Above all, Mr. 

Speaker, they have shown they have an interest in the common man and those who, for some reason or 

other, are not able to satisfactorily fend for themselves. 

 

I am proud also of the C.C.F. philosophy for which this Government stands. I believe in a planned 

economy composed of private, co-operative, and government enterprises co-ordinated for the greatest 

common good and for an optimum of individual freedom. I believe in Democratic Socialism such as we 

have in the Scandinavian countries and many other countries around the world today, which treads a 

middle path between the forces of totalitarianism and the economic greed of grasping capitalism. I am 

proud of this Government that has pioneered this movement in North America, and whose ideals of 

―humanity first‖ have meant the easing of burdens for many; and who, coupled with the work done by 

our C.C.F. M.P.s at Ottawa, have made their influence felt for good across this whole Dominion. 

 

One of the parts of government in which I am definitely interested is that park known as municipal 

affairs. For the last nine years I have been associated with the Council of the Rural Municipality of 

Saskatchewan Landing. It is quite possible there are quite a few here, this afternoon, who have never 

heard of the Rural Municipality of Saskatchewan Landing, but I think you must have heard about the 

Saskatchewan Landing Bridge. The Liberals talked about building it, and talked about building it . . . 

 

Mr. B.L Korchinski (Redberry): — It went out! 

 

Mr. Wood: — . . . and they talked about building it for at least 25 years before this Government finally 

built it — twice. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — That‘s the C.C.F. way — twice! 

 

Mr. Wood: — In my experience as a Reeve of that municipality for the last five years, I have found 

there are many and varied problems facing the municipal men, and let me say, Mr. Speaker, that I think 

some of them are very vexatious indeed. But this Government has shown itself to be not one to sit idly 

by and let the municipalities muddle through as best they can, but has always shown itself willing to 

take an interest and lend a helping hand to assist the municipal governments without, and the same time, 

interfering in any way with the autonomy of the lesser governments. This has been exemplified in the 

way that we have picked up the matter of the Seed Grain Relief Debts, the cancellation of the Public 

Revenue Tax and the shouldering of the major portion of social aid assistance and payment of 

hospitalization for indigents, as well as in many other ways. 

 

In keeping with this program of leadership for local governments, this Government, last December, 

called the Provincial – Local Government 



 

February 18, 1957 

 

 
5 

Conference to be held in this Chamber here in Regina. I must say, Mr. Speaker, that I consider that this 

Conference was one of the most interesting that it has ever been my privilege to observe, and I have 

nothing but commendation for the delegates and visitors who attended this Conference. Although only 

the delegates were allowed to voice an opinion, the seats were kept filled very closely for the full four 

days of the Conference, showing the interest that was being displayed by these people who had left their 

work to come here to attend to the business of the Conference; and I have special words of 

commendation for the delegates themselves for the manner in which they presented their briefs and 

carried on their discussion at the Conference. It is quite possible, Mr. Speaker, that no Conference could 

be expected to solve all, or very many, problems of the municipal governments, and it is also just 

possible that this Conference did not achieve all that high hopes might have wished for it, but let me 

assure you that this Conference was not without good and far-reaching results. The very fact of these 

different government bodies coming together to discuss their mutual problems and going away with the 

measure of unanimity that they have achieved in itself augurs very well for the future relations within 

this province, and the agreement in principle regarding the matter of a continuing committee to study, 

and possibly to recommend, changes in municipal boundaries and fiscal relationships, is a step forward 

in agreement on a controversial subject. 

 

Another project that means much to the rural municipalities, and to the urbans is the matter of the 

municipal grid road plan. The fact that somewhere in the neighbourhood of $2 million was allocated last 

year to this plan, and more actual work was done than was anticipated, coupled with the announcement 

in the Throne Speech which we are today considering, of the additional moneys being voted this year for 

this plan, shows that the mention in the same Speech from the Throne of increased grants to education 

shows that this Government is prepared to do its best for the alleviation of the problems of 

municipalities. 

 

One of the matters of major importance in North America today is in regard to highways, and 

Saskatchewan certainly is no exception. Saskatchewan has always been much more noted for its 

wide-open spaces than it has been for its numerous population and its great wealth, and it seems to be in 

a class by itself when it comes to the problem facing us in the matter of roads. Saskatchewan has twice 

the mileage of improved roadways as the province of Alberta, in the neighbourhood of six times as 

much as the province of Manitoba, and one-third more than the province of Ontario, despite the huge 

difference in population and financial ability of these two provinces. But what is this Government 

doing? sitting back and crying, and wondering how to go about building satisfactory roads in this 

province? No, they are going ahead and are building a satisfactory network of roads. We have here a 

better than 8,000-mile network of roads, and these roads are improving. Not long ago I was talking to a 

service station operator (I don‘t believe he knew I was a member of the Legislature), and he was telling 

me that nowadays, instead of the traditional complaint they have always been 



 

February 18, 1957 

 

 
6 

getting in Saskatchewan about the roads, they now get very little else but compliments from people 

coming through. 

 

I want to say, too that this Government this year is completing their portion of the Trans-Canada 

highway. This is the only province in the Dominion that is able to do that, with the possible exception of 

Prince Edward Island, with their 74 miles of Trans-Canada Highway. With references to this 

Trans-Canada Highway, I think it is a very good example of what can be achieved by co-operation 

between the Federal Government and the Provincial Government in the matter of roads and highway 

building. I think there should be quite a bit more of this type of co-operation. I think that we need a 

highway from Winnipeg to the coast by way of Yorkton, Saskatoon, and Edmonton very nearly as much 

— mind you, I said very nearly as much — as we do need one from Winnipeg by way of Regina, Swift 

Current and Calgary. But we do need the new highway — the one very nearly as much as the other. We 

also need highways from the south leading to the northern parks and lakes of our north country for 

tourist traffic, which is a benefit not only to Saskatchewan, but to the whole Dominion of Canada. 

 

We have always heard and seen how much better roads they have in the United States than what we 

have here, and there is no secret about why that should be. In the United States the Federal Government 

pays approximately four times per capita for aid in highway building as compared with what our Federal 

Government does here in Canada. In Canada, our Federal Government takes in in taxes, from the 

automobile industry alone, about seven times as much as it pays out in aid toward building of highways. 

I think the time has come when we should not let the fact that the automobile was not invented in 1867 

at the time the B.N.A. Act was written; it is time we ceased to let that prevent us from having more 

co-operation between the Provincial and Federal Government in the matter of highway construction. 

 

Another thing we find very interesting in these times, Mr. Speaker, is in regard to the development of 

mineral resources. You are all acquainted with what has been done here, since this Government came to 

power, in the development of oil and gas. I won‘t take your time, this afternoon, to talk about what was 

going done now in comparison to what was being done there, but the time has finally come when we are 

able to talk about what is being done here in comparison with what is being done elsewhere. I this 

province last fall, during the month of October, there were more oil wells completed than there in the 

oil-rich province of Alberta. Last year we produced some 21 million barrels of oil; and 19,600,000,000 

feet of cubic gas. As of February 1 of this year, we have 2,480 oil wells which were capable of 

production, and 157 gas wells. Of these, 427 of the oil wells and 16 of the gas wells were situated in the 

Swift Current provincial constituency. From our little local hamlet of Cantuar there is a pipeline built 

down to the city of Regina where it joins up with the Interprovincial Pipeline. The town of Gull Lake is 

supplied with gas, which is produced in the very near vicinity. At the present time gas is piped from 

Success to the cities of Swift Current and Moose Jaw. 



 

February 18, 1957 

 

 
7 

Allow me to say, Mr. Speaker, that I am much more concerned about excessive gas pressures at Ottawa 

than I am about falling gas pressures at Success. I noticed, last month, some $95,551 was paid by the 

Co-Op Refinery in a cash bonus bid for a drilling least on a half-section in the Bone Creek field, which 

is a comparatively new field in the southwest corner of the Swift Current constituency. The people of 

Swift Current and district are well aware of the rapid progress that is being made in the matter of oil and 

gas development. 

 

In regard to the program this Government has had for distributing has to the cities and some of the 

smaller towns of Saskatchewan, I think they are to be complimented on doing a great and courageous 

thing. It has meant real savings in money to the householders, and has opened for them an entirely new 

era of convenience, besides opening opportunities in many places for industry. I am sure that this 

Government; and the people of Saskatchewan, can be thankful that this Government has the foresight 

and the courage, despite carping criticism, to plan and build an integrated gas system owned and 

operated by, and servicing the people and industries of this province. 

 

I am sorry I have not time, this afternoon, to mention many of the other mineral resources that are being 

developed in this province. It is sufficient to say that, taken together, we have a very happy picture of 

resources development at the present time. They are shaping up so that in the future we have nothing to 

worry about in Saskatchewan in the matter of development, because the resources are here. 

Saskatchewan has a rosy future in front of it in the line of industrial development and, in this regard, let 

us remember that we have a very large proportion of two things that are very necessary for expansion of 

the industrial economy of the future years — uranium and potash. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — We‘re not so sure of that! 

 

Mr. Wood: — I‘m sorry. My hearing aid isn‘t working very well. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — Get another one. 

 

Mr. Wood: — The benefits of industrial development have become more apparent. We need something 

that is going to help us to service and look after the needs of this province, the roadways and the 

highways of this province. It is quite apparent, especially during the last few years, that the farming 

industry, which has been our back-bone here for years, is not able to produce the wealth that is sufficient 

to carry on the services that are needed here. Without in any way releasing from obligation the Federal 

Government for not removing the obstacles from the way of farmers in obtaining for themselves a 

decent livelihood, or their lack of proper distribution of the taxes that are collected, I think we would be 

able to help ourselves a good deal if we were able to work out a taxation base, and I think this can best 

be done by industrial development. 



 

February 18, 1957 

 

 
8 

Those who have been opposed to this Government have been as hysterical as a tree-full of chickens in 

accusing us of keeping industry out of this province, for they have been as dumb as oysters about what 

was done before this Government came into power. I have here a little booklet concerning Swift 

Current, and in the back it says here something about natural gas. The title for this page is ‗Natural Gas‘ 

and it starts out by saying that Government geologists have carefully examined the formation in the 

regions around Swift Current and they are convinced that there is unlimited gas to be found there in 

unlimited quantities. It shows a picture here of a gas well being drilled, and another picture of a flare 

ignited gas issuing from the base of a derrick, and it goes on to finish up with these words: 

 

Gas will also be piped through Swift Current to cities in eastern Saskatchewan in the very near future 

from western gas fields, thus assuring for the manufacturer locating here a ready supply of the 

cheapest kind of power and fuel. 

 

I think I will read that again if you don‘t mind. I don‘t want any misunderstanding. This is not what you 

might call a recent publication. It was put out by the Swift Current Board of Trade in 1915 — 42 years 

ago! Men who had vision and foresight, men who were willing to go ahead and do things, saw gas being 

piped from the western fields to the eastern parts of Saskatchewan and promised that it would be done in 

the very near future. Well, it is being done now — 42 years later! What, Mr. Speaker, has taken place in 

the intervening decade? This Government has made a real and determined effort towards the 

development of its mineral resources, and is doing the same in regard to its industrial development. This 

is exemplified in the way it has taken off its coat and gone to work in this field. The forest inventory in 

the north is now coming to the place where it is very useful and will be very useful in the development 

of the resources of that northern country. 

 

In June, 1950, this Government established the Industrial Development Office — the first time this 

province ever had such a thin; and in line with its program of progress, last fall was called here in this 

city the Industrial Development Conference, which was the first such conference in the Dominion of 

Canada, and something which will no doubt be copied in other places. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — They don‘t need it in other places. We have a C.C.F. Government here; that‘s why 

you had to call one. 

 

Mr. Wood: — We had representatives of Boards of Trade from various places who came here to find 

out what was being done about problems of industry, and these things were explained here at this 

Conference. You cannot have industry without power, and this Government is taking 



 

February 18, 1957 

 

 
9 

steps to increase the power in this province. The increase in industrial development, coupled with the 

huge farm electrification program, has resulted in an increase of 20 per cent per annum in the demand 

for electrical energy, which is one of the highest rates of increase in the demand for all of Canada. A $40 

million plant is being established at Estevan; another $40 million plant is being built, or is going to be 

built, at Saskatoon. Between June of last year until sometime in 1959, the power output of the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation will be increased some two and one half times. That does not sound to 

me like industrial stagnation; and that is being accomplished here. 

 

In our Speech from the Throne I notice some of the things that are being done in the line of industries 

being brought in. It is possible that we have here in Saskatchewan no great industrial colossus; but the 

basis has been laid and the fabric is taking shape. Our output for manufacturing, 10 years ago, was $168 

million per annum. We now have some 1,200 manufacturing plants in the province and Saskatchewan, 

which has always been strictly an agricultural area, is rapidly approaching the place where half our 

income will be derived from non-agricultural sources. It is just possible we may never have here another 

Pittsburgh, but, Mr. Speaker, I want to assure you that it will not take this Government 42 years to 

develop the natural resources we have here. 

 

Mr. Weber (Meadow Lake): — You will have gone to oblivion by that time. 

 

Mr. Wood: — Besides this, I want to say that the policies and program of this Government are 

definitely not a deterrent to the bringing in of industry. 

 

One of the most interesting points in connection with our industrial development is in the matter of the 

way it is finding work and employment of those people who are forced to leave agriculture. And what of 

these people, these men and women who man our industries and our commercial establishments? They 

are the most important ingredients of our industrial economy, and this Government has always shown 

itself to be very interested in the problems of the working man. We farmers know agriculture is still the 

backbone of this province. I would like to say that an understanding of the relative problems of 

agriculture and labour is becoming very imperative. Labour must realize that their best interests are 

bound up with those of the agricultural community, and farmers must acquire a more sympathetic 

understanding of the problems of the working man. This Government, as the government of a 

predominantly agricultural province, has led the way towards a better understanding in this regard in the 

way that they have taken interest in the welfare of labour. 

 

Being a farmer, I have at heart the interests of the agricultural communities, and it is very near to my 

heart and to my pocketbook as well. This afternoon I do not have time to go into the many problems 



 

February 18, 1957 

 

 
10 

that are besetting that industry at this time. I have asked the hon. member from Yorkton (Mr. Neibrandt) 

to discuss these things in his address, and I know he will do very well in that regard. 

 

I would like to say in passing, though, that the problems of agriculture besetting us here today are not 

such that this Government can very well settle; but they have shown they have the desire to do what is in 

their power to assist the farm people of this province. This is shown quite recently in the way they more 

than kept their promise to electrify 40,000 farms by the end of 1956. 

 

Another thing I would like to mention in passing — it is only a small matter — concerns the matter of 

Hospitalization and Education Tax on farm fuels in Saskatchewan. This is very small point because 

when it is all boiled down, it amounts to quite a bit less than $10 per farmer throughout Saskatchewan, 

and compared to some of the other things that are taking money out of the farmers‘ pocketbooks today, 

it is scarcely worth consideration. But I think, Mr. Speaker, with the farmers being so hard-pressed these 

times, being so wrung out by the cost-price squeeze, that the weight of even one more straw on the back 

at this moment seems to be pretty cruel. I think it would be well if this Government were to consider — 

if they have not already drawn up their budget; it would be greatly appreciated if they could consider the 

elimination of this Education and Hospitalization Tax on farm fuel. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Better talk to the Hon. Mr. Fines. 

 

Mr. Wood: — Mr. Speaker, we have always maintained that good health is the inalienable right of 

every citizen, and this Government has made rapid progress to hasten the day when such is the case in 

Saskatchewan. I have not time to go into all that has been done along that line, but I will say that the 

Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan, the Health Services program, the Air Ambulance — all these 

things have done much to hasten the day when the medical need and not financial ability will be the 

prerequisite for hospitalization or medical aid in Saskatchewan. 

 

In regard to health regions, I would like to say a word because I come from Swift Current where we 

have a Health Region that does deal in medical care. I must say that although the various agencies and 

programs of governments at different times come under quite a bit of criticism, the people of Swift 

Current and district are more sold on this program than anything I have run across for some time. 

Anybody who was to come in here to the Swift Current district, or the southwestern part of 

Saskatchewan for that matter, and try to deprive us of our Health Region set-up would definitely have a 

fight on his hands. I think this Government deserves quite a bit of credit for this in their policy which 

has made this sort of thing possible, but I also think that a great deal of credit is due to our health region 

board of elected officials, to our health region staff and also to the medical personnel that has made the 

Swift 



 

February 18, 1957 

 

 
11 

Current Health Region such an astounding success as it is today. 

 

This medical program that we have is very dear to our hearts here in Saskatchewan, but we have always 

maintained that it is not possible to keep the thing up satisfactorily at the municipal or provincial basis, 

and that medical care and good health are really Federal concerns. We are very glad to see that steps are 

finally taking shape in this regard, and it looks promising that they may, in the not too distant future, 

have something along the line of Federal aid in the matter of hospitalization. We trust it will not turn out 

to be a will-o‘-the-wisp as it has many times in the past when Federal aid was first mentioned in 1919. 

 

We are also sorry in regard to the fact that it is not a complete program, in that tubercular and mental 

health patients are not included. These things, Mr. Speaker, are much too important to be left 

disregarded by the Federal Government. Saskatchewan has done much along the lines of mental health. 

In their program of staff training and advanced techniques, they have come to the place where they are 

acknowledged to be leaders in the field in this way. We have a new training school at Moose Jaw, and 

have an addition to the Munroe Wing here in Regina, an addition to the General Hospital here in Regina, 

as well as our old hospitals at Weyburn and North Battleford. Also our mental health clinics at the cities 

of Moose Jaw, Saskatoon and Regina and temporary clinics in the other cities of Saskatchewan, and the 

town of Assiniboia. Not the least encouraging thing in this matter of mental health is the way in which 

such organizations as the Canadian Mental Health Association has shown such an interest. 

 

Recently it was my privilege to peruse plans of regional health centres much smaller than the hospitals 

that we have now. The advocates of these plans claim that better and more economical health care can 

be given therein. I am in no position to judge as to the feasibility of these plans, but I do know that great 

study is being given to the whole question of mental health by our Department of Public Health, and this 

Government is anxious to do any necessary enlarging of facilities as soon as funds are available. Also, I 

know that the folks of Swift Current are able and willing to advance good reasons for any enlarging to 

be done in our area. 

 

This Government has other programs of great importance, and I feel that the care of our senior citizens 

is one of these. The C.C.F. movement has always taken the lead in social welfare, when other political 

parties were actually opposing them. Today, the overall expenditure for social aid in proportion to 

population, to say nothing of wealth, is higher here than in either of our neighbouring provinces, and, so 

far as I know, there is no place in Canada that pays more in proportion to population than is paid out in 

social aid here in Saskatchewan. Besides this, this Government is establishing a system of care and 

housing that cannot be robbed of its effectiveness by rising inflation. We have in the Speech from the 



 

February 18, 1957 

 

 
12 

Throne, today, mention of what is being done along these lines of building homes for senior citizens. In 

our Swift Current area we have finally come out of the initial stages of difficulties regarding our Prairie 

Pioneer Lodge, and we trust that the start of the actual construction will begin this year. 

 

Besides this program of housing for senior citizens for which our Provincial Government pays 20 per 

cent of the cost of building and yearly grants per bed in regard to the upkeep, we have also built nursing 

homes at Saskatoon and Melfort, and now a new 300-bed home is about to be opened at Regina, as well 

as the old one we are still maintaining at Wolseley. This caring for the old folks is one phase upon which 

our Government should be highly commended, and I for one hope the day will not be far hence when 

more of these nursing homes can be built at various other places in the province. 

 

There are many other phases of the Government in which they are doing a great and wonderful job, and 

which have shown to the people of Saskatchewan what a program of progress can really mean; but I do 

not have time this afternoon to go into these things. Undoubtedly there are some things this afternoon, 

Mr. Speaker, about which all of us here are agreed. I am sure that each one of us here has the welfare of 

the province of Saskatchewan at heart. I am sure there are none of us here, this afternoon, who are too 

proud or presumptuous not occasionally to pray ―God guide and keep Saskatchewan.‖ There is no doubt 

also that there are many problems and many questions upon which we are very divided in opinion, and it 

is one of the blessings of our democracy that we are able to come here and freely debate and freely 

discuss these things upon which we have a difference of opinion. 

 

So far as I am concerned, Mr. Speaker, the policies and program of this Government have been, and will 

continue to be, in the best interests of our province. We may be here only a small sphere in a world that 

sometimes seems bent upon destruction, but we here can keep alight the beacons of freedom, equity and 

peace, and we can work together towards the day when hunger, fear, ignorance and suffering may be 

banished from the earth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I therefore move, seconded by the hon. member from Yorkton (Mr. Neibrand): That an 

humble Address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor as follows:- 

 

To His Honour the Honourable William John Patterson, LL.D. Lieutenant-governor of the Province of 

Saskatchewan 

 

May it please your honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty‘s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, in Session assembled, 



 

February 18, 1957 

 

 
13 

humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to address to 

us at the opening of the present Session 

 

Mr. Fred Neibrandt (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to second the Address in Reply to the Speech 

from the Throne, I am humbly aware not only of the honour accorded me, but also of the honour to the 

Constituency of Yorkton, which I have the privilege to represent. As the members well know, the 

constituency was well represented ever since this Government came to office by Arthur Swallow. His 

fine character and high standard of public service was appreciated by all who knew him, and his many 

fine characteristics will ever be a guide to me as his successor. 

 

I want to add my personal congratulations to you, Mr. Speaker, on your elevation to your high office. 

We feel confident that your past conduct in this House has demonstrated that you are fair and have good 

judgment. We feel certain that your office will show that you have a high sense of impartiality, and that 

our respect for you from both sides of the House will lend honour and dignity to our proceedings. 

 

At this time too, Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to the fact that our Premier led his Government to victory 

last June, not because he holds the distinction of having served longer than any other previous Premier, 

but because of good leadership, and because he has kept faith with the people he serves. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — He fooled many. 

 

Mr. Neibrandt: — I am sure that they are proud of the gains that they have made and confident that 

Saskatchewan will maintain the lead in good government. 

 

I also want to extend my congratulations to all those on both sides of the House, who merit the honour, 

in being elected. In particular, I want to congratulate the people of the Swift Current Constituency and 

their member in the honour accorded them and the honour accorded him in being chosen to move the 

Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne. I think you will agree that in this he had acquitted 

himself with distinction. I feel that in him they have a man of high Christian ethics and of a moral fabric 

that we appreciate and admire. It is only natural that he should be a member of the C.C.F., and I predict 

a great future for him in the continued progress and development of our fine province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have in the Yorkton Constituency, a cross-section of fine people representing every 

nationality to be found in this province. They are friendly people, congenial, hospitable, hard-working 

and tolerant, and they are the offspring of pioneers whose mutual interests taught them co-operation and 

tolerance, respect and understanding, and who, 



 

February 18, 1957 

 

 
14 

each in his own way and according to his talent, contributed his particular best to the welfare of the 

whole. I believe this is what lends character and distinction to the people I represent. 

 

Yorkton is situated in an area of abundant moisture, and has been noted for its consistent good crops. It 

is rapidly becoming an important turkey-producing centre and has led over the years in the production, 

too, of cattle, hogs, and poultry. When there is a fair relationship between what we produce and our net 

returns, due to our higher level of production we are fairly well off. Today, the reverse is true; added to 

this, Mr. Speaker, more densely populated, we require more highways, roads, bridges, drainage, schools, 

churches, and hospitals. I shudder to think what our relative position today would be, had not this 

Government so substantially increased grants and services to rural areas. The city of Yorkton, in the 

beautiful parkland, in keeping with it surroundings, has been noted for its miles of tree-lined boulevards, 

its well-kept lawns, and beautiful homes. An active horticultural society is carrying on the work 

pioneered by our former member of the Territorial Legislature, the late Dr. Patrick. He was able, through 

his stimulating personality and example, to inspire a lasting interest in roadside and boulevard 

tree-planting, and this, of course, greatly adds to Yorkton‘s attraction. We are indeed grateful to men 

like him. 

 

Since city and country, through modern highways and transportation facilities, have become more 

closely drawn together, Yorkton annually is host to the world‘s largest bonspiel. It, too, gained world 

attention through the grand response of its citizens in the 4th International Documentary Film Festival. 

Our annual Christmas Carol Service and our Art Exhibit by contemporary local artists, yearly gain an 

impressive following. Famous artists, both vocal and instrumental, strike a responsive chord in the 

hearts of its citizens, and really get a big hand. Our square dancing, for sheer good fun, is probably 

unsurpassed anywhere. We have a fine band, and we are proud of our male choir. Our young people 

have a lot of natural musical talent and our Little Theatre group stimulates interest in the theatre and 

develops fine artists. Our various service clubs are supreme in community service, and our local A.C.T. 

in conjunction with radio station CJGX leads Saskatchewan in the amount of money raised for the 

Anti-Tuberculosis League. And the finest example of co-operation to be found anywhere is that 

provided by our various civic groups, the city, municipalities, service clubs, and citizens in general, in 

their co-operation under the auspices of the York Lake Parks Association in improving the facilities at 

nearby York Lake, and making it accessible to all as a fine community centre. 

 

I could go on talking about Yorkton and its citizens, but obviously today, I haven‘t got the time. 

However, while I represent the Yorkton Constituency, I do intend to come back to this topic when I get 

the chance, for I honestly believe that the Yorkton Constituency is one of the most important in the 

province. 



 

February 18, 1957 

 

 
15 

I was thrilled as I listened to the Speech from the Throne, and also to the member for Swift Current (Mr. 

Wood), when he reviewed the strides that we have taken in the last few years, in so many aspects of 

government that affect our daily lives. The C.C.F. Government is a fulfilment of a vision that I had some 

25 years ago while living in an industrial centre in the United States – of a government that could really 

serve the people. It was at the time, Mr. Speaker, in the States, when we had more time on our hands 

than we new what to do with; and so, since we had time, we had time to think for ourselves; and all the 

propaganda by press and radio of ―business as usual‖ and ―prosperity around the corner: could not 

conjure away the reality of what went on. And somehow, Mr. Speaker, it does make you think, when 

you are hit hard enough between the eyes; when if affects your wife and family; when schools closed, 

and your children were denied their natural birthright; when banks closed, and you lost your heard-

earned savings; when property values decreased 1,000 per cent, and you lost your equity in your own 

home. That was the time, Mr. Speaker, when thousands of people lined up for jobs that just wouldn‘t 

materialize, while other thousands lined up in relief lines; and yet the powers-that-be and the old-line 

politicians were content to sing ―Happy days are here again‖ while thousands of tons of cotton and food 

were being destroyed. That was the time, Mr. Speaker, when I got my greatest and finest education, 

because that was the time when my conclusions about government were formulated, and I was thinking 

along the lines of the ‗Regina Manifesto‘, of how a government . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — Whoops! 

 

Mr. Neibrandt: — . . . genuinely concerned with the interests of the people, through proper planning 

and a humanitarian approach, could really serve the people. I am happy to say that a vision of that 

government has materialized in the C.C.F. Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

In spite of good government for the last 12 years, we still have a lot of long outstanding problems to be 

solved, and I agree with the member for Swift Current when he said that the convening of the 

Municipal-Local Government Conference was a unique experience in democracy. It gives hope of at 

least finding a beginning to the solution of problems that plague us. 

 

Being a farmer fortunate enough to live on a proposed grid road, I realize its importance in a rural 

community that yearly is becoming more isolated; and since we have such a tremendous mileage 

problem, I heartily agree with the member for Swift Current when he said that we should have more aid 

for highways forthcoming from the Federal Government. when we assess the great potential of needed 

minerals in our almost inaccessible north, the need for highways to the north becomes self-evident. 

Railways are reluctant to build into any area until it is developed, and you cannot have full-scale 

development unless you have some form of transportation. Our northern airway service had done a 

tremendous job, and I was really amazed at the amount of miles of access road now built. 



 

February 18, 1957 

 

 
16 

When the Speech from the Throne was read, we heard names mentioned that ten years ago were entirely 

unknown. Today, they are important to the economy of this province – an achievement that is entirely 

due to the policy of this Government. the north, Mr. Speaker, is our only frontier, and just as oil-derricks 

and power-lines have added a new touch to our prairie skyline, so I predict that the coming of pulp mills, 

head frames for mining shafts, reduction mills, and refining mills, will change the scene of many a 

lonely northern landscape. 

 

I was very pleased when government supply stores were established up in the northern country. At Lac 

La Ronge, I received a firsthand account of their boon to the northern trapper and the fisherman. You 

know, Mr. Speaker, it doesn‘t always follow that only big corporations are monopolistic. The little 

trader up north can be just as unscrupulous. Fair trading and fair dealings with our northern settlers and 

natives, and the building of schools, have given these people opportunities that were too long denied 

them. I am really proud of the record of this Government in the north. 

 

I noticed the keen interest, when we listed a little while ago, that was shown by this House in the 

discourse on resource and industrial development. As a farmer, I have become more keenly conscious, 

as time goes by, in the revenue from resource development as an aid to extending more services to our 

people, and I believe and approve of the contention that our natural resources are our birthright and 

should be developed in the interests of the people. I now look forward to begin the representative from 

the Yorkton Constituency when natural gas is brought to our city. We have not, at the present time, in 

Yorkton all the industrial development that we would like to have. We hope to see that situation changed 

soon, especially at the time natural gas will be brought to Yorkton, and when the block-board plant at 

Sturgis becomes a reality. 

 

The city of Yorkton is rightly assessing its position, and they are getting ready for industrial 

development. They have put together a line pamphlet highlighting our many advantages; and when I get 

these (I haven‘t got them yet), I would like to distribute them to the various members here, and I trust 

you will read them, and become better acquainted with our fair city. I can assure members that we will 

welcome industry in Yorkton to help diversify our economy, for nowhere are we more vulnerable to the 

fluctuating welfare of the farmer, than we are in our area. 

 

We on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, always look with pride on the progress that this Government 

has made in the field of labour, health and welfare. The hon. member for Swift Current ably dealt with 

these subjects. We haven‘t in Yorkton, at the present time, a medical-care program. At the same time, 

our old-age pensioners and other welfare groups really feel the effects of the high cost-of-living; and we 

do have a hospital problem over there. But this is a matter, of course, that I can talk about in greater 

detail at a later date. 



 

February 18, 1957 

 

 
17 

Mr. Speaker, I mentioned a while back that my greatest education was derived in the school of hard 

knocks during the depression. It was also during those difficult days when children could only attend 

school 2 ½ days a week, and nothing could have focused on my mind more clearly the implication of the 

lack of education in this modern age. I thrill with pride at our progress in educational opportunities that 

we continue to make. I am truly sorry that we still are the only province which today provides assistance 

to needy students to attend university. I have always contended that our prairie young people are serious 

students, and that the general level of quality is exceeded nowhere. 

 

I believe that we are justly proud, and the Throne Speech indicates it, of the progress and expansion that 

is taking place in our university; especially the fact that this year will see the graduation of the first full-

fledged medical doctors from our own Medical College. While attending University Farm Week, a little 

over a month ago, the fact that all faculties were crowded and in the process of expansion, while that of 

Agriculture operated only on a 60 per cent enrolment, brought home to me the depressed state of 

agriculture as compared to other professions. This to me is very disturbing. In the past we have 

graduated too many students that found it necessary after graduation to leave our province to make a 

living elsewhere. At the present time we are not educating enough farmers simply because they cannot 

afford, at the present time, the outlay involved; and this to me has a meaning and an implication that in 

the future our basic industry may suffer through lack of adequate training and leadership. It is very 

discouraging. 

 

I also had the opportunity at that time when I was attending University Farm Week, to visit our fine 

University Hospital; and there I found four people from Yorkton receiving hospitalization, special 

nursing care and specialized treatment by doctors that are outstanding in their field. These facilities were 

only made available by a government that believes that a person‘s health and well-being are of prime 

importance. 

 

I want to say at this time how much we appreciate power on our farms. I realized when this program was 

first launched that some of us would have to wait, and for that reason, I did not mind waiting. Today, we 

do such things as milking cows and elevating grain; and believe me, Mr. Speaker, it is the most 

uncomplaining and cheapest servant that I ever hired. I was rather surprised that, from the Yorkton 

office alone, this year, over 800 miles of rural power lines were built. In many cases the farmers 

organized and did the work themselves, and in some cases they reported that they earned over half of 

their original outlay. I believe that that is a good policy. As a matter of fact it must be, because the 

Throne Speech revealed that we extended rural power, last year, to over 7,800 farms, and in this we led 

the Dominion. The truth of the contention that the light came on in Saskatchewan under the C.C.F. no 

longer can be denied. 



 

February 18, 1957 

 

 
18 

I had occasion, just before Christmas, to put through an emergency telephone call to my daughter at the 

west coast. I was simply amazed at the efficiency of our telephone service. In no time at all, we were 

connected. I had anticipated a long wait. A few days later my daughter called me back, and I again was 

agreeably surprised when she said she had got through almost immediately. The Hon. Mr. Gardiner has 

stated from a public platform at Yorkton that, since this Government took over, our telephone service 

was so bad that on one occasion when he was at the west coast and had to get through to his son in a 

hurry, due to Socialistic inefficiency, he had to wait several hours. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — C.C.F. inefficiency! 

 

Mr. Neibrandt: — Since my experience with telephone efficiency I can now thoroughly discount 

―Jimmy‖ Gardiner‘s statement. I can also discount – because I know better – his claim when he says that 

the farmers never had it so good. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have not time now to go into detail concerning problems that are peculiar mainly to our 

area. I was glad when the member for Swift Current suggested that the tax on farm fuels be taken off. I 

will have more to say on that topic if it does come up; I am in full agreement with that; in view of the 

fact that in our area, due to intensive cultivation, the farmers over there have always felt they are paying 

a large share of this fuel tax. 

 

I have already mentioned that the citizens in our area need better hospitalization. We have made a start 

in our home for senior citizens; but a nursing home for this group is urgently needed. I welcomed the 

reference in the Speech from the Throne that we are making progress in mental health, and that further 

study is being given to our future needs. I, too, when there is a decision made, intend to put forth our 

claim for a mental hospital in that area. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — You won‘t need it if you get rid of the C.C.F 

 

Mr. Neibrandt: — We also need a good road to the many lakes and beauty spots in our section of the 

province. We need a TV station, and we need a new grandstand for our Exhibition grounds, and, of 

course, we need industry to process some of our abundant agricultural products. 

 

I am thoroughly convinced, Mr. Speaker, that our chance of achieving our hopes and aspirations in this 

respect, are much better and brighter under a government that believes in working for the interests of the 

people than would be the case under any other government. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as a farmer, I am uneasy. I am afraid that our spiralling inflation is robbing us of a 

great share of even the reduced income that we have. Normally, the farmers are the biggest consumers, 



 

February 18, 1957 

 

 
19 

and any increase in services is a real burden. It must be remembered that we buy food, clothing and 

shelter. The farmer has to buy machinery, repairs, fuel, and fertilizer, and often feed and seed, in order to 

operate his farm successfully. It seems, therefore, that our present economic structure is loaded with 

booby-traps for the farmer. A farmer in my constituency complained that when he wants to market his 

grain, more than likely he cannot use his own elevator. Through sheet necessity. . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I can use my own elevator. 

 

Mr. Neibrandt: — . . .he is forced to use an elevator that, at the time he hauls the grain in, just for the 

moment happens to have no room for the type of grain he has for sale, so he has to accept a lower grade 

that amounts to sometimes 17 cents, between No. 4 and No. 5, and I think that that is a real hardship. 

 

Further, I find that my initial payment is less, due to the fact that our International Wheat Agreement is 

based on the American dollar, which, of course, is a lot cheaper. Increased interest rates paid by the 

Wheat Board cost the farmer just that much more when the farmer receives his final payment. I seems 

that he has credit in the bank when he doesn‘t need it, and elsewhere is credit is zero. Yet he has to 

compete with dollars that are increasingly hard to get, in a market where prices keep rising. No wonder 

that, even amongst the most stout of heart – and that includes old-age pensioners and those on fixed 

incomes – there is uneasiness as they contemplate the future with bleak misgivings. 

 

The present unfavourable economic position with respect to the farmers is so grave that I feel I would be 

unfaithful to my trust if I would dismiss this most embarrassing and perplexing subject without further 

comment. When we have men like our present Federal Minister of Agriculture, and even the Prime 

Minister, disdainfully dismissing the subject as of now consequence and stoutly maintaining that the 

farmer ―never had it so good,‖ it is not only very disconcerting, but downright alarming, for the farmer 

as he looks in vain to Ottawa‘s agricultural policies for relief to his present dilemma. The basic problem, 

of course, is the cost-price squeeze where, due to inflationary pressures, the products that the farmer 

buys are away out of line with his diminishing returns; and the prospect facing me as a farmer is that 

soon I will reach the point of no return. 

 

We hear a lot of loose talk about the uneconomic unit and greater efficiency of production. As farmers, 

it is maintained, we are supposed to acquire an efficiency of such a high calibre and standard that we can 

compete with all comers in the markets of the world. When people who require our wheat have an 

income that is equivalent to only about $50 a year, it is not a question of greater efficiency at home, but 

rather it revolves around the question of aid to these people in such a way that they become more 

efficient and productive to the end that they will be able to afford our wheat. 



 

February 18, 1957 

 

 
20 

Mr. Loptson: — Why don‘t you give your surplus away then? 

 

Mr. Neibrandt: — It is equally foolish, Mr. Speaker, to talk of increased efficiency at home when the 

farmer is forced to buy on the most inefficient market devised by the cunning of man. Goods that cost 

$50 to produce have a mark-up to $100 to the farmer. Of course, this takes care of capital investments, 

plus the capital cost, transportation, warehousing, servicing, distribution, wholesaling, selling and 

retailing. Unless the article is a farm implement, another ten per cent Federal sales tax has to be added. 

How can there be a claim for efficiency in the production of tractors when 47 types and models are 

produced, each one of which needs special repairs and specialized maintaining, separate advertising and 

distribution and servicing, all of which is added on to the price the farmer pays? How can we justify the 

inefficiency that exists in the duplication that takes place, for instance, in the production of refrigerators, 

where 50 companies compete, and where it is conceded that one company could produce the whole 

output at half the price? It seems to me that the farmer on an economic unit is efficient. It is the 

antiquated structure of our competitive enterprise system that has failed us. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — What about the Co-ops? 

 

Mr. Neibrandt: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the western farmer produces the highest quality wheat in 

the world, and sells it at a price that is the lowest in the world. I would not mind that so much if the 

Canadian consumers would derive the benefit; but they are paying top price for bread that is produced 

from the cheapest and best wheat. Through inefficiency of distribution, the price of a loaf of bread 

would still be 16 cents, even if the wheat was free. Yet Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, does not allow the validity 

of our contention that the farmer should at least get parity for that portion of grain which goes into home 

consumption, maintaining that the consumer would be victimized. Yet they glibly talk of the farmer 

receiving parity now! By painting this distorted picture of agricultural prosperity, Ottawa is deliberately 

trying to give the impression to the housewife that, when she shops for her groceries, the high price she 

pays is due to the fact that the farmer receives too much for his produce, and the worker receives too 

high a wage. Of course, she is amazed when she finds out the difference in the spread between what she 

pays and what the farmer really gets! It is duplication in advertising, selling and distribution, and higher 

profits, that puts on the high price-tag to the consumer! There is no competition in price, but there is a 

tacit understanding of how to victimize the consumer, and how to put the blame on the high cost of 

labour. Even in our most modern bakeries, where everything is automatic, where labour is only a minor 

factor, the price of bread is still as high as ever. 

 

Another chief cause of the price-squeeze is the unprecedented higher profits that the manufacturers of 

farm machinery make. When labour wins an increase in wages, that is an excuse to jack up the retail 

price 



 

February 18, 1957 

 

 
21 

out of all proportion to labour‘s increased cost. When freight rates go up, or when the price of raw 

material advances, that is an opportunity for higher profits. Just to give you one example – when the 

price of steel went up $5 a ton, instead of a differential of $20 on a four-ton combine, there was an 

actual increase of $450 to the farmer. I maintain that this situation needs to be remedied soon, lest our 

economy burst under the strain! 

 

I heartily agree with the realistic agricultural policy of the C.C.F., of parity prices, cash advances, and 

the payment of storage on farm-stored grain. It may be necessary to consider the question of outright 

gifts to the needy areas of the world; the extension of credit to, as well as technical and economical 

assistance for, the under-privileged should be considered. Also, it would help to launch a more 

aggressive sales campaign abroad; and promoting the idea at home that ―bread is our best food and that 

we should eat more of it,‖ would help to increase consumption, with its inevitable good effects on 

health. 

 

I take pleasure, Mr. Speaker, in seconding the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Leader of the Official Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, first of all I would like to 

congratulate you, Sir, on your election as the Speaker for this session of the Legislature an d for the 

three Sessions at least we expect in the future. I, as you know, have had the opportunity of sitting in this 

Legislature with you for some considerable time, and I was pleased to learn that you were to be the 

Speaker of this Legislature. I sincerely hope that your tasks will be light and that you will enjoy them. 

 

At this time I would also like to congratulate all of the members on the other side of the House who have 

been promoted into the Cabinet since June 20th. 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek): — There are quite a few, too! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — They have many responsibilities and I know, from the experience I have had in 

leading the Opposition, that their duties will not be light in carrying the responsibility of any particular 

department of government. 

 

I would also like to congratulate all of the new members of the Legislature, on both sides of the House. I 

am always very pleased to see younger men and women take an active part in the political parties that 

are asking for the support of the people of this province and of Canada on different occasions; and I 

want to congratulate each and every member who is sitting in this Legislature for the first time. I am 

sure that you will all enjoy your work. I hope that some of you have a long stay, and I hope that some of 

you have a short stay. 



 

February 18, 1957 

 

 
22 

I would like at this time to congratulate both the mover and the seconder of the Address in Reply to the 

Speech from the Throne. I feel that, as new members to this House, they both did a very commendable 

job, this afternoon. I feel that their presentations were excellent. I am certainly going to have to disagree 

with many of the things that they have said, but, after all, I suppose that is the reason we have different 

political parties in this Legislature and in different parts of the world. But I do sincerely commend both 

speakers on the efforts made here, this afternoon. 

 

This being ‗Brotherhood Week‘, I would like to say that I believe if all of us were to act probably more, 

and to govern our actions, keeping Brotherhood Week in mind, than to give it lip-service during that 

week and then by our actions destroy all of the things that we have said when we are making speeches 

with regard to Brotherhood Week, this would be probably a better Legislature in which we could all 

work; it would be a nicer province to live in, a nicer country, and I think that the whole world would 

benefit more if each and every one of us were to give brotherly lip-service, if we were prepared to work 

with and for our fellow men as our friends. 

 

There are just one or two things that I want to say in regard to what has been said by previous speakers 

here this afternoon. I thought at one time that I might deal with the Speech from the Throne in the next 

fifteen or twenty minutes, as that is about all the time it will take. It is the leanest Speech from the 

Throne that I have ever had the privilege of listening to. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — It‘s the longest, though! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Yes, there is an awful lot of writing but there is practically nothing in it; and after 

listening to the mover and the seconder here, this afternoon, I soon found that we were back down in 

Ottawa and that this Session of our Legislature, if this afternoon is any example, means that we are 

going to be down in Ottawa and fighting a Federal campaign during the eight weeks or so that we are 

supposed to be looking after the affairs of our province; and I do not think that is the reason that the 

people of this province elected any of us to sit in this Legislature. 

 

The Speech from the Throne refers to agriculture – that is about all it does; it just reefers to it. Now you 

may recall, last year, when I was speaking in the Legislature I had a few things to say about agriculture 

and the following day the Premier chastised me for not having said more about agriculture. Well now, 

Mr. Speaker, we have the spectacle of a government sitting in office in the province of Saskatchewan – 

the mover and the seconder of the Reply to the Speech from the Throne complaining bitterly about the 

condition of agriculture in Saskatchewan; and we have no suggestions of policy, no program, to take 

care of any of these problems that were outlined by the mover and the seconder or by any speaker that 

has been speaking on behalf of this Government over the last several months. If agricultural conditions 

are in the shape that my friends say it is, surely then we, as a provincial government, have some duty 

and some responsibility 



 

February 18, 1957 

 

 
23 

as far as agriculture is concerned; but in the Speech from the Throne they say, and I quote: 

 

―However, on a long-term basis the most serious threat to agricultural solvency is rising farm costs 

and falling farm prices.‖ 

 

Mr. Cameron: — That is the sum total. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Has this Government no plans or no program to take care of any of the problems 

confronting agriculture today? I think it is about time they got their heads out of the sand and that we, as 

a provincial government, get out and do the things we can do, as a provincial government, to alleviate 

the situation that agriculture finds itself in today. 

 

Then they go on and in the next paragraph they speak of having had a Select Special Committee last 

year, and that that Committee approved a report, and the report was approved by the Legislature, and 

then what they have done with the report I don‘t know. Yes, the Government members of the 

Legislature approved the report. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker (Attorney General): — You didn‘t vote against it. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — But what did you do with it? What happened to this report? Where did it go? Who 

did you send it to? Did you send it down to Mr. Coldwell? 

 

Mr. Korchinski (Redberry): — Lower Slobovia! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Well, it must have gone to Lower Slobovia because I don‘t know what happened to 

it. 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): — Yes, that is it exactly – Slobovia – Ottawa. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Now there are so many things that I would like to say in this regard that I think I 

will leave my remarks until tomorrow, with one exception. When the seconder of the Speech from the 

Throne was talking about the types of tractors that we have had and the numbers of models of 

frigidaires, and that that would be much decreased in a planned economy, I thought for sure that he was 

going to tell us that we should have one type of member in this Legislature and one political party. Well 

now, I would be quite happy if we only had one kind of tractor manufactured in Canada or the United 

States, providing it was one I wanted; and I suppose there are other people who would certainly disagree 

with me, and I suppose there are people who would be satisfied to have a frigidaire or a deep freeze of 

any make. There are a lot of us who have a liking for one particular kind or another, and I doubt very 

much the wisdom of us getting into a planned economy whereby we have one product, or one make of 

any particular 



 

February 18, 1957 

 

 
24 

machine, or even one member in this Legislature, or even one political party in Saskatchewan or in 

Canada. I am a free enterpriser not only in the type of tractor I might want to buy; I am a free enterpriser 

in the type or program and the type of philosophy that I would like to support so far as governments are 

concerned. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, with those few words I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 4:15 o‘clock p.m. 


