




















































Hansard: February 21, 1957


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

6th Day 

 

Thursday, February 21, 1957 

 

The House met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

SALE OF BOND ISSUE 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded 

with, I would like to announce that yesterday the province received bids for $7,000,000 of 20-year 

debentures. We received four bids. The successful bidder bid a price of $96.32; the bonds were re-

offered for sale at a price of $97.50, which is a yield to the investor of 4.95 per cent. I have just received 

word that the books were closed this morning, and the issue has been over-subscribed. 

 

I would like to point out that I feel very happy about this further evidence of the financial stability of the 

Province and the great development that is going on, when investors will invest in Saskatchewan at a 

rate of 4.95, especially when, in recent months, our neighbouring Province of Manitoba, for a similar 

bond, paid a higher price. The bonds were sold at a yield of 5.125. The Province of Nova Scotia, within 

the past month, raised money on similar terms at 5.07. The Province of Newfoundland is at the present 

time selling an issue at a price of 5.07. The Province of Ontario, one of the wealthiest provinces of 

Canada, just completed a deal under which the bonds of their province were sold at 5 per cent. In New 

Brunswick, the issue there was sold at a price of 5.15 and 5.25. So this is the first time that the bonds of 

any provincial government have been sold at a rate of less than 5 per cent in a good many months, and I 

think we should all be very proud of that fact. 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

Debate on Address-in-Reply 
 

The House resumed from Wednesday, February 20, 1957, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion 

of Mr. Wood (Swift Current) for the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Hon. A.P. Weber (Leader of Social Credit) (Meadow Lake): — I would like at this point to bring out 

the 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
2 

fact that due to radio time allotted to the members of the Social Credit group, I am in a position where I 

am forced to confine my radio speech to thirty-five minutes. I would also like to point out that the total 

radio time allocated to the Social Credit group for the complete Session is one hour and fifty minutes. 

We are not very happy about this situation; however, we will abide by the decision of the Radio 

Committee. 

 

I would like at this time to say, Mr. Speaker, that last June we presented to the people of Saskatchewan 

our program which we considered right and possible. We have not, since that time, changed our opinion, 

and we will continue to press for many of these positive policies which we had in our program at this 

Session. 

 

It is my privilege today, to speak on the motion to the Speech from the Throne and this being 

‗Brotherhood Week‘ I would ask your indulgence in this, my first speech to the Legislature. 

 

I was pleased to hear that the hon. members from Yorkton and Swift Current (Mr. Neibrandt and Mr. 

Wood), when speaking on the motion, favoured the abolition of the 3 per cent Education and 

Hospitalization Tax. The Leader of the Official Opposition (Mr. McDonald) also indicated that he is in 

favour of the removal of this tax. Therefore, we feel that it is very encouraging to hear that all parties are 

in agreement that this tax should be abolished. We have been advocating this change for a considerable 

number of years, and it goes without saying that this move, we think, is in the right direction, since this 

will eliminate some of the tax burden which is placed on our agricultural producers today. 

 

The hon. member from Yorkton mentioned that Saskatchewan was a province which was, in his words, 

―paying the highest per capita of social welfare of any province of Canada.‖ This is no surprise to me. 

However, I wonder if the reason for this could be that this expenditure is necessary in Saskatchewan due 

to the abnormal demands for increasing social aid. The hon. member also mentioned the extensive 

highway program. This may be true in the southern part of the province – I don‘t know for sure; 

however, in the north of the province, which I represent, this highway program is not in evidence. In 

fact, in our town No. 4 Highway from the south passes through the town of Meadow Lake and continues 

on into the north. No. 3 Highway comes from Prince Albert through Big River, Green Lake and is 

supposed to finish up at the Alberta border. I have been in that district for 15 years and since that time 

they have been building highways, and there is only one direction in which we can get out of Meadow 

Lake under any adverse weather conditions, and that is on No. 4 Highway to the South, and we have to 

drive approximately 100 miles before we can reach a hard-top highway. 

 

However, we have a situation up there now which you people have perhaps heard about, and that is the 

new Uranium City road. This was 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
3 

a dream of the business men of Meadow Lake along with some of the other ambitious people, to try to 

bring some of the natural resources or the mineral wealth from the northern part of Saskatchewan, such 

as Uranium City, to Saskatchewan, instead of having it go into Alberta. This business in the past has 

been mostly divided between Edmonton and Calgary. However, it is mostly being flown in, excepting in 

the summertime when they can use the waterways, and it is very expensive to bring goods into Uranium 

City. A year ago this winter, the business men undertook to establish a route by themselves, and in doing 

so they found a way, partly over water and partly over land. I think it took them around three weeks or a 

month to get up to Uranium City. They have gone up there again this year with a bulldozer, and are 

making a road which is mostly overland, and they are trying to compete with Alberta, who have voted 

$100,000 to construct a road from the vicinity of Waterway to Uranium City. 

 

This matter was brought to the attention of our Ministers in the year previous, and last year some of the 

members of the Prince Albert Board of Trade and members of Uranium City Chamber of Commerce got 

together, and they got in touch with Mr. Davidson, assistant Deputy Minister of Natural Resources. In 

interviewing him he stated that this Alberta road that was going 350 miles northeast of Edmonton to 

Lake Athabasca would not hurt Saskatchewan. I quote: 

 

―I am not surprised, he said, when informed of the Alberta announcement. We have expected Alberta 

would build a road for some time. Most of the trade has been going via this route in the past. I don‘t 

know whether the Saskatchewan Government can or will do anything about the situation. The only 

definite plan is the one of Meadow Lake – Uranium City Freightways.‖ 

 

I think that the this Government should have been as interested in establishing a Uranium City contact as 

the Government of the province of Alberta, and, therefore, I would suggest that some consideration be 

given to assist these men in their attempt to establish a road into the north. 

 

I would like at this time to pay special tribute to those men who had the vision and the pioneering spirit 

to make that trip into the north. I would also like to draw attention of this Assembly to our pilot, or guide 

as I should call him, who had his own plane and at very, very little expense money assisted in guiding 

the bombardier through that wilderness in the north. Unfortunately, on the road returning from the north, 

when he was flying supplies out to the bombardier, his plane crashed; he was almost killed. He was in 

hospital for a considerable length of time and at this time I would like to pay tribute to that pilot, Mr. 

Martin. 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
4 

The hon. member for Yorkton also kept referring to the depression years. I always feel that the 

depression years should not be a criterion whereby this Government gauges its successes or failures. The 

depression was worldwide and no particular government can be blamed for this situation. However, we 

feel that a great deal of suffering could have been alleviated by proper distribution of goods which were 

produced in abundance during that difficult time. Small investors, larger investors, millionaires, 

industrialists, manufacturers and many others went ‗broke‘ along with the farmers. However, we will 

forget about the depression years except to this extent: the depression years were the years that built the 

community of Meadow Lake. When the south was dried out and things were at a low ebb here, the 

farmers, with the same pioneering spirit that they had when they originally came to Canada, or I should 

say Saskatchewan, and settled this country; when they were in that depressed state they still had enough 

gumption to pack up the few belongings they had left and go to a country where there was a little bit of 

moisture and green grass. I would like to say at this time that many of the farmers in that area, through 

hard work have made a success of their farming endeavours. It wasn‘t easy for those people. As most of 

you know, the area I represent, was mostly at that time, bush or heavy timber, and they had quite a time 

to cut their farms out of that type of land. However, I am very pleased to say that they have been quite 

successful on the average, and today you can go into the Meadow Lake area and you will find that it is 

one of the biggest shipping points for grain, livestock, etc., in western Canada, not to mention the many 

other hay crops, such as alfalfa, produced up in that area. 

 

In my opinion the province of Saskatchewan has been built on the foundation of agriculture, and I still 

think that agriculture is the basic economy of our province. However we find that farmers generally are 

in a very precarious position. We feel that provision should be made by this Government to relieve the 

tax burden placed on the farmers, and also to encourage them towards stabilizing our farm economy. I 

would urge the Government to introduce legislation to establish a Farm Credit Union program under 

which capital loans will be made available to young farmers for the purchase of agricultural land. 

 

We in the Social Credit group will continue to support and press for the construction of the 

Saskatchewan River Development project, and we will also continue to support the request made by 

various agricultural organizations to the Federal Government to institute a parity price, or a two-price 

system, for the agricultural products and for advances on farm-stored grain. 

 

In his speech yesterday, the Premier was comparing the progress of Saskatchewan‘s oil industry with 

that of the oil industry in Alberta. In very glowing terms, Mr. Speaker, he outlined the great advantages 

which Saskatchewan has made in the past year; and I was very pleased to hear that this was so. But I 

noticed that when he quoted Saskatchewan‘s progress, he 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
5 

compared this progress percentage-wise with the progress in Alberta, and when he mentioned the total 

production he only gave the figures for the province of Saskatchewan. Now we all know that, if we had 

one oil well last year and brought in another one this year, we would have an increase of 100 per cent. 

Let us not fool ourselves. We still have a long, long way to go before we can equal the total production 

of oil produced in the province of Alberta. Nevertheless, if this favourable comparison with Alberta‘s oil 

industry should exist, and as the Premier outlined yesterday, and if our mineral wealth is considerably 

more than that enjoyed by the province of Alberta, I would like to know just why it is that this 

Government has found it necessary, year after year, to borrow money to expand the operations of the 

Crown Corporations of our province, while last year, in Alberta, one department was able to budget for 

more money than the total budget of the province of Saskatchewan, for the same year – and they didn‘t 

have to borrow a dollar. Therefore, I believe that we are not yet in a position to compare our province 

favourably with the province of Alberta, as far as oil industry is concerned. However, I know that our 

province is making tremendous strides, which I am very pleased to see, and that, in the not too distant 

future, we will produce more oil in Saskatchewan than we ever thought would be possible. 

 

In the northern part of the province that I have mentioned before (and, of course, I am very keenly 

interested in that area), we have potential wealth in mineral and industrial development, too, for that 

matter; but I would like to say that, in my opinion, this mineral wealth that has been developed so far has 

just been a small part of the potential of the northern part of our province. It is true we have a base set-

up in Uranium City and Gunnar Mines, but I believe, due to the poor communications in the areas south 

of there, much of this area has never been explored. I would like also to point out that in our area we 

have some of the best fishing in Canada. In the northern part of Saskatchewan we produce quite a good 

class of fish. We have mostly ‗A‘ lakes, and the fishing industry is a big addition to the economy of our 

province. 

 

Timber and pulpwood is also in abundance in that area. It is too bad that communications are so 

difficult. At the present time it is almost impossible to get into those prospective areas, excepting by 

airplane transportation which, we know, is very costly and it does not always bring you into the area in 

which we would like to start exploration work. 

 

There is one thing that I would like to bring to the attention of this Legislature, and that is the tourist 

attractions we have in the north. We are very, very proud of our lakes and resorts, and also the fish we 

catch up in that area. If you will check back you will find that the two largest pike that won the 

provincial championship last year, were caught in a lake close to Meadow Lake. 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
6 

Our difficulty up there seems to be roads again. I would like to see better roads in our part of the country 

and further development of our lakes into summer resort parks. These lakes are all within a few miles of 

Meadow Lake. Within a two-hour drive you can get to La Plonge Lake – don‘t confuse that with La 

Ronge; it is La Plonge Lake, trout fishing area. You don‘t have to hire any guide, and with a rowboat 

you can go out there and catch fish on ordinary jackfish hooks. This sounds like advertising, but it is not. 

I think the tourist industry is one that can be developed into a major industry in our province; but we 

must provide facilities for the tourists who come into our country, and a lot of tourists are turned back at 

the city of North Battleford because they cannot depend on the roads in our area to go to, and return 

from, the lakes to which they would like to go. 

 

With all this potential and actual wealth in the northern part of our province, I would urge this 

Government to establish a northern development commission to make a complete and thorough study of 

conditions and needs in the northern area of our province. 

 

Municipal property taxation in our province, Mr. Speaker, has reached the saturation point, in my 

opinion, in both rural and urban municipalities, and with the trend to increased taxation today I find that 

we need to look elsewhere than direct property taxes to secure the necessary taxes to carry on the 

functions of governments at all levels. We believe that a sharing of the gasoline tax would be a step in 

the right direction, and this would take off some of the burden from our property taxpayer. I noticed in 

some of the statements that our Premier made that he is opposed to the sharing of the gasoline tax. 

However, we would ask him to reconsider his stand, under the circumstances, and at least give the plan 

some consideration. This tax-sharing policy could be started on a small percentage scale and then 

increased gradually as circumstances would warrant. 

 

The old-age pensions are another thing that has been kicked around a lot, and I would like to give our 

stand on this. We feel there is much to be desired in the treatment of our old-age pensioners, both by the 

Federal Government and by the present Provincial Government. We will, progressively, as finances 

allow, ask that the old-age supplementary allowances be brought into line with those now in effect in the 

provinces to the west of us. We also press for a revision of the supplementary allowances for widows 

and children, as well as a real expansion in the field of social services. 

 

I had the honour of being mayor of the town of Meadow Lake for four years; I was on the council for 

four years previous to that, and I have had some experience in municipal financing, at least on the urban 

level. I would like to point out at this time the difficulty that we experienced with the Local Government 

Board in making arrangements to finance any debenture issues which we found necessary to carry on the 

work of local improvement. 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
7 

I might mention that in our town we put in a sewage system. This sewage system necessitated borrowing 

over $70,000 and we found it very difficult to get buyers or takers for these debentures. I must say that 

the Provincial Government did help us out to some extent, but nevertheless, we can realize that it is still 

a difficult proposition for municipalities, both rural and urban, to have a source whereby this money can 

be obtained without too much red tape. 

 

At the present time our town is trying to raise money, through debentures, for the completion of the 

waterworks in the town. This is also getting to be more difficult year after year. Large finance 

companies, or finance companies who are in a position to take up these debentures, are not inclined to be 

bothered too much about small municipal financing; they are more interested, as the Provincial 

Treasurer mentioned today, in million –dollar projects which, of course, are more simple as far as they 

are concerned. Therefore, I would ask the Government to establish or set up a municipal financing 

corporation. This would be a non-profit organization to assist in municipal financing by the purchase 

and sale of municipal securities at the lowest possible cost, and to provide a convenience and accessible 

means to the people of the province of investing in debentures and other securities of provincial 

municipalities. 

 

In the northern part of our province – going back there again – AI am just wandering a little bit around 

the country. I haven‘t got too far east and I haven‘t got too far west; but we have a problem up there that 

is rather unique in this country, and that is the problem of our Indians. As some of you know the Indian 

situation in our province is such that part of these people come under the Department of Indian Affairs, 

which is federally controlled, and some of the Indians are Indians who are not under this Department 

and do not receive treaty money. Services are rendered in that area by both the Department of Indian 

Affairs from Ottawa, and by the Government of the province of Saskatchewan. We feel that the Indians 

should not be segregated. We believe that the Indian should become a citizen with the same privileges 

and the same benefits as any other citizen in the province of Saskatchewan; and I would suggest that 

some investigating committee be set up to check into the feasibility of bringing all Indians under one 

department to be administered by the province of Saskatchewan. Then there wouldn‘t be this 

overlapping of services, such as schools and social services, which exist today. This overlapping does 

not mean that these people are getting too much; in my opinion, this overlapping means that on the one 

side we have the Federal Government, on the other side we have the Provincial Government, and in 

between we have the neglected people. 

 

I believe my time has almost come to an end and I would close my remarks in speaking on the motion. I 

would be quick to point out that our group feels that many problems of vital importance to the welfare of 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
8 

of Saskatchewan have been overlooked, and we urge the Government to consider implementing the 

necessary legislation which we find they have failed to include in the Speech from the Throne. 

Therefore, I feel, Mr. Speaker, that I cannot support the motion. 

 

Hon. Woodrow S. Lloyd (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, may I first of all join with those 

who have already extended to you congratulations on your election as speaker of the House. Having had 

a fair amount of opportunity over recent years to see you in action in Cabinet and on the Board of 

Directors of the Power Corporation, I have cause to know your feeling for fairness and your ability to be 

impartial, and I am sure the Legislature will be well served as a result of your occupancy of the Chair. 

 

May I also join with those who have congratulated the Mover and Seconder of the Speech from the 

Throne on their vigorous contribution to the debate. Unfortunately I was not able to be in the House on 

the occasion of those addresses, but I was able to hear them on the radio. As a matter of fact there is 

some advantage, I find, in listening to these addresses on the radio of a car. Driving along in the car one 

has a feeling of well being. As you look out straight ahead of you, you can see some of Saskatchewan‘s 

fine highways, and you get some feeling of hope and promise for the future. I get quite a different 

feeling when I look immediately across from me in the House, Mr. Speaker, so there is some advantage 

in being in the car. 

 

Members of the Legislature and the public have now had the opportunity of hearing expressions from 

each of the Leaders of the three political groups represented in this House, and members of this 

Legislature and the public will, as a result, be in a position to judge, on the basis of clarity of thought, of 

precision of plans and of humanism of philosophy, which of these groups can best claim the right to 

govern the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I thought it a great pity when the Leader of the official Opposition was taking his cross-country tour, 

touching on provincial elections the other day, that he did not continue to the logical conclusions. Had 

he done so, he would then have pointed out that the only political party in Canada to have been defeated 

in provincial elections in recent years was the Liberal party. We have seen in recent years the Liberal 

Party lose its control of governments first in British Columbia, then in New Brunswick, and more lately 

in Nova Scotia. The wonder of it is, I think, that in the election of last year they did not get more votes in 

Saskatchewan based, that is, on the extent and the flexibility of the promises which they put before the 

people of Saskatchewan at that time. I am reminded, for instance, of the discussions emanating from 

various seats in the province with regard to 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
9 

whether or not Regina College should be a full-fledged University. The Liberal candidates in the city of 

Regina said the Liberal party would make it such; but the Liberal candidates in the city of Saskatoon 

said that wasn‘t the Liberal party policy. Then we had a perfectly beautiful sort of a statement from the 

Leader of the official Opposition, saying: ―Well, that‘s all right, boys. It‘s fair game for the candidates 

for the party in one constituency to promise something and in another constituency not to promise the 

same thing.‖ We found the Liberal candidate (one, at least) in the city of Saskatoon, being critical of the 

Government ‗s policy of using vocational educational grants to build composite schools rather than to 

build one big institution. I think it is fair to assume that Liberal candidates in some 20 or 30 

constituencies in which composite schools have been built, did not share in that kind of criticism of 

Government policy. 

 

In my own constituency I found the Liberal party there promising some things which I am quite sure that 

even the members of the Legislature in the Liberal party had not heard of before. I have here the copy of 

the ‗Biggar Independent‘ for the week of May 31, in which I find, among other things, the Provincial 

Liberal Party in that constituency promising compensation for accidents to farmers and farm workers; 

that the Canadian Wheat Board would market all grains; that they would improve the P.F.A., 

supplementing it, if necessary, by provincial assistance, and, above all things, that the South 

Saskatchewan River project would be built immediately. 

 

When one considers the flexibility and the variety of programs offered, I say the wonder is they did not 

get more votes. As a matter of fact, I found people in some places calling them the ‗Heinz Party‘ – 57 

different varieties! 

 

When the Leader of the official Opposition was outlining to the House the other day his 16 points with 

regard to an agricultural program, I was reminded of the methods of modern merchandising. You know 

how it is, Mr. Speaker. You go into the store; you see advertised there the big economy-sized package, 

and then inside that package maybe there is a premium, or perhaps you have to send in some box-tops 

with 10 cents, or $1.61 in order to get the particular premium. Frequently the premium isn‘t too bad, if it 

wasn‘t for the blamed stuff that you had to eat in order to get the premium. It seems to me that the 

people of the province took that same kind of an attitude toward this same offer made to them in the 

election campaign. Many of the points advanced in themselves would not have been too bad; but people 

were not prepared to take what they had to take along with those points in order to support them. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — That‘s why you are changing your tune up there now; the people 

couldn‘t swallow it any longer. 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
10 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — From time to time he compared the situation in Saskatchewan with the situation in 

other provinces of Canada, seeming to suggest that if only these things were done here which were done 

there, then all would be well. In view of that it is interesting to note that we find from farm groups in 

other parts of Canada the same kind of complaint; that they are facing the same kind of problems as are 

the farmers of Saskatchewan. It is not just a matter of the wheat farmers on the prairies. It is a matter of 

fruit farmers in other provincials, and potato growers in other provinces; and that seems to validate the 

conclusion advanced in the Speech from the Throne that these problems are the ones which can be 

corrected only if appropriate proper action is taken by the Federal Government. It seems to validate the 

statement that the basic problem is one of relationship between costs and prices, and no government in a 

province of this kind, Mr. Speaker, which has proper consideration for the welfare of the individuals of 

this province or for the municipal local government institutions of this province, can with dignity and 

decency be quiet in the face of such a situation. 

 

Since it is impossible to discuss the problems of local government without reference to that situation, 

and since the members opposite appear to be either unconvinced or unbelieving with regard to the 

Premier‘s statements yesterday, I thought one or two of them might bear repeating. So I looked up a 

publication of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool called ‗The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and Its 

Accomplishments for the Year 1957‘. In this publication they point out the problems which face the 

people of Saskatchewan, and they point them out in these terms: 

 

That farm cash income in 1955 was that of 1946 plus eight points, but farm cost in 1955 was that of 

1946 plus 52 points. 

 

In other words, in that period of time there had been a deterioration of some 44 points. They go on to 

urge such items as deficiency payments, as cash advances on stored grain. 

 

In the Speech from the Throne we have reference to the fact that the Government welcomes the 

announcement made by the Federal Government regarding financial assistance to universities. The 

C.C.F. party has long been an advocate in provincial matters and in Federal matters of increased Federal 

assistance for education. Having been in that position, it is gratifying when action is taken in that 

particular direction. The C.C.F. has long been a maker of Canadian conscience and will continue in that 

category. It has long been a force in compelling a Liberal Government at Ottawa and a Liberal 

movement in Saskatchewan to progressively move along the way toward better ideas and better action. 

Increased Federal assistance to universities will benefit our own university to the extent of 

approximately an additional $373,000. This, it seems to me, is a very logical way in which the Federal 

Government may support education. Many of the graduates go into the services 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
11 

of the Federal Government itself. Many of them go into the services of companies which serve not just 

Saskatchewan, but which serve all of Canada. While I agree with what the Leader of the Liberal party in 

the House said yesterday, or the day before, that we would hope more and more of our graduates would 

stay in Saskatchewan, at the same time I think it is true that we do not necessarily lose the services of 

these people when they go into the employment of organizations or governments which are national in 

scope. 

 

A second way in which assistance is available will be through the creation and activity of what is called 

‗The Canada Council‘. Information which we have is that approximately $100 million will be placed at 

the disposal of this organization. This, by the way, according to a statement by the Prime Minister in 

Parliament, is the Federal Government‘s ‗take‘ or a portion of the take, from the estate of two Canadian 

citizens who have recently died. It is, in other words, a share of the profits which have come in large part 

out of the natural resources of Canada and the sweat of Canadian people. It is an appropriate thing that it 

should be ploughed back and contributed to the welfare of the Canadian people in this way. 

 

The $100 million is divided into two parts. There is an endowment of $50 million, the earnings of which 

will be used to support scholarships of students, and the activities of individuals and groups in those 

fields generally called the ‗humanities or cultural activities‘. The Province of Saskatchewan has been 

active in this field for some number of year now. The Premier referred yesterday to the Student Aid 

Loan Fund which has been operated for a number of years. Members of the Legislature will, I hope, be 

familiar with the fine program which has been undertaken for a number of years now by the 

Saskatchewan Arts Board, and such activities as that proposed for the Canada Council should 

supplement these activities, indeed. 

 

At the same time, while welcoming that, Mr. Speaker, I think all of us would hope that there would be a 

wide interpretation placed on the meaning of ‗culture‘ and on the meaning of what goes into making up 

the studies of the humanities. A very excellent author has written that there is no more necessary virtuo 

in having read 1,000 books than in having ploughed 1,000 fields, and I would hope that this kind of a 

view would be kept in mind by those who form the policy of the Canada Council. 

 

The second $50 million is to be expended for the purpose of paying half the cost of certain university 

construction in the universities across the country. I think here we must raise a question, and perhaps 

even raise a protest as to the way in which, so far as we know at the present, this is to be allocated. I 

understand from reading of Hansard that this is to be available not for all university buildings, but that 

rather it is to be restricted simply to those buildings again associated with the teaching of the humanities, 

with the advancement of culture. Unfortunately the pro- 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
12 

vincial governments have not been given an opportunity of expressing an opinion as to how this money 

might be most beneficial in our respective provinces. 

 

Let me illustrate how this restriction is an unfortunate one from the point of view of Saskatchewan. As 

the Speech from the Throne indicates, we have completed this last year on the campus of the University, 

a very fine library. It carries the name of the very first President of the University. Because it combines 

sound planning with an eye for beauty and a vision for the future, it is indeed a fitting memorial for Dr. 

Murray, who was the first President of the University. But, we completed it last year. I understand that 

McGill University (to use an example) completed last year a science building. Now, it so happens that 

one of the most pressing needs of our university is for a science building. I understand that McGill has 

need for, and intends to build, a library. If the restriction which I have referred to stands, then it means 

that when Saskatchewan builds its science building, it will not qualify for assistance because it built its 

library last year; but McGill will qualify because it is building a library and built its science building last 

year. That, I think, must be protested. 

 

Even if this restriction did not apply, it is proper, I suggest, to raise the question of whether or not the 

$50 million can be considered a fair contribution on the part of Canada. I say that because the 

developments, the contributions, of those who graduate from our universities will contribute greatly to 

the affluence of the taxes which go into the Federal treasury. I think wee need not look on this as a gift 

of the Federal Government. It is true that they are under no constitutional obligation to make it, but 

certainly they are under some moral obligation, and certainly, from the standpoint of the economy of 

Canada, it is a good investment. So I raise the question of whether $50 million can be considered as an 

adequate contribution. At a conference of Canadian universities held last fall, we were told (and this is 

information which was further given in ‗The Financial Post‘ for the issue of august 25) that the 

universities of Canada must look forward to spending in the next 10 years, for new construction, some 

$300 millions. The Federal Government offer is to share one-half the cost of one-third of that amount. 

 

I think it is fair to say that the University of Saskatchewan is at least well prepared, and probably better 

prepared than most Canadian universities to meet the increased student enrolment which we know will 

take place in years to come. The increased enrolment at our own university to date is gratifying. It will 

increase. It is gratifying, too, to know that this increased enrolment is not yet influenced by the increased 

birth rate of the late ‗40s. Perhaps just a few figures with regard to the position at the University would 

be of value to the members of the Legislature. The enrolment last year, not counting summer school or 

correspondence school or night school, was approximately 3,000 in number. The enrolment in the 

present year is some 3,558. It is estimated by the University that by 1963-64 that enrolment will have 

increased to 4,420. (Interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
13 

one year ago it was estimated that by 1965-66 the enrolment would be only 4,009. Already they have 

revised that estimate so that one year earlier it is 4,420). This will mean, of course, a very considerable 

expenditure with regard to providing new buildings. It was estimated a year ago that it would take $7 

million. The new estimate of enrolment will mean that more than that will have to be spent. It was 

estimated a year ago that this would require additional staff of some 75. The new increase in expected 

enrolment will mean a greater amount than that. 

 

With regard to student fees, our fees for arts and science (the basic course at the university) are 

comparable with those in western Canada – a little less, perhaps, than most of the universities of western 

Canada except Alberta, where they are about the same. At the same time they are at least $100 less than 

those found in the large eastern universities such as Toronto and McGill. If you take the largest college 

on our campus in numbers that is the College of Engineering, here again we compare favourably with 

the other western universities: a little lower than Manitoba; some $200 less than Toronto, and $150 less 

than McGill. If you take the costs of board and room, they are about the same throughout the western 

universities; they are more, generally speaking, in the east. So Saskatchewan young people can, in 

general, attend for the same cost or less cost than is the case in other provinces. 

 

A second reference in the Speech from the Throne is to the matter of school construction costs. May I 

refer again to the ―Financial Post‘ issue of August 25 in which it was estimated that over the next 10 

years, the public and high schools in Canada will require for new construction some $1,440 millions; 

$1,440 millions over the next 10 years. The question to be raised, of course, is whether or not local 

governments and provincial governments can possibly provide finances to make this necessary new 

construction possible. Those who will build will be faced with two big problems. They are faced, first of 

all, with increased building costs as such; and they are faced, secondly, with high-cost money at the 

moment, and the expectation of higher cost money in the future. We have here an effect of this non-

selective high interest rate situation which the Premier referred to yesterday. I know that it can be argued 

that the Federal Government doesn‘t actually establish these interest rates, but certainly all of us will 

agree that the Federal Government policy has been such as to make these interest rates the interest rates 

of the day. This is an unfortunate effect of this non-selective policy, that the cost of getting money for 

this needed purpose may be such as to be an impossible burden for local governments in the province. It 

has one other unfortunate general effect, it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, and that is that it does in effect put 

more power over the lives of the people of Canada in the hands of federal institutions. 

 

The school boards in Saskatchewan, at the moment, do not carry a tremendously large load of capital 

debt. In our units the capital debt is only some $6 ½ million. In the cities, it is about $10.8 million, and 

in 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
14 

the other parts of the province about $2.5 million, making some $19.8 million altogether. This, I say, is 

not a huge debt, when we realize that it is based on an assessment of approximately $1,000 million. 

 

The Provincial Government has been assisting in school construction and will continue to assist in two 

ways: First of all, by virtue of grants which vary with the ability of a district to meet the necessary bills, 

and which have been as much as 70 per cent of the cost of some construction, that‘s the top figure; and, 

secondly, we have assisted by means of purchasing debentures. For the year ending December 31, 1955, 

the Province purchased approximately 21 per cent of all school district debentures issued in the 

province. 

 

The second major problem facing education and school administrators in the province has to do with the 

supply of teachers. As hon. members will have learned from press statements, we have this year in the 

province, some 172 study supervisors. This is 40 more than last year. It is 70 less than the year before, 

but it is 40 more than last year. At the same time it is true that the general qualifications of our teachers 

other than this group, continues to improve, so that we have increasing numbers of young people taught 

by people with university degrees, or with two years of training instead of one, or three years of training 

instead of two. We lost during the year to other parts of the world, at least as measured by teachers who 

asked to have their certificates transferred to other placed, about 597 teachers. We certificated teachers 

from other places to the extent of something over 200, but our net loss was some 377. This indicates that 

the problem is one of retaining teachers. The proper question to be raised, of course, is how do we 

improve this situation? Well, we might improve it if we lowered, as has been done in some provinces, 

the standards which we ask teachers to reach. We have been convinced that this is not the way to make 

any headway in giving us a supply of teachers. Without a doubt salaries are an important factor in 

retaining people in the profession. Without a doubt better living conditions for teachers are extremely 

important. If one looks at the areas in which there are the largest number of study supervisors, it 

becomes immediately plain that, almost without exception, these are those areas of the province in 

which there are conditions of considerable isolation, and these are the areas in which it is difficult to 

attract teachers. If you look at those areas which have no study supervisors, or very few study 

supervisors, these are generally the areas which are close to a city or a large town, or are well served by 

other conveniences of life. 

 

There can be no doubt, too, I think, that we can improve this retention by improving working conditions. 

The one-room rural school can be a very lonely sort of a place; it can be a place in which there is a 

considerable degree of professional isolationism. A teacher works all by himself or herself, and this is a 

less attractive sort of opportunity than is frequently provided in a school in which there are a group of 

teachers employed. These are some ways in which the situation can be improved. 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
15 

I would like to refer also to the situation with regard to students in our teacher training institutions. We 

have at the present some 956 students either at Saskatoon Teachers‘ College, Moose Jaw Teachers‘ 

College or the College of Education at the University. There are 40 more this year enrolled at the 

College of Education than there were last year. One reason why we have more study supervisors is that 

there are more of our teachers not teaching, but in attendance at the University improving their 

standards. But we have about 100 less total teachers in training than we had last year. One reason for 

this, in addition, is that we have increased somewhat our entrance qualifications to Teachers‘ Colleges. 

Had we left those as they were last year, we would probably have had approximately the same number 

of people. Even though it is less than last year, it is greater than any other previous year in the history of 

the province for people in full-time enrolment at the college. 

 

One of the great problems which we must be aware of, and convinced of, in the province of 

Saskatchewan is the large number of schools which we have in relation to our population. It is still true 

that Saskatchewan has more one-room rural schools than the provinces of Manitoba, Alberta and British 

Columbia all put together. This makes our problem of getting enough teachers much greater. We have at 

the moment over 500 schools in which the enrolment is ten or less. We have almost 200 schools in 

operation in which the enrolment is seven or less. Obviously, if it is possible to group these youngsters 

so that a teacher doesn‘t teach seven but teaches fifteen, or a teacher doesn‘t teach ten but teaches 

twenty, we will have a much more adequate supply of teachers. It is because there are very considerable 

costs associated with meeting these problems that the Provincial Government announced in the Speech 

from the Throne, and had announced previously, its intention to make a considerable increase in school 

grants for this particular year – an increase in school grants which will be more than the total of school 

grants paid in the year 1945-46, and considerably more than was paid in the years previous to that. 

 

Since, it is true, Mr. Speaker, that we have been and are spending considerable amounts of money on 

education, it is also necessary, I think, that we ask ourselves as to why this particular investment is 

desirable. 

 

First of all, there are very substantial economic reasons. I do not put this first, I assure you, because I 

think it the most important. Certainly it is true that the economic reasons for investments in education 

are becoming more evident every year. Whether it is a matter of farm or factory, these reasons are there. 

Those people, such as farmers and small businessmen who are self-employed, find the processes which 

they have to master more complicated each year, I am sure. If one looks at the needs of industry in terms 

of skilled or semi-skilled employees, more and more we need more and more of these people. At one 

time we could afford to leave to chance 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
16 

the numbers who came forth to prepare for professional or semi-professional occupations, and usually 

enough came forth. We can no longer do that. We felt at least, we could do it before and usually did 

until a crisis arose. I think it is fair to say that a very serious handicap to our war effort at the beginning 

of World War II was the alarming shortage of skilled and semi-skilled people to do what was needed in 

Canada at that time. 

 

The second reason why there must be emphasis to this problem is that our responsibility for professional 

people and skilled persons is more than the responsibility to our own nation. Surely here is one 

responsibility which we have to under-developed portions of the world. Surely here is one way in which 

we can make a contribution to improving the prosperity of those people and to the hope for a peaceful 

world and end of war. 

 

Let us, of course, not think that it is just the scientist that we need to train. If we are going to have a 

balanced society, we need not just the physical scientist, but the social scientist – the doctor, the social 

welfare worker, the librarian and the teacher as well. 

 

A third reason is because the whole art of decision is becoming more difficult every day. There was a 

time politically, for example, Mr. Speaker, when the only decision the voters had to make at the polls 

was whether to vote Liberal or to vote Conservative, and actually it didn‘t make too much difference 

which one they voted for. But that simple sort of living is no longer with us. It is not just in the matter of 

voting but in the whole mater of relationships – community problems, home problems – that the art of 

decision is becoming more difficult, and education is one way in which the values and the practices and 

the tools of decision may be put in the hands of more people. I have noticed that the Gordon 

Commission in one prediction said that the hours of work were going to steadily decrease. This raises 

the question of what kind of education we do to prepare people for this. 

 

Finally, and overall, is the fact that democracy is dedicated to the ideal that the individual is entitled to 

the right to develop to the full extent of his powers so long as that development does not interfere with 

the right of other people to develop also. This whole matter of what is going to be done about education 

is, if not its most pressing problem, certainly one of Canada‘s most pressing problems. This means that 

governments at all levels, Federal and Provincial and Local, are going to have to be more concerned 

with this problem. It means, also, that each of us as individuals are going to have to make this problem 

of education a matter of personal conscience. 

 

We need in this province then, and we need across Canada, more teachers, better trained teachers, better 

paid teachers, at all levels from the University to the kindergarten. Teachers‘ salaries in Saskatchewan 

have, of course, improved. In 1945 our teachers‘ salary bill was some $8.6 million. In 1954 it was $20.2 

million; in 1955 it was $22.6 million. It 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
17 

will have to be more. We stood at that time fourth highest in the Dominion of Canada with regard to 

teachers‘ salaries, and that was the position which the income of our people generally enjoyed by 

comparison with the income of people in other provinces. We need more school buildings. We need 

them because of the industrialization which is taking place in various parts of the province. Areas such 

as the southeast, where they are experiencing the gratifying oil boom, are facing problems with regards 

to accommodation of students. Just this week we had a community in another part of the province come 

in to us and they have difficulties because of a potash development. They expect, on information given 

to them by the company, that by next year they will need an additional eight classrooms in this relatively 

small urban centre. 

 

In addition to the teacher problem which I have mentioned, and the school building problem, we need 

also better conveyance arrangements. We need better conveyance arrangements if we are to use our 

trained staff adequately. A small rural school has many deficiencies from the point of view of the 

teacher, for whim it presents an occupation not too interesting; from the point of view of the pupil for 

whom it denies the opportunity to associate with other pupils of his own age and grade level, and from 

the point of view of the taxpayer because of the high cost association with it. We will always have in 

Saskatchewan many small enrolment schools; but certainly all of us in this Legislature and across the 

country have an obligation to make other arrangements where these other arrangements can be 

satisfactorily and properly made. We need these better conveyance arrangements if we are going to 

provide high school systems competent to retain both teachers and students. 

 

One of the favourite pastimes throughout the province indulged in by members of the opposition 

sometimes, and by others as well, is the comparison of school grants and school contributions in 

Saskatchewan to those in other provinces. I would like just to spend a few minutes talking about some of 

the bases used in these comparisons. We find, first of all, people compare on the basis of the percentage 

of total budget spend in one province as compared to the percentage of budget spent in another province. 

Whether or not this is a valid comparison depends, of course, on what these budgets include. If the 

budget in one province includes (as it does in Saskatchewan) $10 million or so for hospitalization, but 

doesn‘t include any such sum in another province, then obviously a smaller percentage in the first 

province may indicate an even greater level of effort. 

 

The Provincial Treasurer, when speaking to the Local Government Conference last year, intimated that 

out of estimated revenue of the Provincial Government here, some 34 per cent would be passed on in 

terms of direct financial assistance to local governments in one way or another. In other words, one 

dollar out of every three that comes in isn‘t kept. We simply put a postage stamp on it and send it to a 

local government some place 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
18 

in the province for some use or other. In addition to that, there is the assistance given by government 

programs such as hospitalization, such as the medical care for old-age pensioners and others, which have 

proved of great value. Frequently reference is made to (and frequently the fact forgotten) the action 

taken to remove the weight of some $75 million of seed grain and relief debts. If one looks at this in this 

way it becomes a very large undertaking. This $75 million which the province paid off, would have 

enabled us to have paid all the school taxes in rural municipalities and L.I.D.s for the years 1945 to 

1951, inclusive. That was the extent of the measure of that relief. 

 

I submit that we cannot make accurate comparisons with regard to one function, unless we take it with 

regard to a group of functions. Health, social welfare, education, are generally those programs which are 

shared by local governments and provincial governments. If you take percentages of revenue budgets 

spent for these purposes, estimated at last year across Canada, we get this kind of a picture: in Alberta, 

the combined expenditures for health, social welfare and education amounted to 36 per cent; in 

Manitoba, 44 per cent; in British Columbia, 49 per cent, and in Saskatchewan 56 per cent. 

 

Secondly an attempt is made to carry on this comparison by talking about the percentage of cost which 

is carried by the provincial government or by local governments. This, of course, depends for its validity 

upon what other services have to be carried by local governments. If a municipality in one province has 

to share the cost of Mothers‘ Allowance but doesn‘t in another province, that is one picture. If a 

municipality has to make a much greater contribution toward hospitalisation in one province than 

another, then of course, that also varies the picture and makes the comparison difficult. It is the burden 

which remains after all provincial government services or assistance are taken into consideration that is 

important. It is the totality, of the provincial effort to provide services or share costs, and the totality of 

the remaining burden to provide these services left to the municipalities. It is also, of course, the 

standard of service and what is left over for the individual to provide himself which counts. 

 

So it is practically impossible to get a realistic basis of comparison. We can compare on the basis of the 

levy per quarter-section. Even here, of course, this depends upon the relationship between the 

assessments in the various provinces. But if we use this measurement for the latest year for which 

figures are available at the moment at least, the year 1954, this is what we find. The total levy including 

schools in rural municipalities and L.I.D.s on a quarter-section – the average, in Saskatchewan was $40 

and the average in Manitoba was $50, and the average in Alberta approximately $100. If you take it in 

terms of mill rates for the same year, we find that when the average school tax in Saskatchewan was 23, 

in Manitoba it was 24 and in Alberta 30. If you take the total municipal 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
19 

tax, including school =s, we find that the average mill rate was 50 in Saskatchewan, that it was 61 in 

Manitoba and 55 in Alberta. 

 

But, we ought also to look at the situation within the province as it varies from year to year, or over 

periods of years. How well are we doing in that regard? What kind of a measuring stick can be use? 

Well, the Saskatchewan School Trustees‘ Association, in their brief to the Conference of last fall, 

suggested a measuring stick of the relationship between rural municipal tax levies and farm cash 

income. They concluded ―that it seemed reasonable then that it would be inadvisable to levy an amount 

greater for municipal taxes than 5 per cent of the farm cash income.‖ The long-term relationship 

between total municipal tax levy and farm cash income over the period of the last 30 years was one of 

6.1 percent. If you take the period from 1946 to 1955, this total municipal levy was less than the long-

term average. It was 5 per cent of farm cash income, and that 5 per cent, of course, provided much more 

services than were provided previously. If you take a period such as 1926 to 1929, the relationship there 

was 6.5. I am not going to take the depression years, because that is not a fair comparison. If you take 

the period emerging from the depression, 1939 to 1943, then municipal taxes took up 7 per cent of the 

farm cash income; or if you take the years from 1941 to 1945, they took up 5.1 per cent. 

 

The conclusion then is that the relationship for the last ten years was certainly better than for the long-

term average, and better for any other four or five-year period in that part of the province‘s history. The 

last three years, it is true, the percentage is increasing, and this ought to bother us all. It is increasing for 

two reasons: The levy for local government purposes is up, but more important is the fact that cash farm 

income is down. If the average cash farm income for the last three years had been equal to that of the 

three years previous, then the percentage would not have been down, but would have been barely over 5 

per cent. 

 

And, so, Mr. Speaker, if so measured we have fallen down in our efforts, we have at least not fallen 

down so far as in previous history of the province. 

 

One of the items of which we have heard something in terms of Federal Government plans is the 

renewal of the agreement for technical educational purposes. There is not too much information that I 

can give the House with regard to this at the moment, because the arrangement of the agreement is not 

concluded. We have some information, but we have to date been asked to keep it confidential. 

 

I would like to say a word about the problem of providing technical education in the province of 

Saskatchewan. The growth of the industries in the province, the increased speed of development of 

natural resources, provide a need for more skilled people and the opportunity of employment for more 

skilled people. We need technical education with regard 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
20 

to agriculture, and I would hope that perhaps those members who represent constituencies, including the 

larger units of Kindersley or Kinistino or Sturgis, might have an opportunity to tell us something of the 

vocational-agricultural program being carried on in those units. We need a great many people at what is 

called a ‗sub-professional level‘, with perhaps two years of training; we need a great many people who 

are trained as skilled tradesmen. 

 

I think it important to remember that the first pre-requisite to technical education is a good general 

education. A few months ago I had the opportunity of having a report by Dr. Dimond of the Bureau of 

Statistics. He had been in charge of a survey carried out for the Gordon Commission in this matter of 

skilled and professional workers, and he emphasized the point of view of employers all across Canada 

that, while they were interested in technical education, they were interested that those people who had 

technical education had first of all a good general education. If that good general education can have 

some vocational slant, such as it can have in our composite schools in the province, then so much the 

better for our technical training in the end. A composite school is not, of course, a technical school, but 

does provide some opportunity for exploration of interest and ability; it does provide a better basis for 

choice and I would hope that the new agreement does not exclude assistance to composite schools. 

 

A year ago in the Throne Speech we announced the decision of the Provincial Government to build in 

the province a provincial technical institute. There has been a fair amount of discussion and of planning 

undertaken during the year on this project. There has been a gratifying amount of interest and of 

understanding throughout the province. It has been most helpful to have been able to have announced it 

in advance. I am quite sure, Mr. Speaker, that I would not have known how to have decided the location 

of this institution, if I had not had all the information about so many communities who are sure that 

theirs is the best place for it. My only decision in that regard to date is that, since the cities of Prince 

Albert, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Regina, North Battleford, and the town of Rosetown are all convinced it 

ought to be there, my only decision at the moment is that, after the decision is made, I want from the 

Premier a month‘s leave of absence to leave the province. That decision is one which requires a lot of 

thought. Planning on this will advance during the year on the whole form and function of the institution. 

I hope that, during the year, we will be able to employ at least some key staff. 

 

Reference is made in the Speech from the Throne to education in northern Saskatchewan, and I was 

pleased to hear the expression of opinion from the Leader of the Social Credit party, who has just 

spoken, with regard to this problem. We point out here that in a number of communities in northern 

Saskatchewan, the Federal Government, which has the responsibility of education for the Indian 

children, and the Provincial Government, which has the other responsibility, have completed agreements 

enabling us to carry on one educational 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
21 

program in the community. This is, as the hon. member for Meadow Lake (Mr. A.P. Weber) indicated, 

extremely desirable. It has taken some considerable length of time to bring about. I think it was in 1945 

that I first went to Ottawa to discuss this with the Federal authorities at that time. We have several 

communities on such an arrangement today, and everybody, I think, is very happy about it. The 

significance of it, of course, is that, previously, one group of the children were picked up and taken out 

of the community by airplane or canoe to some other part in the north, and they by that very act became 

somehow different from the children who remained at home. This arrangement makes it possible for the 

public school to perform its function of getting all of the children in the community together with the 

same kind of an opportunity associating as one kind of person, not too or three. 

 

Reference is made to the development at Lac La Ronge. When this development (which again is a joint 

effort on the part of the Federal and the Provincial Governments) is completed, we will have some ten 

classrooms at Lac La Ronge, and I am sure that they will all be full when the school bell rings next fall. 

This is the first time that we have undertaken anything in the nature of a vocational program in that part 

of the province. This is again an important step. Several members of my staff have recently been in Lac 

La Ronge to discuss this with the people in the community, particularly the Home and School 

Association, and one of them, who just came back a week or two ago, said ―this was the finest home and 

school club meeting I have ever attended in my life.‖ He spoke of the reception of the idea by all the 

people of the community. He spoke of the interest of the Indian population, of the contribution which 

the members of the Indian population made to discussion at the home and school club meeting. He 

referred in particular to one elderly Indian lady who said, ―One of the things we ought to teach in this 

vocational school is the art of tanning hides. This the Indian needs. This is something that some of us 

know how to do, but it is becoming a lost art.‖ She is so keen on it that she has already written out a 

complete and detailed description of just how this process can be carried out. It will, I trust, be possible 

here to give not the kind of vocational education that we would give in a large technical school on the 

prairies – we will not be concerned with farm motors; we will be concerned with outboard motors and it 

should be possible to give here a practical education depending upon the needs of the people in the 

community. 

 

This is again an example of the benefits of Provincial and Federal co-operation in one of our most 

difficult problems, and what may well be one of our most productive processes. We hope to see such co-

operation extended. 

 

The Speech from the Throne tells a story and it points a way. It is the story of a province which is 

growing and developing rapidly. It is, in part, the story of some of the problems of the people and of our 

major industry. It indicates as well development which has been taken place in the 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
22 

fields of health and social welfare and education, while at the same time it is summarizing those aspects, 

its points the way and refers to needs for further development. It gives credit to the Federal Government 

where credit is due, and it criticizes where criticism is due. It points out gaps and weaknesses which can 

only be provided for by joint action on the part of both Governments. It is, Mr. Speaker, a speech of 

confidence; a speech of confidence based on solid achievement in the past and based on realistic hope 

for the future. 

 

I will support the Motion. 

 

Hon. R.A. Walker (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, in joining in this debate I want first of all to 

congratulate you on your elevation to the high office which you now enjoy, and to express my 

confidence that, in that office, you will continue to demonstrate the same wisdom and balanced 

judgment which you have always shown in the past, and that the deliberations of this Assembly will 

profit greatly from that fact. 

 

I also want to join with previous speakers in congratulating the mover and the seconder of the Address-

in-Reply. For some eight years now I have heard a succession of movers and seconders making their 

speeches in this House, and I think I can truthfully say that I have never got more inspiration or more 

instruction from any two speeches that have been given by movers and seconders in this House. 

 

In my first contribution to the discussions of this House in the position of head of the Department of the 

Attorney General, I want first of all, to say that I entered upon these duties with a keen realisation of the 

high and noble traditions which this Department has built up over the past 12 years. I want to say that 

the Attorney General‘s department of this province has earned for itself a reputation for its keenness and 

its eagerness to protect citizens from oppression and exploitation of any kind. This Department, under 

the supervision of my predecessor, was responsible in 1944 for the passage of The Farm Security Act, 

an act which provided real security for the first time in the history of this province for that large group of 

primary producers who are so dependent upon the vagaries of international marketing. And I may say 

before leaving my comments on The Farm Security Act, that the former Attorney General of this 

province had to endure the opposition of my hon. friends opposite and their predecessors, for the Liberal 

party never stopped opposing this real measure of security for agriculture. I say that the true position of 

the Liberal party in this regard is clearly shown by the records. I say that their alliance with the mortgage 

companies is on the record for all to see. The Liberal party has as every member of this House knows, 

throughout this province over the years tried to convince farmers who were unable to obtain credit for 

their 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
23 

farming operations, that somehow the passing of The Farm Security Act had made it difficult for them to 

get credit because it was impossible to foreclose or evict people from their farms. But this does not stop 

this ‗Jekyll and Hyde‘ monstrosity from now saying in this House that many foreclosures and evictions 

have taken place in this province since the passage of The Farm Security Act. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — The records prove that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — The truth of the matter is, as the hon. member from Arm River well knows, that 

The Farm Security Act is designed to protect honest farmers who are anxious to discharge their 

obligations and who do not have the means to do so. The hon. member from Arm River knows these 

facts as well as I do – that the Mediation Board . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That‘s your own answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — . . . that the Mediation Board has interpreted the protection given by The Farm 

Security Act liberally and generously for the benefit and protection of farmers. If the hon. member from 

Arm River is acquainted with foreclosures and mortgages (these are probably terms he is not acquainted 

with), he would know that there are a multitude of instances where foreclosures and actions for 

cancellation of agreements for sale are taken merely to clear up titles from debtors and purchasers who 

are absent or who are deceased – land which is tied up by encumbrances of one kind or another and that 

can only be cleared off by legal action of that kind. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Wasn‘t that the case before? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — He knows, too, that in a great majority of instances of foreclosures and 

cancellations of agreements for sale, they are done not only with the consent, but with the actual 

connivance, of the mortgagor or debtor in order to clear up the title, and obtain for himself a clear title 

under a new agreement. The hon. member from Arm River, if he would pay a little more attention to 

facts and a little less attention to Liberal propaganda, would be a little more conversant with the truth of 

the situation . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — If you would stick to the facts . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — If you would tell the truth, you wouldn‘t get into that mess! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: —His head is equipped with three major orifices, and if he would use two of them 

more, and one of them less, he would profit by that change. 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
24 

My predecessor in this Department was also responsible for introducing legislation in this House to 

provide protection for tenants at a time when the Federal Government threw these helpless people to the 

mercy of their landlords, at a time when housing accommodation was in extremely short supply, when in 

other provinces very severe and burdensome increases in rentals fell upon them as a result of the 

vacation by the Federal Government of that field in the fall of 1949. The Minister of this Department 

was one of the pioneers in Canada – the first provincial Attorney General to introduce legislation into a 

provincial Legislature to guarantee to every man and woman freedom from oppression and from 

persecution because of race, colour or creed. Saskatchewan led the way in the matter of civil rights, a 

subject which was very dear to the heart of Mr. Corman. I want to say that it is my hope that I can live 

up to the standards which have been set by the Hon. J.W. Corman in his capacity as Attorney General of 

this province for a period of 12 years. 

 

I think that, on this occasion, I should say something about the functions and plans of the various parts 

of this Department for the benefit of the Legislature. As you know, the Department of the Attorney 

General is responsible for the administration of the Courts of Law. As you know, too, the Courts of Law 

are based in function and in arrangement and structure upon forms which have shown merit over many 

hundreds of years. It is fair, however, to add that any institution that has attained its form and its 

procedures, over long, long years of precedent is inclined to suffer from the complaint of inflexibility 

and cumbersomeness. As a matter of fact, that was one of the problems that perplexed me, not so many 

years ago, as a law student facing the problem of studying court procedures. I thought that if I ever got 

an opportunity to simplify, to streamline the procedures of our courts, I would do anything that I could 

in that direction. Happily, in September of last year we were able to obtain the voluntary services of 

three of our most distinguished members of the Bench in this province, in addition to eight of the 

leading practitioners of the profession of Law to form a committee – a committee charged with the 

responsibility of making enquiries and investigations into all aspects of the administration of justice in 

Saskatchewan. That committee was asked to report sometime in the summer of 1957. As a result of 

meetings and interviews with lawyers from one side of this province to another (and I am assured that 

they are also prepared to hear submissions by representatives of the general public) these men, it is 

hoped, will be able to in their report, suggest many improvements in our judicial procedures. I am 

hopeful that, as a result of their report, far-reaching reforms in the constitution and establishment and 

procedures of our courts will be recommended. 

 

One of the problems which faces the operation of our courts in this province is that they were set up in 

1908 with a view to a totally different population pattern than what we find ourselves with today. In 

1908, of course, it was thought that every quarter-section was going to contain a manor house with a 

retinue of servants doing the work, and that Saskatchewan 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
25 

was going to have a pattern of settlement something similar to the agricultural countries of Eastern 

Europe, with perhaps several million people living in the province. The processes of the law have taken 

a different turn than was anticipated 50 or 60 years ago. Litigation, I am told, in the early days of this 

province accounted for a large proportion of every lawyer‘s time. Today, of course, a large proportion of 

lawyers seldom have an opportunity to appear in court. The work has changed radically from what was 

thought would likely happen in the early days of the province. So it is only natural that a group of 

lawyers should be anxious to look into the reform of our judicial institutions and procedures. I may say 

that the request for setting up such a committee was made by the Law Society of Saskatchewan in a 

resolution at its annual convention in Waskesiu in June of last year, and that recommendation has been 

accepted, as I say, and acted upon, and I hope to the advantage not of the lawyers of Saskatchewan, but 

to the advantage of the general public who, I hope, will make more frequent occasion to use the 

traditional services if they are more readily available, and at less cost. 

 

Another phase of our judicial system is the administration of criminal justice, and that is not only 

constituted by the province, but its judges are also appointed by the Province, in contrast to those of the 

Courts of Record. Our magistrates‘ courts consist, at the present time, of seven full-time paid 

magistrates, six part-time paid magistrates; one position is vacant at the moment. In addition to these 

magistrates there number more than 500 unpaid volunteer Justices of the Peace. I want to say here that 

the people of Saskatchewan owe a debt of gratitude to the hundreds of men who devote their time 

selflessly to the administration of justice in their towns and communities. They are called upon 

sometimes at two o‘clock in the morning to hear cases (it is almost worse than being a doctor or a 

veterinarian), and they do it without complaining because it is in the public service. These men after 

doing a day‘s work, have to sit during the evening sometimes for several hours disposing of cases which 

are in the interests of the public to be dealt with and disposed of with dispatch. And they do it without a 

salary. They receive only a small nominal fee for their services. 

 

About 90 per cent of all the court work done in this province is done in our Magistrates‘ courts. I refer to 

the great bulk of our criminal litigation which is done in our magistrates‘ courts and by the Justices of 

the Peace: Prosecutions under The Liquor Act or Vehicles Act; the Criminal Code; city by-laws; 

municipal by-laws and provincial statutes. It is too bad, I think, that these people are not accorded the 

honour and dignity at all times that they should. It must not be forgotten that they have very wide 

powers, powers including the committal of accused persons to jail, levying very substantial fines and 

penalties. 

 

Representations have been made to me and to the Government over the past few months, not only by the 

Law Society, but by other organizations, that we should attempt to reorganize our magisterial service, to 

replace to a large extent the use of Justices of the Peace by trained and properly qualified magistrates. 

We are making some very substantial programs in this direction. It is the policy of the Government that 

we would like to see prosecutions tried 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
26 

by magistrates trained in the law, wherever possible. To this end we have arranged it now so that our 

magistrates will visit towns and communities throughout their magisterial district, and be more readily 

available to the police and to the public wishing to use their services. We have at the same time made 

the request to the police authorities that they use the magistrates at these points wherever possible, and 

wherever it will not result in a serious inconvenience to the general public this should be done. It is 

already showing significant results in that the magistrates are hearing more cases than they have ever 

heard before. 

 

There are many advantages in the use of trained magistrates in these criminal cases. I only mention two 

or three. In the first place, the adjudication over a criminal case is essentially a matter of law. The 

Legislature makes laws, and Parliament makes laws, defining offences. Unless someone who is qualified 

and capable of interpreting the laws in the same sense and in the same spirit with which the Legislature 

passed them, the results will be, and often are, a miscarriage of justice. It is also true that our trained 

magistrates, through wider experience in the handling of criminal cases, are better able to mete out, to 

award, punishments and penalties on some comparative measure and some relative scale one case with 

another. 

 

There is, of course, as everyone knows, a fundamental unsoundness about the system of free part-time 

judges, and it is essentially this that Justices of the Peace should have to depend for their remuneration 

upon the fees which they collect when they convict an accused person. 

 

Another important aspect of the Department, another agency coming under the Attorney General‘s 

department that I would like to refer to, is the Provincial Mediation Board. That Board used to have 

powers of moratorium, by recommending to the Lieutenant-Governor in Council moratorium orders 

under The Moratorium Act. As you know, the Premier drew to your attention yesterday, that Act was 

challenged in the Supreme Court of Canada and was declared ultra vires on the grounds that bankruptcy 

and insolvency are matters coming under the jurisdiction of the Federal Government. There were certain 

other powers which the Board had in relation to rentals also provided in The Moratorium Act. Those 

powers, of course, lapsed when the Act lapsed. The Mediation Board, however, does a great deal of 

other valuable work. It is a fact that every action for a debt can only be taken after notice is sent to the 

Mediation Board by the clerk of the court, and the work of the Board is to advise the debtor of the effect 

of the summons and the protection which is available to him through the Board. The Board is also 

advised of every foreclosure action that is launched, every action for cancellation of an agreement for 

sale, and the Board is able in hundreds of cases every year to effect compromises, agreements, 

postponements, for creditors who are being pursued in the courts. Lawyers tell me they are grateful for 

the help which the Mediation Board is able to give in effecting settlements not only on behalf of debtors 

but also on behalf of credits. It is often that the Mediation Board is able to work out some kind of a 

compromise based 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
27 

upon monthly payments so that the debtor escapes the stigma of executions, and at the same time the 

creditor, over a period of time, recovers his claim in reasonable small monthly amounts. I have had 

lawyers tell me, including lawyers acting for creditors, that the work of the Board has assisted in the 

orderly collection of their accounts. 

 

The Mediation Board was also constituted as the Rental Control Board in this province. I referred a 

moment ago to the rental picture as it existed in 1950. We are pleased to be able to report that, as a result 

of an increase in the availability of housing accommodation, before the board. So we are able to report 

that, in October last year, some administrative changes in the manner of handling rental fixation 

problems were brought about. Today the Mediation Board, acting in its capacity as a rental control 

board, deals only with those cases where the parties are unable to make or reach an agreement between 

themselves. Instead of having to hear and dispose of every case where a rental adjustment is to be made, 

now the Board sits only in arbitration where the parties are unable to reach a voluntary agreement. There 

will be other legislation submitted in that direction. 

 

I want to say something about another piece of legislation that was referred to in the Speech from the 

Throne, when it was pointed out to you in the Speech of His Honour that legislation would be submitted 

providing for greater security of titles to chattels by means of a central registration. I point out to you 

that in the matter of titles to chattels, the only proof of title for which public facilities are provided is the 

register in the courthouses. There bills of sale, chattel mortgages, conditional sale agreements, lien notes 

and so on are registered and filed. There you can go and search the name of any individual you may 

want to search, with a view to buying a chattel article from him. That system also has become largely 

obsolete because of the great mobility of the people of Saskatchewan over the past 50 years, and so there 

were many other problems connected with that system of registration. In the first place, you had to 

register your chattel mortgage not only in the judicial centre where the chattel happened to be situated, 

but also in the judicial centre where it was purchased, and sometimes very often, two different centres. 

Then, if the chattel was moved by its owner from one judicial district to another, it had to be registered 

by its owner from one judicial district to another, it had to be registered again, and many problems arose 

in that connection. The result was that people found it very difficult to be sure that a particular chattel 

was clear when purchasing it. There was also the fact that there is a large amount of labour, of clerical 

work, involved in keeping 21 different registers for chattel mortgages and 21 bills of sale. 

 

As a result of suggestions passed on to the Department from members of the profession, and also from 

organizations and groups who are interested in making our system of registration more effective, a 

system was worked out for which legislation will be submitted in due course to provide 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
28 

for one central register in the province for all bills of sale and all chattel mortgages and lien notes. Each 

court house would still be used, as it has been used in the past, as a place for filing these documents, but 

that they will all be forwarded to a central depot and kept in one central register, which will mean, of 

course, that if you are buying a chattel, you do not have to find out which judicial district it comes from 

and search the total there. You will be able to search it at the central depot, at the central registration 

centre, where the provincial register is kept. I am pleased to be able to say that members of the legal 

profession are overwhelmingly in favour of that new departure, not only in Regina but in all of the cities 

and towns that I have been able to contact throughout the province. 

 

I am pleased to be able to tell you, too, that those organizations such as the Automobile Dealers‘ 

Association, the finance companies, are all welcoming this new legislation and have said so. However, it 

will be submitted to you in due course. My purpose for mentioning it at this time is because it is referred 

to in the Speech from the Throne, and you may have been curious to know something about it. I hope to 

be able to give you, in the second reading of the Bill, of course, the details of the mechanics of the 

procedure. 

 

Before I conclude my remarks I want to say something about the conditions I find throughout the 

constituency of Hanley and throughout the province of Saskatchewan as I have seen them during the 

past six months or so. My constituents would consider me most remiss if, speaking in this House at this 

time, I did not bring to your attention the problems which face them, which are very serious indeed. 

 

However, in view of the lateness of the hour, I will refrain from going further at this time, and will defer 

the rest of my remarks until tomorrow. I beg leave to adjourn the debate at this time. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 6 – An Act to amend The Automobile 

Accident Insurance Act. 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, I did have about a 50-minute address ready, 

but, unless you insist, I will save you the pleasure and deal solely with the principle of the Bill. I 

understand that we are to deal with the principle only on Second Readings. 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
29 

There is only one principle in this Bill and that is to expand the benefits of what is undoubtedly the 

world‘s finest automobile insurance plan. The benefits are being improved in approximately four 

different ways. First of all, we are changing the licence year to April 30, in proposals which will come 

before you under The Vehicles Act. That means that to make this conform, we must change The 

Automobile Insurance Act. In other words, all the good people of Saskatchewan are going to get one 

month free insurance this year. 

 

The second point, Mr. Speaker, is to increase the limits of property damage. When the Bill was 

originally drafted in 1946, the limits of property damage were $1,000. That was changed some years 

later to $2,000 and now we propose that this be changed to $5,000. There may be some who think it 

really is of no benefit. There are others who are ignorant enough to believe that this will only benefit 

those people who have big Cadillac cars worth $5,000 or $6,000; but may I point out that the benefits of 

property damage are not for the owner of the property which may be destroyed but rather for the person 

who destroys that property. In other words, if we have a Cadillac (shall we say) from Alberta, driving on 

our highways, and one of our Saskatchewan residents drove into him and completely smashed up the car 

and was responsible for it, then, today, under our compulsory insurance plan, the most the Insurance 

Office could pay on behalf of that Saskatchewan resident is $2,000. So, what we propose to do is to 

change that to $5,000. In other words, this helps the person with an old 1929 Ford car that can plough 

into a Cadillac just as well as another Cadillac can plough into one; and so that everybody in 

Saskatchewan is getting the same protection under this particular section. 

 

I point this out because, you know, ‗The Leader-Post‘ had an editorial, the other day, which was so 

completely confusing that if any members of the Legislature are confused we could not really blame 

them. 

 

The next important amendment that we have is to assist those persons who may be injured, or the 

dependants of a person who may be killed, as the result of an accident caused by a hit-and-run driver. 

Today such a person could receive the benefits under Part 2 of the Act; that is, total death benefits of 

$5,000 in the case of a married man, and out-of-work benefits of up to say $25 a week, provided his 

income is cut down below that amount; and it does provide, of course, for certain other benefits up to 

$600. However, there may be cases when, if the driver of that vehicle were known, action could be taken 

against the driver to collect other indemnity of probably $5,000, or $10,000, or $20,000. Under our Act, 

we provide indemnity under the Public Liability of $10,000 and $20,000. This puts the Insurance 

Company in the position that they will be recognized in the same was as though they were the owner of 

that vehicle that injured that person. In other words, the Insurance Office may be sued up to the 

maximum allowed under the Act – the $10,000 and $20,000 under the Public Liability. It doesn‘t, of 

course, necessarily mean a lawsuit; we would hope that most of the cases would be 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
30 

settled out of court, as most of our cases are. There will, of course, be the odd one where we can‘t agree 

where it will be left to the courts to decide the amount of the claim. 

 

The next important amendment is one which will provide for where the driver of a vehicle is killed, and 

in breach of condition. For example, he may have forgotten to get his licence. Today the Insurance 

Office would be precluded from paying to the widow any benefits under the Act. A few years ago (in 

1953 to be exact), we amended the Act to provide that, in the case of a drunken driver who was driving 

his vehicle while intoxicated, even though the Act of that day paid that for anybody in breach of 

condition, their dependants would not be able to receive benefits, we amended it to provide benefits in 

the case of drunken drivers. What we wish to do now is to amend it still further so that no matter what 

breach of condition exists, we shall pass on to the widow and to the dependants any benefits which 

would have been passed on had they not been in breach of condition. In other words, we feel that they 

should not have to pay for the neglect, or whatever it might be, on the part of the licences. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, we are extending the benefits of the Act in these four ways, and that is the 

principle of the whole Bill. 

 

I know that there will be may questions arise in Committee, and I will be very glad to try to deal with 

the questions that come up at that time. In the meantime, I would like to move the second reading of this 

Bill. 

 

(Motion agreed to, and Bill referred to a Committee 

of the Whole at the next sitting.) 

 

Bill No. 7 – An Act to amend An Act to incorporate 

The Saskatchewan Guarantee and Fidelity Company. 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines: — This company was incorporated by an Act of the Legislature in 1908. At that time 

the entire business was done in a little corner of a room, and it was not anticipated that ever at any time 

would the Company grow to where they would need to pay in rent more than $5,000 a year. Fortunately, 

the Guarantee and Fidelity Company has expanded and now we are in a position where the property 

required may exceed the value of $5,000 per year. Of course, in the meantime, we have had a little bit of 

inflation. The dollar of 1908 is probably worth about 25 or 30 cents in terms of rental power. So I 

suppose, we should not criticize too severely those who passed the original legislation and thought 

$5,000 would be sufficient rental; but it certainly isn‘t today. We require more than $400 a month for the 

space we now require and occupy, so we want to amend the Act accordingly. 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
31 

I moved second reading of this Bill. 

 

(Motion agreed to, and Bill referred to a Committee 

of the Whole at the next sitting.) 

 

Bill No. 8 – An Act to amend The Members of the Legislative 

Assembly Superannuation Act, 1954. 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines: — This is a Bill to amend The Members of the Legislative Assembly Superannuation 

Act. 

 

This Act, as hon. members know, was passed in 1954. I think there is one thing I would like to say at 

this time, in view of certain statements that have been made during the past summer. Before this Bill 

was introduced in the Legislature, all parties were consulted and it was agreed by the then Leader of the 

Official Opposition and by the Whip, who is now the Leader of the Opposition, that such a Bill was 

justified. I will say in fairness to the Leader of the Opposition, he warned me that he had a couple of 

very obstreperous members on the other side that he couldn‘t control and that they would probably 

speak and vote against this Bill; but that the party was supporting this legislation. In other words, it came 

in here with the support of the two parties in the Legislature. We felt at the time that this legislation was 

something which would assist in bringing into this House men and women of the calibre that we want. 

We want to try to attract into the Legislature people who would be prepared to serve. We did not think it 

was right to expect them to give up their entire future, that there should be something for those who 

served this province and served it well throughout the years. And so the legislation went through, in 

1954. 

 

I was, therefore, very grieved this summer when some of those who had supported the legislation and 

had given the promise of their co-operation in putting this legislation on the statute books, actually went 

out and said that this was legislation for the members of the Cabinet, and even stating that the Premier, if 

he were defeated in his constituency last summer, would retire with $250 a month. Well, of course, first 

of all that is wrong. No member can get $250 a month until he is 55 years of age, and our Premier is 

much too young to get a superannuation allowance under our Act. 

 

I may say in this respect our Act differs from the one in Ottawa. In Ottawa we have members, I can 

think of two – I can think of the member for Assiniboia, and the member for Moose Jaw, both of whom 

went into the House of Commons in their twenties – early twenties in the case of Mr. Argue; Mr. 

Thatcher, I believe, in his late twenties or early thirties – who, after serving for three terms could step 

out with 4,000 a year for the rest of their lives. In the case of Mr. Argue he would be able to step out 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
32 

of Parliament, when he went in there at twenty-four, after 12 years, at 36 years of age, with a full 

pension of $3,000 a year. 

 

The members here are all required to contribute five per cent of their salaries. I may say that, in the case 

of the Ministers of the Crown, that means a contribution of over $500 a year at the present time. Not 

only that, but we all had to pick up all the back service; we all got bills from the office of the Treasury 

Department of over $4,000 that we had to pay; and yet the people run the risk after having paid that – 

they may live for one year, two years; we hope that most hon. members will live to enjoy it for twenty or 

thirty years. 

 

When we passed this Act we tried to imitate The Public Service Superannuation Act, and the Act in 

Ottawa. We tried to combine the two to fit Saskatchewan‘s conditions. We have found one or two places 

where our Act is not clear. The particular point where it is not clear has to do with the setting up of the 

fund. It was always intended that we should set up a specific fund, but, under the Act as it is, the money 

goes into the consolidated fund. We think it would be better to have it in a separate fund where the 

people of the province and the members themselves could see at all times exactly how it stands. 

 

So the principal amendment in this proposal today is that we amend the Act to provide for the 

establishment of a specific fund in which the contribution of the members will go and which the 

Government will match. That is, by vote of the Legislature, we shall vote each year a sum which will be 

equal to the amount of the contributions of the members. 

 

As I said earlier, we tried to put in the features of The Public Service Superannuation Act. We did, 

insofar as a widow is concerned; but one thing we overlooked was supposing both the widow and the 

member, or exemption-member, should be killed at one time or should die within a few months of each 

other and leave small children; no provision had been made for the children. So we are amending the 

Act to provide that, in addition to any other benefits, children under the age of 16 or 18 (I am not sure 

which it is) will receive 10 per cent of the amount to which the member would have been entitled; and, 

in the event of the death of the widow, the children would receive her share – that is, 50 per cent of what 

the member would have been entitled to – until they reach the age of 16. 

 

Those, Mr. Speaker, are the two principal amendments we have to the Bill. I am sure when we get into 

Committee there will be questions that will arise and I will try to answer them at that time. I would 

move the Second Reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I was wondering if I could ask the 

Minister a question How many of the members of the Legislature have applied, or made application, to 

come under this Superannuation Act? 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
33 

Hon. C.M. Fines: — I shall get that information for the Committee. I am sorry I haven‘t got it here, but 

I will bring it with me. We are all under it now, you understand. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Whether we have made application or not? 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines: — Oh yes. What I think the hon. member means is how many have made application 

to have their past service picked up – there have been a very considerable number, but we didn‘t 

anticipate that all members who intend to do so would until this spring. May I suggest that those who 

intend to please do it, because the Act provided this must be done within three years from April, 1954. 

We did that purposely in order to see whether or not the members were coming back into the House for 

a further term; and now, for those members who have been in the House before, it would certainly be in 

their best interests to specify that they intend to come in. We have had applications from former 

members – the former member for Qu‘Appelle-Wolseley tried to get in under it; and I think it is 

something that everyone should attend to within the three-year period, which runs out this spring. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — This Act then is compulsory? 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines: — Oh, yes. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Is the legislation in Ottawa compulsory? 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines: — Absolutely. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Are you sure about that? 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines: — For the members of the Legislature it is deducted now, but it is not compulsory for 

past service. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — For members of the House of Commons I mean. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask a question of the Minister. A person 

who has not applied to come in under the provisions of the Act, and the money that has been deducted 

from his indemnity since this Act came into operation that was passed by the Government, he is 

compelled to keep on contributing his share every year until he drops out or dies or something? 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines: — That‘s right. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — In spite of the fact that he has not put in any money to provide for his past services? 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines: — That‘s right 



 

February 21, 1957 

 

 
34 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, I didn‘t think that was so, but you must know. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the Minister – I have no intention to 

apply for the pension; I am expecting to get that money back. 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines: — Oh, you will get it back. We are just keeping it for you. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — If a person has no desire to take part in the provisions of the Act, why should he 

contribute? 

 

(The Motion for Second Reading agreed to, and 

the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at next sitting). 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 5:30 o‘clock p.m. 


