



















































Hansard: April 02, 1957


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

34th Day 

 

Tuesday, April 2, 1957 

 

The House resumed at 2.30 o‘clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

HUNGARIAN REFUGEES 

 

Mr. D.T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley):  Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are 

proceeded with, I would like to draw attention to a matter in my constituency with regard to Hungarian 

refuges working on the farms. Some of these were hired as farm help as truck drivers. Now I understand 

that, due to the fact they cannot read or speak English, they are not being granted drivers‘ licences to 

drive the trucks, and I would like to ask the Minister in charge what policy they have in that regard. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer):  I am sorry the hon. member hadn‘t the courtesy to advise 

me that he was going to raise the question, in order that I could have got the details. I have no 

knowledge of the instance he has referred to. If he would see me I would be very glad to look into it for 

him. 

 

Mr. McFarlane:  I will do that, Mr. Minister, to see if we can arrive at some decision in this respect. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  It would come under The Vehicles Act. 

 

UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE 

 

Moved by Mr. Davies, seconded by Mr. Stone: 

 

―That this Assembly recommend, through the appropriate channels, to the Government of Canada 

such action as will assure: 

 

(1) That unemployment insurance benefits be established at not less than two-thirds of earnings of 
persons in insurable employment; 

 

(2) that the ―waiting period‖ be eliminated; 
 

(3) that the coverage of the Unemployment Insurance Act be extended to include employee groups not 
now within the scope of this legislation.‖ 

 

Hon. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw City):  Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak in support of the resolution on 

the 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

2 

Order Paper which I shall move, I should like to show in some detail reasons for, and the importance of, 

the position it recommends. The resolution, as you will note, urges an improvement of the provisions of 

the Unemployment Insurance Act to an increase, first of all, in monetary benefits; the elimination of the 

time on the ―waiting period‖, and the extension of the application of the Act to groups that are not now 

covered. 

 

Some days ago, Mr. Speaker, I had distributed a Table One, which showed the benefit rates in effect 

after October 1, 1955. From this you will have seen that employees‘ weekly contributions range from 16 

cents a week to 60 cents a week. Also shown were the weekly earning range in which those payments 

were made, and in the two right-hand columns, the weekly benefits for single workers, and workers with 

a dependant, or dependants. There is no difference in benefit because of the number of children in a 

family, the criterion being whether or not the person is married or single. In this table it will also be 

noted that the benefits for single persons range from as low as $36 a week to a high of $23 a week, and 

for persons who are married and become unemployed and collect benefits, the sum would range from $8 

weekly to $30 weekly. 

 

I think it is extremely important in the first instance to realize that the top figures for benefits, namely 

$23 and $30, are received by relatively few. I believe that it is the mistaken belief that the benefits — 

$23 and $30 for single and married persons respectively, apply across the board, and you will see by the 

table with which I provided you that this is not the case. 

 

Perhaps if I gave you some other information it will show just what is received, or approximately what 

is received, by the average beneficiary in Canada on his becoming unemployed. In 1956, using figures 

for Canada, there was a total of 11,178,588 benefit weeks paid for a total of $210,330,165. The average 

weekly payment (you can make the division of the weeks into the total amount paid) is $18.81 a week. 

Now, taking the Saskatchewan example, there were 396,074 weeks paid out amounting to benefits of 

$27,151, 394, for an average weekly payment of $18.33. I think it will be agreed that this is rather a low 

amount in consideration of the present period that we are living in, and the living costs that have to be 

borne by workmen, whether or not they are unemployed. The average payment in both Saskatchewan 

and Canada is thus less than $19 a week. I think if you do a little arithmetic you will find this works out 

to about $80 a month. I submit to the members of the House, that $80 will not, in many instances, buy 

even housing accommodation for many of the workmen of this city, and the other urban areas in 

Saskatchewan. But this low benefit also had to provide in Canada and in Saskatchewan, for food and 

clothing as well as shelter in the year 1956. 

 

I would like to point out, too, Mr. Speaker, that we are actually providing, as a Government, larger 

amounts in social aid in certain cases where there are a number of dependants in the family this 

government is paying larger amounts in social aid then are provided by this unemployment insurance 

payment. I think, too, that very few people realize that even in this relatively buoyant period, there is a 

great deal of unemployment in Canada. Last year there were for every day of the year, 311,333 persons 

who were out of work in Canada. The corresponding figure for Saskatchewan is 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

3 

9,934 unemployed persons or almost 10,000 persons, for every day of last year. I say again, that is in a 

period which is regarded by all as being a pretty prosperous period. 

 

How does this affect us as a community? How does this affect society in other ways? First of all, I will 

take the average weekly wage paid in industry in Canada last year, $64.19. Then taking the number of 

persons who are unemployed (311,000 persons odd), and making estimates in terms of time lost and 

wages lost, we find some rather starling information. I worked it out. I didn‘t take the $64.19 figures, 

this being an average of establishments of over 15 employees, which is the only information that is 

readily available. I took $50 a week instead; some $14.19 less than the average in the establishments to 

which I referred. Working this out on a yearly basis, it figures out to a loss in wages of $809,465,800. 

That was the loss to the Canadian community because of unemployment. It may be said that this was not 

the loss in purchasing power, since there is a difference between the wages lost and the amount that was 

lost in purchasing power. If you deduct the figure of $210,330,165 which was received last year in 

unemployment insurance, it would still leave you a net wage and salary loss of $599,135,635. I think 

that no one will argue that this is not a great reduction in buying power, and that it is going to affect 

many other people in the community and not only those who are idle. 

 

Looking at this same comparison in terms of the Saskatchewan picture, it works out to an estimated loss 

of $25,828,400 for the year. Deducting the unemployment insurance benefits that were received, a net 

purchasing power loss to the Saskatchewan community of $18 million was suffered. 

 

I would like to repeat again that this is a loss not just for the unemployed, but for the whole community, 

and I want to make some additional remarks in that regard. First I think I should say something about the 

losses in production. There is not only the question of losing almost a million dollars in wages by 

unemployment, but there is the question of losing productivity which does not come into being because 

people are not at work. I don‘t know how much that would figure out to. Manifestly it would be much 

more than the nearly one billion dollars lost because of annual unemployment. I submit in any event that 

it must be a very large loss, one that means something to all Canadians. 

 

I would like to say too that these losses in production and in buying power, affect not only the people in 

the city but affect the people in rural areas – our farming population. I know there are reverberations 

from time to time, (both outside and within this House) to the contrary; but I want to assure the hon. 

members and I shall prove it, that the farm and labour interest is, and always has been, interdependent; 

that the losses because of unemployment have affected adversely also the farming population of this 

province, and this country. 

 

First of all, when people are not earning larger wages and salaries, they are receiving very low 

unemployed benefits, and buying much less in terms of agricultural products. I think this was brought 

sharply to the attention of the American Congress last year, when Mr. Walter Reuther 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

4 

A.F. of L. – C.I.O. produced figures before the United States Department of Agriculture Join 

congressional committee. these figures were not his own, but had been arrived at by a study of another 

Congress committee. The study was on food expenditures of U.S.A. city families. It showed that when a 

family was in an income class of under $1,000 yearly in the United States, the family food expenditure 

was $13.76 a week. When the income ranged from $2,000 to $2,999 a year, the family food expenditure 

weekly averaged $22.35. When the annual income ranged from $3,000 to $3,999 the expenditure on 

food was $28.03. I think those figures tell quite a story – that, where people are making a better living, 

they are purchasing twice the food quantities that the family on lower incomes buy. I submit to the 

members of this House that this has a direct influence on the welfare of agriculture; that this is 

significant information in the light of the resolution which I am moving here today. 

 

I might say that in complete support of the conclusion that was urged by Mr. Reuther, the joint U.S.A. 

Congressional committee on the Economic Report, in studying low-income families and economic 

stability, said this – and I would like to read it, Mr. Speaker, with your permission: 

 

―The amounts and patterns of expenditures of low-income families for food, in addition to education, 

improved cooking and so forth, suggests the importance of raising the income level of these families 

in order to provide a larger market for our prospective farm surplus. . .  

 

There is more to this quotation, but I do not want to do more than to say that the general principle I have 

advanced is approved by some eminent authorities. I don‘t think very many members of the House will 

realize that over the past 20 years, there has not only been an increase in the amount of food consumed 

by the domestic population, but there has been a heavier per capita increase because of somewhat better 

conditions, and relatively more prosperity. If you compare 1935 to the year 1953, when in the earlier 

year there was a total of some $1,600 millions consumed in farm products by all the people in this 

country, and the last year which I have mentioned when there was $3,350 figures are constant terms. 

They are not inflated figures. They are ―actual value‖ terms over this period. What actually happens is 

that this extra consumption has materially helped the economic situation of farmers in this country, 

recognizing of course that their economic conditions remain precarious in this country for other reasons. 

What I am suggesting is that it would have been a great deal more precarious, had it not been for a 

relatively (and I underline that word) high purchasing power in the Canadian population. 

 

It means something else too, and I think I should make mention of it here, Mr. Speaker, in relation to the 

question which I am discussing. We often think that if we sell grain from Saskatchewan (or from the 

prairie provinces) on the international market, our domestic buying power has little effect on what 

happens to our grain sales. The belief is that, after all, our population in Canada can only consume so 

many tons 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

5 

of cereals, and after that domestic buying power doesn‘t do the farm in Saskatchewan, or on the prairies, 

very much good. But that viewpoint, I suggest, is an erroneous viewpoint and does not recognize the 

fundamental facts. Indeed, here is what happens. then we sell on the international market, invariably the 

nations that take our cereals, our grain, demand that we in turn take their products in trade. Unless we 

have a comparatively high, fairly stable, domestic purchasing power, we are unable to buy from the 

nations to which we sell, and there follows an inevitable deterioration in our trade and our trade 

relationships. This is precisely the kind of thing that works against more trade with Asiatic countries. 

Their domestic buying power is so poor that they cannot get into genuine trade relationships with us, so 

that the expedient of give-away programs which in themselves are no solution to the question of 

exchange and trade – become the order of the day. I say that such expedients are not satisfactory, and 

that one of the key things for development of our trade, and for the prosperity of the prairie farmer is to 

assure a relatively high domestic purchasing power. 

 

I would now like to move on to the question of how the increase that is proposed in the unemployment 

insurance benefits would be financed, since this question, no doubt, will arise during our discussion of 

the resolution. I have mentioned that the greatest contributions of employees run from 16 cents to 60 

cents per week. This, of course, is matched by an equivalent employers‘ contribution and there is in 

addition a contribution from the Federal Government that roughly approximates the cost of 

administration, not only for unemployment insurance, but for the National Employment Service. Now, 

the state of the unemployment insurance fund as of March 31, 1956 (the last fiscal year for which I can 

get figures) shows there was a total of $854,198,518 in the Unemployment Insurance fund. This amount 

was $13 ½ million higher than the previous fiscal year reported, so there was a sizable gain last year in 

the size of the fund. Contributions from employers and employees in that period ending March 31, 1956, 

totalled $168,481,000, approximately. the contribution from the Federal Government totalled a little 

better than $31 million. I suggest to the House that, first of all, to achieve the two-thirds of income 

benefits which I have suggested in the resolution, the present size of the unemployment insurance fund 

permits of a generous increase. I think there is a tendency to treat the fund as though it were something 

for the distant future: that is, to provide for all emergencies of desperate unemployment which may lie 

ahead. I don‘t think that this viewpoint is valid or one that should be held by this House, nor indeed the 

Canadian public. I suggest that if there was unemployment of the type and extent that we knew in the 

1930‘s, the fund could not bear the shock in any event, so that we should consider the fund rather more 

on a short-term basis, since it could not take care for long, of deep-going unemployment. I suggest that 

the size of the fund, (almost $1 billion) permits of some increase, apart from all other arguments. 

 

It might be necessary to increase the employees‘ and employers‘ contributions. I think frankly that this 

might be necessary. I think moreover that, (for most employees), such an increase would not be 

resented; it would be realized that this was necessary to get better benefits in case they become 

unemployed. 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

6 

I believe, too, that, in the whole picture, the annual over last year was provided for general 

administration costs. A large part of that administration goes not just for unemployment insurance, but 

to the general National Employment Service that is for the good of the whole country. 

 

I have, also, in framing this resolution, recommended that the ―waiting period‖, which is now one week, 

be completely eliminated. First of all, it seems to me that the weekly period imposes hardship; there is 

no good reason for it. When you become unemployed you are just as needful of your weekly wage as 

you ever were. It is necessary that there be some immediate continuing payment. It seems to me the 

week ―waiting period‖ that now exists is not realistic, and is not fair. As well, benefits come from the 

insurance fund, and many of the claimants have paid into it since its inception, never having made a 

claim since the inception of the fund. Particularly because it is an insurance fund (to which the employee 

is making continual contributions), there is greater reason for the benefits to be paid immediately; that 

there should not be this waiting period that now exists. 

 

As well, in other laws that provide compensation – Workmen‘s Compensation, for example – the 

general tendency all across Canada is to eliminate waiting periods, and, of course, workmen‘s 

compensation arises from laws entirely financed by the employer. Such Workmen‘s Compensation 

provides not two-thirds payment of benefits, but in eight of the ten provinces of Canada, provides 75 per 

cent of earnings, and in the remaining two provinces of Canada, 70 per cent. While in all provinces it is 

not paid immediately, the tendency has been, in legislation of recent years, to eliminate substantially the 

waiting period in workmen‘s compensation Acts. I say there is a parallel here with the questions we are 

discussing, and with unemployment insurance, which is party paid for by the employee, there is a very 

good case for the waiting period to be completely eliminated. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, in the resolution I have suggested that there be an extended coverage of the present 

unemployment insurance regulations. I think some figures should be given here so that the whole picture 

might be seen clearly. As at August 20, 1955, it was estimated that there were 5,772,000 persons in the 

Canadian civilian labour force, and of these there were 4,438,00 reported as wage earners. The balance 

was made up of 717,000 ―own-account‖ workers; 293,000 unpaid family workers, and 324,000 

employers, making a total of 1,334,000 non-wage earners. Now, of the wage-earning class 3,345,000 (or 

75 per cent of the wage earners), were covered by the provisions of unemployment insurance; but 

1,093,000 wage earners were engaged in non-insurable employment. Over a million engaged in non-

insurance employment! So we see that one in four workers are not covered by unemployment insurance. 

 

Perhaps it might be of interest for the House to know who, or what classes are not covered. First of all, 

there are 142,000 persons in agriculture – that is, the wage-earning class in agriculture, horticulture and 

forestry. There are 128,000 persons in hospitals and charitable institutions not covered; 190,000 

permanent federal, provincial and municipal employees not covered; 122,000 teachers; 72,000 private 

domestic servants; 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

7 

62,000 salaried employees earning more than $4,800 a year, and consequently beyond the scope of the 

Act; 23,000 workers; 20,000 insurance and real estate salesmen; 19,000 policemen and 11,000 engaged 

in miscellaneous employment, and part-time or seasonal work. I think these figures are sufficient to 

show there are large numbers of persons who don‘t get this valuable protection. I do not think it is a 

particularly good thing for those who are not covered, or for those who are covered now. 

 

I have not requested in the resolution that all persons should be covered; I have suggested rather an 

extension of scope. There may be some classes that it would not be expedient at the moment to cover. I 

do think, though that, considering the complexion of this House in particular, all members should be in 

favour of a coverage of agricultural workers. It seems to me that this would be a very good thing, not 

only for the agricultural worker, but for the farmer. At the present time one of the main reasons why it 

becomes difficult (in some periods of the year, especially), for farmers to secure the labour they require, 

is because of the increasingly part-time nature of farm employment. I am not saying, of course, that 

there is not a demand where year-round requirements exist, but generally speaking, there is a very large 

section where farm employment is of a part-time nature; the spring-time work, and the fall harvesting 

operation – as they say, ―six weeks in the spring, and six weeks in the fall.‖ I can recall, Mr. Speaker, 

many years ago when I was on a far, my father having a hired man who had been with the family for 10 

or 12 years. He was like a member of the family. But at that time, there was almost enough work for one 

hired man to look after stabled horses. Everyone knows that situation has changed radically since the 

earlier days. 

 

I think however, if you want to make the farm labouring population more stable, make it more available 

to people who want the services of farm workers – it is desirable that there be established protection in 

the seasonally unemployed period. I stress their coverage would accomplish something that would aid 

everyone in this province, both urban and country dwellers.\ 

 

I think the argument may be advanced, Mr. Speaker, that extended benefits may lead to abuse. I would 

like to say something about that. It is often said that in insurance of this kind, or in workmen‘s 

compensation, there is the danger of malingering. I want to say however, that the experience of the 

unemployment insurance bodies, the workmen‘s compensation bodies and similar boards and 

commissions, is that there is a minimum of this particular problem. Again, so far as workers affected by 

unemployment insurance are covered, there are very strict regulations, and it is a hardy man indeed who 

can get by these regulations, and get benefits to which he is not entitled. And too, a person cannot get 

unemployment insurance unless he is available for work; and if the work is there and he does not take 

the work, he does not receive unemployment insurance benefit. The present sum that is received in 

unemployment insurance is very small. Certainly as it stands it is more than a deterrent; it is a hardship. 

I think that on a ―two-thirds of earnings‖ level, no one can argue that a worker is going to avoid work, 

and lose one-third of his income merely to get unemployed benefit. 

 

I mention again the thing that I talked about a moment ago, that most people are just not made that way; 

they do not like to malinger 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

8 

or be idle; in fact they are very unhappy if they are away from their work. I think you will find from 

officials who have had most to do with this sort of problem, that indeed it is not a problem at all 

concerning the general run of working people. The type of person who will malinger is the type of 

person who will malinger at any level of income, whether it is two-thirds, one-third or whatever it may 

be. The reason why there are people of this type is linked with a lot of psychological factors, and social 

maladjustments which I do not intend to attempt to elaborate on, this afternoon. 

 

Generally speaking, and to sum up, I have tried to show in the evidence I have given to the House, that 

what I propose in this resolution will be of considerable assistance to all Canadians, not just those who, 

through no fault of their own, become unemployed. I have tried to show you the serious repercussions 

which occur in all population sections when unemployment occurs. I think perhaps some final 

comparisons might be useful in the concluding part of my talk to the members of this House. 

 

I don‘t know whether hon. members are aware that during the first six months of 1956 there was more 

time lost because of unemployment in Canada than there was lost because of all strikes in Canada in the 

first 50 years of this century. In this whole 50 years there was less time lost because of strikes than was 

lost in the first half-year of 1956, because of unemployment. If you took an average of all time loss in 

Saskatchewan due to all strikes in any one of the last three years, it would be more than made up, Mr. 

Speaker, by time lost in just one day of unemployment, on the average, in any one of these last three 

years. I mention all this in its relationship to the question that we are discussing. 

 

Like other resolutions that are being, and have been, considered by this House, this resolution tried to 

underwrite a general economic stability based on the philosophy that the interests of the farmer and the 

urban dweller are basically interdependent. I have, I think, shown that the effects of unemployment can 

be just as serious for the farmer as for the unemployed urban dweller. I will ask for the support of the 

whole Assembly in the voting on this resolution. I think that certainly there is no political question 

involved. It is a resolution that every member of this House can and should support. I ask you, in 

considering your support of this resolution, to remember the figures I quoted to you, to remember the 

extent of the need for the remedies this resolution advocates. 

 

Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon City):  Mr. Speaker, the mover of the motion has covered the subject 

matter of the resolution so well, and also covered most of the material which I had prepared that, 

therefore, to use that material would be more like repetition. He has, I think, proved or shown why an 

increase would have an effect on the economy of the nation, and also the need for greater coverage 

under the Act. 

 

I think history will prove that the trade union movement has been responsible for social legislation such 

as this in all countries 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

9 

in the world, social legislation that has been put on the Statutes. It is true that political parties have 

claimed the credit for enacting such legislation, but the work has been done in promoting the ideas from 

the trade union movement, and that, of course, is only natural because the trade union movement is in 

close touch with the workers, and knows their needs and requirements. 

 

People are inclined to think that the trade unionists are years in advance of the thinking of the ordinary 

mass of people. We hear or see people today shake their heads when workers speak of a 32-hour work 

week with the same take-home pay, and a guaranteed annual wage and a national health program for 

every man, woman and child. At all these things they shake their heads in amazement, and wonder what 

next the worker will want. I venture to say, Mr. Speaker, that with the coming of automation, maybe 

even in your lifetime many of these things will come into being. 

 

It was quite a few decades ago that the trade union movement, through the many periods of booms and 

depressions – and as the depressions got longer with years, saw there was a need for some kind of an 

insurance for wage earners during their term of unemployment, and they promoted the idea, and the idea 

became so popular that in the famous Liberal convention of 1919, the Liberal party of Canada enacted as 

one of their platforms of their party at that time Unemployment Insurance. However, the constitutional 

difficulties of the B.N.A. Act was a convenient obstacle for any Liberal Government after those years to 

carry out this plank of their program. Until 1940, after the terrible economic catastrophe of the 1930‘s, 

the late Mackenzie Kind did introduce the Unemployment insurance Act as we have it today on the 

Statues, and, like most social legislation, it was a very cautious piece of legislation. One of the major 

troubles of that legislation was its meagre coverage. It included a great deal of what were considered 

fairly permanent employees at that time but left out a great many of the wage earners whose 

employment was not quite so secure. 

 

There have been many minor amendments to the Act since 1940. A few crumbs have been brushed off 

the table – most of them around election years; but they have not yet approached the problem which was 

recommended to them at the time the Act was first enacted, and that was a wider coverage (as the mover 

has mentioned) and increased benefits. The mover covered this waiting-period and the increased-

benefits fairly well; I think extremely well. I think the experience of the unemployment fund will show 

that the great majority of the workers who enjoy benefits under the Act – seasonal employees and those 

kind of workers who, for various reasons, never know what it is to have permanent employment, and so 

when they are unemployed, this waiting period of a week is a considerable hardship to them. They have 

never been able to get their heads above water, and the loss of income for a week means a real hardship 

to them. It also has an affect on approximately 50 per cent of their wages which they receive on benefits, 

when they do come under the Act. Therefore, we feel that two-thirds is not too much to put into the 

hands of these people so that they can buy some of the necessities of life. I believe in this respect, that 

provincial and municipal governments could approach this problem in a more realistic manner, realizing 

that more and more money in the hands of more and more people does help the economy in the 

municipality and in the province. 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

10 

I want to finish up by saying that Canada today is spending billions of dollars for a defence program. I 

think many will agree that, in many ways, it is a waster of goods, and services – a big expense; and I 

think a more feasible approach to bolster the economy of this nation would be to put more purchasing 

power into the hands of those people who become unemployed, so that they and their families can obtain 

more than the necessities of life. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I recommend to the members of this Assembly to support this motion. 

 

(The motion was agreed to, unanimously.) 

 

FEDERAL AID FOR EDUCATION 

 

The Assembly resumed from Thursday March 21, 1957, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 

Mr. Thorson: 

 

―That, in the opinion of this Assembly, the Government of Canada should, without encroaching on the 

exclusive jurisdiction of the Provinces in the matter of administration and curricula, provide increased 

financial aid to the various Provinces of Canada for the expansion and equalization of education 

opportunities in the primary, secondary and higher institutions of learning.‖ 

 

and the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. McFarlane: 

 

That all the words after the word ―Assembly‖ be deleted, and the following substituted therefore: 

 

―recognizing the serious difficulties encountered by school officials in meeting the ever increasing 

demand for additional classrooms and in retaining qualified teachers, coupled with an ever mounting 

tax burden on local ratepayers, recommend to the consideration of the Government the establishment 

of a Committee of educationists to examine reports and recommendations as a result of research work 

done by Canadian School Trustees Association under the direction of Dr. LaZerte, to study 

suggestions concerning a foundation program for education, and to work in co-operation with other 

provinces in an endeavour to establish in each province, a program such as would be incorporated into 

a policy through which the Federal Government may make unconditional grants.‖ 

 

Mr. F.E. Foley (Turtleford): Mr. Speaker, when I adjourned the debate on the amendment moved by 

the hon. member for Qu‘Appelle-Wolseley to the motion, I was discussing some of the problems which 

education faces in our province today. 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

11 

I have divided our amendment into what I considered two portions: the first portion dealing with a 

general statement on problems in education, and the second portion dealing with recommendations. The 

amendment reads in part, as follows: 

 

―recognizing the serious difficulties encountered by school officials in meeting the ever increasing 

demand for additional classrooms and in retaining qualified teachers, . . .‖ 

 

That is the first problem stated in the amendment. In connection with that, more academic demands are 

being placed upon young people today in our province by the professions and the industries, and we are 

finding it increasingly difficult to meet these demands. One of the problems in this connection, I feel, is 

the students who for many reasons are dropping out of school before completing Grade 12, thus making 

it impossible for them to qualify for institutions of higher education. Out of every 100 children who 

began Grade 1 in 1945, a very small number will graduate from Grade 12 this June – less than 20 I am 

told. Of those 15 to 20 who will graduate from Grade 12 this year, only a portion of them will go on to 

university. 

 

Certainly if we can sponsor any activity in education which will increase the number of high school 

students, completing their Grade 12 and going on to our universities, our teachers‘ colleges, our nursing 

training schools and others, then we will be assisting the call of the industries and the professions to a 

great extent. 

 

Another problem in this connection today, is the fact that we still have a large number of schools where 

one teacher is attempting to teach several grades; a large number of smaller high schools, where the high 

school teacher has possibly Grade 9 to 12, or Grades 10 to 12, to cope with. As a result, in these schools 

it is difficult to give a diversified program to students who, for one reason or another, may not be too 

adept in mathematics, or science, students who possibly could go on and complete their high school if 

they had the advantage of such courses as woodworking or metal-working, or other crafts. I believe one 

of the reasons why we are losing students from high schools is the fact that in our smaller schools it is 

difficult to provide other than the basic academic programs. 

 

In looking over the report tabled by the Hon. Minister of Education (Hon. Mr. Lloyd) for 1955-56, I 

thought I would make note of one or two entries. It is interesting to note the enrolment in our 

Saskatchewan Correspondence School this year. The work of the Correspondence School has for many 

years been very much appreciated in the province of Saskatchewan, in that academic and high school 

courses have been made available to many students who would otherwise not have had that opportunity. 

Yet the fact that the enrolment in the Correspondence School is increasing, I think indicates and points 

out to a certain degree at least, the lack of qualified teachers in our rural schools, and the necessity, in 

order that these schools be kept open, of acquiring less qualified people and supervisors. 

 

Also, in the report it is interesting to note the number of high school teachers qualified in 1955-56. I note 

that since the certificates were changed, where we now have just the three certificates in the province, 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

12 

Professions, Standard and Interim-standard Certificates, that in 1954 some 559 professional certificates 

were issued, in 1955, 339, and 1956, 735. However, as has been mentioned before, a number of 

qualified teachers left the province during the year, and the numbers have been so large that they have 

almost equalled in some cases the number of teachers who are becoming qualified. This year, 

subtracting the number coming into the program from the number that left, we have a deficit of some 

300 to 400 teachers. There is no question about it then, that coupling all these things together, the 

difficulty in retaining our high school students throughout their high school courses, the difficulty of 

retaining our qualified teachers in competition with our neighbouring provinces, the necessity of closing 

down our rural schools because of the inability to get teachers for them, coupled with the conveyance 

problems which result, all point out the necessity of attempting to do more than we have been able to do 

in terms of education. 

 

The second problem as stated in the amendment mentions an every-mounting tax burden on local 

ratepayers. I was interested to note, also, in the report on Education for 1956, the mention of the fact that 

the Minister of Education has appointed a Committee to study the structure and organization of teacher 

education in the province, with a view to analyzing the merits and the possibility of bringing teacher 

education under one administrative source. I believe that this has some merit, and certainly I believe, 

since we in our amendment recommend a Committee also to study problems of education, that in these 

ways we will certainly bring the problems of education to the fore, and will arrive at helpful suggestions 

and solutions. 

 

Some excerpts from the Royal Commission on Rural Life, I think, point out some of the significant 

problems of education today, and I have just jotted down here several of them: 

 

―Although annual school grants have thus nearly tripled since 1942, grants as a proportion of 

Government disbursements for education have shown a decline from the 1941 to 1945 average.‖ 

 

Another excerpt from this Report: 

 

―Although Government grants have nearly tripled since the 1940‘s, the school tax paid by rural 

ratepayers has not been reduced.‖ 

 

And a third quotation: 

 

―Since 1942, education as a proportion of expenditures for all Government services has declined.‖ 

 

Now, going on to the second portion of the amendment, the first recommendation reads as follows: 

 

― . . . the establishment of a Committee of educationists to examine reports and recommendations as a 

result of research work done by Canadian School Trustees‘ Association under 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

13 

the direction of Dr. LaZerte, to study suggestions concerning a foundation program for education, . . .‖ 

 

I have here a brief summary of Dr. LaZerte‘s Report, and although I realize, of course, that he is only 

one man, and that there may be disagreements with his recommendations, I thought it worthwhile, just 

to mention briefly some of the significant portions of his report. He makes this statement: 

\ 

―In 1951-52 the average provincial grant for education equalled 35.4 per cent of cost as here defined, 

while real property taxes were 64.5 per cent. 

 

And he goes on to draw this conclusion: 

 

―In view of total current responsibilities of municipal governments, these percentages should probably 

be reversed.‖ 

 

He goes on to state that: 

 

― . . . the type of schooling available to any particular child should not depend upon the wealth of the 

parents, the tax-paying ability of the local district, or the economic status of the province.‖ 

 

And states that: 

 

― . . . A foundation program for education would be helpful.‖ 

 

And he makes these recommendations: 

 

―The proportion of educational costs which should be borne by provincial and municipal government 

respectively, depends upon the relative weight of other services provided and financed by each. And 

real property assessments should be equalized throughout each program and, where possible, non-

paying tax-paying property should be placed on the assessment rolls.‖ 

 

He ends up in this vein: 

 

―What in summary is desirable in educational finance? The essentials are: 

 

―the best education the province can afford to be available to all students of elementary and secondary 

grades; 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

14 

―equal opportunities for all through approved foundation programs; 

 

―increased provincial grants, the provinces instead of the owners of real property to be responsible, for 

the major share of educational costs; 

 

―equalization of costs within each province, through equalized assessment, and a uniform provincial 

school tax rate, and; (finally Dr. LaZerte ends up) 

 

―Federal aid given as equalization grants to assist provinces in maintaining minimum programs of 

elementary and secondary education.‖ 

 

I note also that Dr. LaZerte‘s report resulted from the action of the Canadian School Trustees‘ Finance 

Research Committee, which had its origin in the province of Saskatchewan in 1950, and his report 

resulted from their requests. I feel, as such, that it merits the attention of all who are interested in 

education. 

 

I would like to say this. I believe that to a certain extent, at least, we have some Federal aid for education 

now. The family allowance paid to Saskatchewan and throughout Canada by the Federal Government, I 

believe, have assisted education in the province to a certain degree; and I believe, from my own 

experience, and I am sure others will agree, that the family allowance particularly in the case of a large 

family, have assisted mothers in the nutritional problem with children, have assisted in clothing those 

children, and some, I believe, have assisted to a certain extent in keeping those children in our schools. 

The Federal aid which the Government in Ottawa has made available to the universities of Canada this 

year, I think is commendable, and is an example of how education can be assisted in our province 

without any loss of our autonomy as defined under the British North American Act. I believe that the 

setting up of the Canada Council by the Federal Government, a Council to aid in promoting culture and 

the arts, will assist the province of Saskatchewan as it will assist all of Canada. So then, I feel that 

Federal Aid, to a certain degree at least, is already a reality in Canada today. 

 

The final portion of our amendment reads: 

 

― . . . and to work in co-operation with other provinces in an endeavour to establish in each province a 

program such as would be incorporated into a policy through which the Federal Government may 

make unconditional grants.‖ 

 

The fact remains that, if such a form of educational assistance is to be instituted, then I believe we, as a 

province, should have some say in the manner in which such assistance is given. I am sure we are all 

very much in favour of assisting education in this province in every way that we can. I feel, therefore, 

that such an amendment as I have the privilege of seconding, this afternoon, would enable us to sit down 

and study carefully the 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

15 

recommendations of such individuals as Dr. LaZerte, the reports made by the Commission on Rural Life 

in the Province and to take into consideration what develops from this Committee which the Minister is 

setting up regarding teacher education. In this manner we could acknowledge and attempt to understand 

better some of the underlying problems of education with which we are faced, both as teachers and as 

parents throughout the province; certainly a desirable thing, because I think we all will agree that 

education today in Saskatchewan, as it is throughout Canada, is becoming more and more of a dynamic 

force for progress. When we look around us, when we see the great movements that are on foot in other 

nations of the world for developing more engineers, more technicians, more doctors and the like, we 

cannot help but feel that, if Canada is to remain in the prominent position which she holds today, if she 

is to retain her place in the United Nations, and if she is to continue to make contributions to culture and 

to statesmanship throughout the world, we must continue to see that educational opportunities are given 

to our young people, and that they in turn then will have the opportunity of representing us in local, 

provincial, Dominion and world governments, and keep Canada the nation that she is today. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I take a great deal of pleasure, and consider it a distinct privilege, to second the 

amendment moved by the hon. member for Qu‘Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. McFarlane). 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Minister of Education):  Before giving to the Legislature some reasons why I 

think it is highly desirable that the amendment as proposed be defeated and the original resolution 

supported, I would like to make a few comments on the remarks of the hon. member, who has just taken 

his seat. 

 

May I say to begin with that I can agree substantially with many of the remarks which he has made, and, 

as a matter of fact, insofar as his analysis of problems and so on, are concerned, I think I can say that 

most of those items I have drawn to the attention of the Legislature not only during this session, but 

during each of the preceding sessions. He had reference, to begin with, to the problem of dropout of 

students. This, as I have frequently said, is certainly one of our most serious problems, and I would like 

to suggest to him, and to members of his party, that they could give some better support than has 

frequently been forthcoming from the, in regard to measures undertaken to solve those particular 

problems. 

 

I have reference, for example, to the fact that one of the measures taken and one of the measures which 

has been to some extent effective in partially solving this problem, has been the organization of larger 

school units, and the result which this has had on extending opportunities to more youngsters, 

particularly those youngsters in our rural and smaller urban centres. If we are to retain more youngsters 

in high school, then certainly one reason why we are going to so retain them, is because we are going to 

make available to them some of these more attractive high school opportunities, of which the hon. 

member spoke. This will only be done, as the result of regrouping our attendance, making it possible for 

many youngsters who now have to attend the one-room high school which, while 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

16 

it can do an adequate job for some people, frequently fails to do an effective and interesting job for 

many people, to make it possible for them to attend the kind of a high school which can offer a more 

varied program. It is quite obvious that this cannot be done by small urban centres by themselves, or by 

rural school districts by themselves. It is only as a result of the effective operation of larger units, and 

the developing of high school centres, regrouping of school population, the utilization of school buses, 

that this kind of opportunity can be made available in a province such as Saskatchewan, and I am glad to 

hear the hon. member endorse this kind of a program. 

 

I gave in a previous debate one indication of the relative effectiveness of this program to date, and at that 

time I referred to the fact that, prior to the organization of units in the province, in those high schools in 

the areas now organized as units, high school students made up some nine percent of the total students 

enrolled, whereas in the most recent year for which we have any records, high school students made up 

not nine per cent but seventeen per cent of the total enrolment, or in other words, almost double the 

percentage that they had previously. 

 

Reference has been made to the difficulty with respect to adequately and properly certified teachers in 

adequate numbers, and again in this, of course, I must concur, and have placed the information before 

this House. But may I point out again the very considerable progress which has been made, and which is 

frequently overlooked, and may I suggest, too, that one of the worst deterrents probably to getting more 

and retaining more and better teachers is the fact that all the emphasis is so frequently given to the 

number of study supervisors or the number of people who have left the province for other places. I think 

we could do much to develop the prestige of the teaching profession, and must to develop the interest of 

more people in the teaching profession, if we would on occasion at least, tell the story with regard to the 

positive side of the picture. As I pointed out just a few days ago, Mr. Speaker, we have, in not so very 

many years, been able to more than double the number of teachers in the province who hold university 

degrees, much more than doubled those who had two or three years of university training; that the total 

percentage of our teachers with more than two years of training has increased from something like 10 

per cent to approximately 50 per cent in the province at the present time. We have been successful in 

steadily increasing and improving the level of certification of teachers in the province, and more 

emphasis needs to be given to this, because frequently it is only the other side of the picture to which 

any reference is made. 

 

May I also refer just for a moment to the statistics from the Royal Commission to which he had 

reference, because I think it must be remembered that the statistics commenting on the increase in 

school grants, and the percentage of Budget which was allocated to education, are now several years old 

and as he pointed out at the time of the Report of the Royal Commission, the school grants had increased 

considerably. I would point out that, today, as for this current year, they are not about three times what 

they were, but are something like five times what they were, compared to that period which was used. 

May I also point out that the total portion of the Budget of the Government for Education has increased 

during that period from 13 per cent to some 23 per cent as for the current year. 

 

I would agree with, Mr. Speaker, that family allowances have been of a measurable assistance to many 

people in the province, but I 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

17 

recall that, a few years ago, when I used exactly that same argument, an attempt was made to severely 

scold and criticize me by the Leader of his party for having suggested that family allowances should 

have anything to do with the matter of education, or defraying educational costs. 

 

Certainly I will agree, and I am on record as stating my appreciation, and it is stated by the Government 

in the Speech from the Throne, of the action taken by the Federal Government with regard to assistance 

to universities, with regard to the assistance to cultural organizations through the Canada Council, and 

with the further assistance to the universities through the Canada Council, for their building program. 

but I would say here again, as I have said previously, that this by itself is still going to leave many 

universities with a very real financial problem to meet; that here in itself is one way in which I think the 

Federal Government must, and could, quite justfully go far beyond their present proposal of $50 million 

to assist university construction costs over the next ten years. It has been pointed out at the meeting held 

in Ottawa last fall, a meeting called or arranged by the Carnegie Corporation of representatives of 

universities and provincial governments across Canada, that in that ten-year period, universities would 

expect to spend at least $300 million for purposes of new construction. And as I said previously this 

estimate was already out-of-date by the time the conference itself was held, so that we can confidently 

expect new construction costs for universities across Canada to total more than $300 million in the next 

ten years. The question which I raised before and raise again is whether or not the Federal contribution 

of $50 million toward that, can be considered an adequate one. I raise this particularly, because of the 

contribution which professionally trained persons are making, and will make in even greater measure, to 

the development of the economy, not of each individual province alone, but of all of Canada. This is one 

point why I think the Federal Government must, and ought, in the interests of all of Canada, pick up a 

greater portion of the bill. 

 

May I now turn, just for a few minutes, to talk about the amendment and the resolution. The resolution, 

Mr. Speaker, is a very clear-cut, concise request for recognition of the principle of Federal aid to 

education in the Canadian provinces. This is a principle which has been affirmed by this House on 

previous occasions. I think it is important that we either reaffirm or otherwise our belief in the validity 

of this principle, and support of the resolution does so affirm. On the other hand, the amendment so 

qualifies and so equivocates that by the time it is finished, the resolution as amended, would be, I 

submit, practically meaningless. The Government needs to know whether or not this Assembly is 

prepared to reaffirm the support given in previous resolutions in previous years to the principle of 

Federal aid. Every year, Mr. Speaker, there is the meeting in Canada of those persons interested in 

education, representative of the educational institutions, called the Canadian Educational Association, 

and every year during that convention the Ministers of Education meet and discuss various mutual 

problems. Almost every year which I can recall, we on that occasion meet with representatives of the 

Canadian School Trustees who have come to us pleading the case of Federal aid for education and 

asking the stand of the various governments with regard to Federal aid. I have always felt, because of the 

stand which the Government itself has taken, because that stand has been affirmed by vote of the 

Legislature in previous years, 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

18 

that I can say quite definitely, insofar as the Government of the province of Saskatchewan is concerned, 

we believe that this was a desirable principle and that all of us ought to take part in working toward the 

achievement or enactment of this principle. And I would like to know just whether or not the whole 

Assembly supports that principle; and secondly, may I say that the people of the province, who through 

many of their organizations have said they support the principle, also deserve to know whether or not the 

members of this Legislative Assembly also support it, because many of the organizations in the 

province, those supporting education, such as the Teachers‘ Federation, such as the School Trustees‘ 

Association, such as the Home and School Association, have year after year endorsed the principle. In 

addition, many other organizations, some service clubs, some labour organizations, some farm 

organizations and municipal organizations, have also said that they endorse the principle of Federal aid 

to education, and I think they deserve to know without qualification or equivocation whether or not the 

members of this Legislature are also prepared to support that same principle. We can give that 

understanding to them by voting for the resolution, but if we vote for the resolution as amended, we tell 

them, Mr. Speaker, exactly nothing. 

 

May I just say a work or two about the amendment as it is proposed in support of my contention that it 

makes the whole thing rather meaningless. It asks that there be established a committee of educationists 

to examine reports and recommendations as a result of research work done by the Canadian School 

Trustees under the direction of Dr. LaZerte. Well, to begin with, and it doesn‘t seem too logical that we 

now establish another committee to study this particular report, particularly since most of the members 

of the committee who worked most closely with Dr. LaZerte were made up of Saskatchewan people of 

the kind referred to in the amendment. 

 

May I just take a minute, too, to have reference to the history of this Committee. It began as a result of 

the interest of the Saskatchewan School Trustees in Federal aid. It began as the result of their conviction 

that Federal aid was not only desirable but essential, if youngsters not only in Saskatchewan but across 

Canada were going to get a square deal, if they were going to stand with some equality before the future 

in this great Canadian nation. They began studying the problem, and the results of their study and the 

direction of their study was accepted in a subsequent year by the Canadian School Trustees‘ 

Association, with the Saskatchewan Committee remaining, sort of a core committee. I would just like to 

point out that this core committee, or nucleus committee, which brought forth this report which the 

amendment would have us establish another committee to study, was made up of the following persons: 

Mr. George Hindley, who was at that time president of the Canadian School Trustees‘ Association, and 

had been president of the Saskatchewan School Trustees‘ Association, Mr. Eamer, the secretary of the 

Saskatchewan Teachers‘ Federation; Mayor McAskill of Saskatoon; Mr. Hall, the chairman of the 

Separate School Board in Saskatoon; Mr. Hay, the chairman of the Saskatoon High School Board, now 

president of the Saskatchewan School Trustees‘ Association; Dr. Tait of the Department of Education; 

Dr. Smith, at that time dean of the College of Education at the University. Professor Toombs of the 

College of Education, was and remained its secretary; and Mr. Henry E. Spencer acted as treasurer of 

the committee. Now I submit that there is little point in establishing another committee, which would 

undoubtedly contain some of the same people to study the work 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

19 

which they have so recently passed on to the people of Saskatchewan and the people of Canada. 

 

The amendment further goes on to say that we study suggestions concerning a foundation program for 

education, and I would point out that the foundation program recommended by Dr. LaZerte was a 

foundation program made up of the combined support of the Provinces and the Federal Government. 

The Resolution seeks to achieve such a foundation program. And finally, that it work in committee-

operation with other provinces in an endeavour to establish in each province a program such as would be 

incorporated into a policy through which the Federal Government may make unconditional grants. I 

submit that there is no need for this particular study, because in each and every province in Canada 

today, there is such a policy in effect which could now, without any delay, without need for any further 

study, be supported by just such a program. 

 

For those reasons, Mr. Speaker, because there is a need I suggest to speak our minds in this Legislature, 

to give our opinion, as to the validity of the principle of Federal aid, I suggest that we cannot in all 

conscience support the amendment, but most defeat it, and support the main motion without amendment. 

 

Mr. Karl F. Klein (Notukeu-Willowbunch):  In speaking to the amendment that we brought in, in 

the first instance I didn‘t think when the Minister was going to make a serious request for Federal aid 

that he would use this opportunity to make a political speech which we have heard over and over and 

over. Secondly, I read the motion through once again, and there is nothing in that motion that says you 

are asking for acceptance of the principle of Federal aid. It says: 

 

―That, in the opinion of this Assembly, the Government of Canada, should, without encroaching on 

the exclusive jurisdiction of the Provinces in the matter of administration and curricula, provide 

increased financial aid to the various Provinces of Canada for the expansion and equalization of 

educational opportunities in the primary, secondary and higher institutions of learning.‖ 

 

In dealing with that motion, we felt that you were perhaps serious in trying to get Federal aid for 

education, but now I see that you are only trying to get the principle, which won‘t be of much value. 

And I believe that it was recognized in the LaZerte Report that piecemeal requests from various 

provincial governments throughout the Dominion will not get the aid that we are desirous of getting for 

education. 

 

I believe that it is also recognized that unless we can convince the majority of the provinces of this 

country to support a definite program by governments and everybody else interested in getting this aid, 

then if they went to the Federal Government with an almost dominion-wide voice, certainly we would 

have more chance of getting this aid than by placing piecemeal requests from each of the individual 

provincial governments. 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

20 

There is no need to go into a long discourse about this entire report, but I also feel that none of the 

recommendations, which were the result of quite a long period of study, should be by-passed and not 

utilized in requesting Federal aid. Certainly, we should utilize what the other people have already 

started, and then try and get dominion-wide support for that which has been started, and in that way 

perhaps we can get the aid that we are desirous of getting. I see fit to support the amendment, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek):  I didn‘t intend to take part in this debate, because I thought that 

the amendment was clear and to the point, and was offering a constructive suggestion to the Government 

as to how to go about an effort of securing Federal aid to education. I was somewhat surprised at the 

statements made by the Minister of Education (Hon. Mr. Lloyd) that the sole purpose of this amendment 

was to by-pass the whole principle of Federal aid for education. He didn‘t say so in so many words, but 

he certainly left the impression that we in the Opposition were not interested in Federal aid for 

education, therefore, we were opposed to the principle of the motion as it was. He said, let us call on the 

Legislature, let us stand up and see who supports the principle of Federal aid for education. Those are 

fine and glowing words and all the rest of it, but Federal aid for provincial assistance in various fields is 

becoming a very common occurrence today, and we had an illustrious example of that by the Minister of 

Public Works in the Federal House when he spoke here, of this new concept of committee-operation 

between the Federal Government and the provinces. He spoke about the greatness of the Trans-Canada 

Highway, and how this new concept was working in that regard. I understand there are discussions and 

negotiations going on between the Federal government and the provinces, regarding the possibility of a 

secondary Trans-Canada highway. The concept of sharing the tax-dollar of the Dominion, which only 

they can collect, with the provinces is certainly an accepted principle today. 

 

I think that, if we are going to ask across Canada that the Federal Government carry this new concept 

into the field of education, it is not just necessary for us to ask that this be done. We must remember that 

it is the person who pays the piper calls the tune; and if we are going to ask Ottawa to contribute huge 

sums of money (the LaZerte Report, I think, recommends $150 million to begin with) to the Provinces 

for education, then I think they will look at the whole problem along the lines suggested by the Premier 

and the Provincial Treasurer to the Local Conference with the local municipal governing bodies here, 

when they said we want to be sure that the tax-dollar is used to advantage with careful and prudent 

management and in an efficient manner. To say that the Dominion government should just on principle 

give money to the province of Saskatchewan and each of the other provinces in a lump sum, in order to 

assist primary and secondary and higher institutions of learning, is not presenting any concrete 

suggestions as to how it can be done. I want to show you here, the LaZerte Report points out that the 

average per pupil operating costs varied from $63 to $205 in 62 districts in municipalities of Manitoba. 

The variation of educating these children in public schools varied from $63 to $205 per pupil; and from 

$85 per pupil to $229 per pupil in 18 larger units in Saskatchewan. Even in the province of 

Saskatchewan in the larger units, the money spent 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

21 

on a per-pupil basis varied from $85 to $229. Are we calling that equal educational opportunities, when 

some units are providing $229 per pupil, and some units are providing $85? From $119 to $335 was the 

per-pupil cost in 54 school divisions of Alberta, some spending $335 per pupil, others $119; and from 

$100 per pupil to $337 per pupil in 77 districts in British Columbia. 

 

So we find, even in our own system, inequality in the amount of money spent in a per-pupil basis for the 

needs of educating that pupil. The study which has already been made and already submitted to this 

Government, shows there is no need for further study of it, according to the Minister. Perhaps there 

isn‘t. But I notice that the Minister of Education was very careful not to come out in support of the other 

recommendations made by this Committee, that, if we are to approach educationists from the viewpoint 

of Federal aid to education, one of the essential things necessary as a first step, is the implementing of a 

foundation program, defined in terms of the per-weighted-pupil-cost or the per-weighted classroom cost, 

in each province. That was one of the conditions they set down as a necessary step to Federal aid for 

education. And likewise, they say, each province should have a foundation program; that is, a program 

not identical in every respect, but a program set out that takes recognition of the teachers‘ qualifications. 

A foundation program might be defined in terms of grade offerings, staff qualifications, teachers‘ 

salaries, adequacy of school equipment or in other terms, and it says that each province should set up as 

a first step, a foundation program taking into consideration these things which I have read. And it says: 

 

―Furthermore, that a foundation program will set out to guarantee to each district or unit a certain basic 

standard of education. And then you will have a uniform tax mill rate across the province (as I 

understand it), and then any district in which the needs of the cost of this foundation program is not 

met by the uniform tax rate, will call upon the Government to make up the difference. If you get in a 

district where the assessed mill rate will carry the foundation program in its entirety then that district 

will not qualify for these equalization grants.‖ 

 

―It is to put it on a basis whereby you will have to set a standard, or a foundation program which will 

have a certain quality set. And then an equalization assessment, and then an equalized tax rate, and 

then if any district wishes to add to its program anything over and above the foundation program it is 

free to do so, but it will be called upon to assess the ratepayers in that particular area to supply those 

additional features of the program.‖ 

 

And then it goes on to state: 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

22 

―Once such a program has been recognized, and some provinces are working towards that end, 

and it has been accepted across the ten provinces, then we will get more uniformity on a per-

pupil bases expenditure for education. To say that we must pay 25 per cent of the cost of 

educating our students in the primary schools, that 25 per cent will vary in many districts, if you 

are gong to have a per-pupil cost from $83 to $200 and some odd ―(as I read before)‖so the first 

essential is to establish this program with the costs more or less on a level where they are not 

varying and fluctuating from $80 to $339, have a uniform mill rate, establish your foundation 

program and the Government will come in to assist whatever is required in each particular area 

to meet that condition. 

 

―Then if that has been established across Canada as a whole, you have a standard, not in 

uniformity of education in the subjects taught and so forth, but a foundation program with certain 

aims and qualities and specifications that is more or less uniform across the Dominion. Then the 

Dominion will give unconditional grants . . . ‖ (which we take from this resolution, it could be 

conditional grants) . . . ‖ depending upon the amount of money it is costing the provincial 

government to carry the burden of education.‖ 

 

We don‘t think we should approach it from the viewpoint of conditional grants at all. We think they 

should be unconditional grants given to the Province, to spend in the manner in which they see best 

fitted to carry out this foundation program. Then you cannot level a finger and say that the Federal 

Government is invading the jurisdiction of the public schools, or the secondary and primary schools. We 

recognize the principle today that they can contribute funds at the university level, but we are asking 

them in the original motion, (as I read it) to make unconditional grants to primary rooms, secondary 

rooms, and higher institutions of learning, and we differ with that, in that we believe it should be an 

unconditional grant based on the cost to the provinces and their needs; to consider the need of each 

province to carry on that program which is instituted, and thus each province will share on the basis of 

its need to carry that particular program, and will supplement the resources of the province in carrying 

that out. 

 

That is why in this amendment we asked to set up the Committee towards the viewpoint of working 

towards the end of setting up a foundation program and then lend our support to other provinces in 

trying to get a foundation program established in each of those provinces. When we have done this with 

the overall picture in mind, the Provinces can then approach the Federal Government on this basis of 

equalization of the cost in regards to the provinces, and the amount of money they have to spend for 

education, and ask that Government to contribute unconditionally to the Provinces a portion of their cost 

of carrying that particular program. We 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

23 

feel, if we have done that, then we have cleared the decks of any suggestion of conditional grants 

dependant upon the amount of money that is being spent. You have got it then on a more stable cost per 

pupil of educating than with the differences of cost we find even in the larger units today, from $83 to 

$209 per pupil. 

 

That is the program we believe is in the interest of education, and Federal participation in an educational 

program across the Dominion we believe this is the proper approach today. We are not recommending 

what type of foundation program, but we are suggesting that we travel in the direction as suggested by 

the results of the studies of this Committee, and they set those down as essential steps upon which we 

must seek a program and then apply to the Federal Government for assistance in it. All our amendment 

is doing is suggesting that we carry out the recommendations of the studies already completed, and go 

forward along the lines suggested as a result of those studies, in order that we, together with the other 

provinces, can put ourselves into a position where we can go to Ottawa and say that the costs are 

moderate, the advantages are equal; equal opportunities for these children, approximately equal costs on 

a per pupil basis for carrying this foundation program. Some provinces are richly endowed with 

resources and have additional income that other provinces haven‘t. Therefore, you should assist the less 

wealthy provinces to carry the foundation program together with those of a wealthier nature. 

 

We think this is the logical step, and to get up and to say that we are not interested in Federal aid for 

education because we are suggesting that step further to see if it is possible to implement, even with 

modifications, the suggestions outlined in the report of the Committee which you have already set up is 

nonsense. Carry this into action, and then proceed with the other provinces to do likewise, and then as a 

joint affair go to the Federal Government and say this is out program, this is what it costs, this is what 

Saskatchewan needs to carry this program, this is what Alberta needs, these are what the other provinces 

need. We strengthen our position when we have shown that we have built the foundation for such a 

thing. 

 

I think on that basis we can be assured that we have just grounds for appealing for Federal aid to 

education. We think that this strengthens our position and shows constructive thinking along the line of 

education and the need for Federal aid. If we proceed along that line, we are confident that sufficient 

work will be done, sufficient committee-operation between the Provinces and the Dominion 

Government we will have established, not only in principle, but in actuality, the contribution of the 

Federal Government towards education across the Dominion of Canada as a whole. 

 

The question being put on the proposed amendment, it was negatives by 33 votes to 17. 

 

The motion (Mr. Thorson) was then agreed to unanimously. 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

24 

FEDERAL-PROVINCIAL AGRICULTURAL CONFERENCE 

 

The Assembly resumed from Thursday, March 21, 1957, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion 

of Mr. Brown (Bengough): 

 

―That this Assembly: 

 

1. reaffirms the position unanimously taken in the 1936 Session in support of the Government of 
Saskatchewan‘s request for a Federal-Provincial Agricultural Conference on Marketing and Farm 

Income, pursuant to which the 1956 Assembly appointed a Select Special Committee in order to 

obtain the views and opinions of Members of the Legislature and farm and other interested 

organizations and persons, the Report of which Committee was made available to the Provincial 

Government to assist it in its representations before such Federal-Provincial Conference; and 

 

2. strongly recommends that, in view of the continued deterioration of the agricultural industry 
relative to other sectors of the national economy and particularly in respect to marketing of farm 

products and farm income, the Government of Saskatchewan continue to press upon the 

Government of Canada the necessity of convening a Federal-Provincial Agricultural Conference 

which would include representatives of farm organizations.‖ 

 

Mr. Fred Neibrandt (Yorkton):  Mr. Speaker, the resolution before us today is substantially the 

same as the one that was incorporated into the report of the Special Select Committee on Marketing and 

Farm Income, and which was unanimously adopted in this House, last year. 

 

In speaking to this resolution, I want unreservedly to endorse the arguments that have been advanced by 

my colleagues, the member for Bengough (Mr. Brown) and the member for Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst). 

the prime purpose of convening this conference would be to face up to, and come to grips with, 

problems that are beyond the scope and competence of individual farmers, farm organizations, or, for 

that matter, the Provincial Government. It seems to me that we here in Saskatchewan, as well as others 

in the west, have reached a blind alley with respect to production, marketing and farm income, and the 

deteriorating economic position of the farmer in relation to other economic groups could well lead to a 

repetition of our experiences in the ‗thirties‘. So it seems to me that before such an eventuality does 

occur, it is proper and expedient for a Federal-Provincial agricultural conference to be convened without 

delay. 

 

I would like, Mr. Speaker, to quote an observation in the report of the Special Select Committee on 

Marketing and Farm Income. I think it is pertinent to this resolution – (page 88): 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

25 

―In the course of its deliberations, the committee was impressed by the frequency and tenure of the 

types of solutions proposed for the long-term problems of Saskatchewan agriculture. There was 

remarkable agreement that what was required was a comprehensive long-range national farm policy, 

which would attempt to integrate the production, price and distribution problems of agriculture into a 

more meaningful framework.‖ 

 

Typical of the comments of briefs submitted by various organizations are some sentiments that pertain 

to this resolution, and again I want to quote from this report, on page 56. The first quotation is from the 

brief submitted by the Canadian Co-operative implements Ltd: 

 

―We suggest that what is most needed is not the short-range solution for the disposition of the present 

surplus, but a long-range impression and a wide point of view to the whole business of marketing of 

wheat and all farm products.‖ 

 

There is another one, from the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture: 

 

―The inter-relationship of agriculture and non-agricultural sectors of the national economy become 

more complex, and as specific agricultural problems assume greater national significance, the need for 

integration of agricultural policy with general policy becomes greater.‖ 

 

A further quotation from the brief by the Saskatchewan Farmers‘ Union: 

 

―We recommend the early holding of an agricultural conference, representative of Federal and 

Provincial Governments and farm organizations for the purpose of outlining a comprehensive plan for 

agricultural policy across Canada.‖ 

 

The last brief that I want to cite a quotation from is the Canadian Farmer-Labour Economic Council 

brief, Mr. Speaker: 

 

―One invaluable service that this Provincial Legislative Committee can perform is to give undivided 

support to the requests of farm and labour groups a full-scale marketing conference at the national 

level.‖ 

 

These examples, Mr. Speaker, highlight the fact that the resolution which is before us commands the 

attention and concern of a cross-section of our Canadian people, both in and outside of those engaged in 

agriculture. It also points out the need for the convening of such a conference. 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

26 

Notwithstanding an improvement in producer marketing which has taken place since last fall, a recent 

report of the Canadian Wheat Board states that, as late as of March 13 (last month), the Saskatchewan 

producers had delivered only 29 per cent of their marketable grain. The consensus of opinion, according 

to that report, shows that we are going to have the biggest carry-over that we have ever had, and that 

stock left on Saskatchewan farms at the end of the coming crop season will likely reach 100 million 

bushels more than we had last year. 

 

What is even more significant and far-reaching in its implications, of course, is the steady mounting 

costs of goods and services which the farmer requires, and the steadily mounting costs of production. 

When you consider hired help, machinery, repairs, fuel, fertilizer and all the other things the farmers 

use, which affect the cost of everything that he produces, we find that these costs have continued to 

mount without a corresponding increase in income; the farmer becomes more dependent on increased 

sales to meet those ever-increasing costs and ever-dwindling returns. Costs today, according to ―The 

Farm Net Income‖ provided by the Dominion Bureau of Statistics, are two and a half times as high as 

the period between 1935 and 1939, and the income in the intervening years has shown very little gain. 

the average farmer cannot meet his operating expense and the depreciating charge, which here alone on 

those two items will amount to $300 million a year. 

 

The anti-inflationary policy now in vogue has resulted in credit restrictions with respect to the farmer; 

the anti-inflationary policy also went against the interests of the farmer in various other ways. For 

example, he has to pay high interest rates if he is fortunate enough to get credit, and high interest rates 

paid to the banks by the Wheat Board take away from his final payment just that much more. All these 

things increase production costs, and we find it increasingly difficult to successfully compete on the 

export market. At the present time there is little or no likelihood that there will be a compensating price 

increase in the export market for Canadian farm products. With this continuing trend the farmer, of 

course, finds himself in the untenable position of storing more and more wheat, and more and more 

farmers are finding it most difficult to remain solvent as the relentless problem of inflation creeps over 

them. 

 

I want to read an excerpt from the Gordon Commission Report on Canada‘s Economic Prospects, which 

concludes there is more need, and not less, for the Federal Government taking a hand in the problems of 

the wheat farmer: 

 

―The Government in every importing producing country, influenced by direct marketing of their 

products . . . It would not make sense to leave Canadian wheat farmers to their own devices.‖ 

 

This is from page 30 of the Preliminary Report. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that this very trend demands an early consideration, and has been recognized as an 

already established procedure all over the world. It is evident that our greatest competitor, the United 

States, has assumed over the last 20 years, an ever-increasing share of the financial responsibility or 

financial burden of their agricultural people. 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

27 

At the same time they have instituted policies which have often been against our interests in the export 

field. Just last week a report revealed that the United States, Argentine and Australia were under-selling 

Canadian wheat on the export market by 30 cents a bushel, and policies adopted by importing countries 

too, are going against the interests of us, as exporters. On our part it behoves us to reserves-examine our 

own agricultural policies in this new light and new relation and implication in this changing picture to 

the internal and external influences; with a view to reserves-establishing ourselves in the markets of the 

world in our traditional first place as the producer of the world‘s finest and cheapest wheat. To do this, 

of course, will necessitate the combined effort of all of us on a national, provincial and local level. 

 

So accordingly, and in view of the foregoing over which the Provincial Government has no control, and 

in view of the trends as outlined by the farmer speaker, and as I have reviewed here briefly, the necessity 

for convening an agricultural Federal-Provincial Conference, including farm representatives, should 

become clear to all of us. I, therefore, urge all members to support this resolution. 

 

The question being put, the motion (Mr. A.L.S. Brown) was agreed to, unanimously. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 92 – An Act to amend Deserted Wives’ 

and Children’s Maintenance Act. 

 

Hon. R.A. Walker (Attorney General):  Mr. Speaker, in respect to this Bill, the present situation is 

that where a maintenance order is obtained in the Court of Queen‘s Bench, it precludes the possibility of 

a deserted wife bringing action in the summary court or the Magistrate‘s court for an order for payment 

of maintenance. The Magistrate‘s court has certain sanctions at its disposal which are very difficult to 

apply in the Court of Queen‘s Bench, and it is very useful to a deserted wife, even though she may have 

an order for maintenance under a separation decree or a divorce decree, to have this summary means of 

enforcing the maintenance order payment. 

 

It is expressly provided in this Bill that the maintenance order given by the magistrate will not 

supersede, or may not exceed the amount due under the order of the superior court. It just makes 

available to the deserted wife or child the sanctions of the summary court, in addition to those which are 

presently available, through the superior court. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that explanation, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

(Motion agreed to, and Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at next sitting.) 



 

April 2, 1957 

 

 

28 

SECOND READING 

 

Bill No. 94 – An Act to amend The Limitation of Actions Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker:  The Limitations of Actions Act is to be amended for certain limitations for 

bringing actions, and the periods limited are set out, depending upon the class of action involved. There 

is a situation in Saskatchewan, at the present moment, where some people may have a right of action in 

an action to set aside mineral assignments and so on, for which the limitation period may be only 

expired this year, and it is proposed that, in view of the intention of the Government that there may be 

some inquiry into some classes of these leases, it is desirable to preserve the right to bring action for the 

additional year, so that no one may be lulled into a sense of security by reason of an inquiry and thereby 

let his right of action lapse because of the expiration of the six-year limit. 

 

With that explanation, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

(Motion agreed to, and Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at next sitting.) 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 10:05 o‘clock p.m., without question put. 

 

 


