



















































Hansard: March 15, 1957


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — 13th Legislature 

22nd Day 

 

 Friday, March 15, 1957 

 

The House met at 2.30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

VISIT OF THE HON. ROBERT HENRY WINTERS, M.P. 
 

Premier Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, how delighted, I am sure, all members of the Legislative Assembly 

are that we are host at this time to three very distinguished visitors, the Hon. Mr. Winters, Minister of 

Public Works in the Government of Canada; the Hon. Mr. Robertson, Minister of Public works in the 

Government of Manitoba; and the Hon. Mr. Taylor, Minister of Highways in the province of Alberta. 

 

It isn’t often that we have the privilege of having a Federal Minister as one of our guests in the 

Legislative Assembly, and we are all delighted to have the very popular and very able minister of Public 

Works with us on this occasion. 

 

Mr. Winters has a plane waiting for him, and he must be back in Ottawa this evening; but he graciously 

consented to postpone his departure so that he could say a few words to the Legislature. Therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I would like to move, seconded by Mr. McDonald, the hon. Leader 

of the Opposition: 

 

“That proceedings be suspended at this stage in order that the Assembly may welcome to the Chamber 

the Hon. Robert Henry Winters, M.P., Minister of Public Works in the government of Canada.” 

 

(Motion agreed to) 

 

Hon. R.H. Winters, M.P.:  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier and members of the Saskatchewan Legislature, 

first of all I would like to convey to you and to the people of Saskatchewan the very high respects of the 

Prime Minister and my other colleagues in the government of Canada. Secondly, I would like to thank 

you very warmly for this honour which you are conferring upon me today, as a member of the 

government of Canada. I think this shows the real desire on the part of this government, and provincial 

governments throughout the country, to co-operate to the betterment of all Canadians, and I am sure this 

Assembly’s spirit of co-operation is what Canadians are expecting of their governments today. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

2 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the British North America Act is a very important document. It is a document 

that merits the respect of all of us, and certainly Canadians everywhere expect an adherence to that 

document. But Canada is a very rapidly growing nation. Technical advances have made it possible to do 

things that could not be done even a short time ago, and our concepts, too, I think, have broadened to 

the point where things that now must be done in many cases on a co-operative basis. The fact that so 

many of these projects now span provincial boundaries and, in many cases, are beyond the capacity of 

any one Government to carry out alone, means that co-operation is the byword if we are to continue to 

develop the full resources of this country. I think it is in that spirit that the Trans-Canada Highway was 

developed, and I wish to repeat what I said yesterday in Saskatoon, and to commend the Government of 

Saskatchewan for the splendid progress it is making in that outstanding project. 

 

Another one of the projects in which I have had the opportunity to co-operate with provincial 

government is housing, and I think, too, that there we have been able to do something for the betterment 

of all Canadians. Now these are the sorts of things that are being done in a spirit of co-operation, in 

harmony with the times, the advancement on all fronts, in our efforts to achieve a higher standard of 

living for everybody. 

 

These things can only be done if we have a good sound Government at all levels, and if we have 

conditions of peace. In this country we have been well blessed with natural resources, but, endowed as 

we are, unhappily these resources haven’t always been equitably distributed across the country. I think, 

however, there is a new awareness on the part of all Canadians to help other parts of the country, and, 

with that in mind, new efforts are being made to distribute the wealth of this country. In that field, too, 

we need outstanding co-operation. 

 

When we talk of endowments, there is one thing with which we have been endowed and for which we 

can all be grateful, and that is the British Parliamentary system of Government, which has brought 

stability of Government and democracy to those countries that have the benefits of it, and to such a 

degree that the members of the Commonwealth of nations are outstanding in the world as examples of a 

stable Government. Now given conditions of stable Government – I think we have demonstrations of it 

here. This morning I was talking to your Minister of Highways, the Hon. Mr. speaker. Douglas, and he 

and I both recalled that when the Trans-Canada Highway Agreement was introduced in 1949, he and I 

sat around the Conference Table, and we are the only two remaining Ministers of Highways that still 

hold our respective portfolios since that period of time. So I think there have been elements of stability 

in our two respective governments in that regard. 

 

Now, I am quite sure that, in this friendly spirit of co-operation between two Governments, and given 

conditions of peace for which we are all earnestly striving, we will continue to march along this road of 

progress towards a fuller development of the resources of the country for 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

3 

the benefit of Canadians everywhere. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Speaker. Premier, once again I extend to you my warmest thanks for this honour 

you have bestowed upon me as a member of the Federal Government to say a few words in this historic 

Legislature today, and at the same time I would be glad if you would accept my expressions of warmest 

regards. Thank you very kindly. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Leader of the Official Opposition):  Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank our 

honoured guest for taking time out to spend a short while with us. We appreciate very much the fact that 

we can have Ministers representing Governments of other provinces, and a representative of the Federal 

Government with us here this afternoon. 

 

The message he has left with us I think is very worthwhile, because it is only through the co-operation of 

our Provincial Governments, our local governments, and the senior Government, that we are able to 

bring about the services that are so needed for all of the people of Canada, and, in order to provide those 

services, we must bend every effort to exploit the resources with which we are so richly endowed. I too, 

appreciate the fact that this Government and governments of other provinces in Canada have co-

operated with our Federal Government in so many respects to bring services to our people through the 

development of our resources, and I am sure that every member of this House is very, very pleased to 

have Mr. Winters, Mr. Robertson and Mr. Taylor with us here this afternoon. We appreciate it very 

much, and we hope that you, along with other members from your respective Governments, will see fit 

from time to time to come to our province, not only to attempt to negotiate with our Government here, 

but that you will pay us visits, some of you maybe during election times, and some of you in between 

elections. 

 

But seriously, we do appreciate it, Mr. Speaker, and I hope that you have enjoyed your visit here, and I 

hope that you will be back. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  The members wish to express their thanks to Mr. Winters, Mr. Robertson and to Mr. 

Taylor for being with us today, and we hope that they will take back to their respective Governments our 

high regard and our continued offered of co-operation in any project which will be to the advantage of 

the p whom we all represent. I am sure all of us thank them for being here and we wish them well. 

 

I now would suggest that we resume the Orders of the Day. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

4 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 

The House resumed, from Thursday, March 14, 1947, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 

the Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): That, Mr. Speaker, do now leave the chair. (The Assembly to 

go into Committee of Supply). 

 

Hon. C.G. Willis (Minister of Public Works):  Mr. Speaker, I am pleased on this, the occasion of 

my report as Minister of Public Works, to have had in this Assembly the Federal Minister of Public 

Works, along with the Provincial Ministers from Manitoba and Alberta. 

 

I am certain that the hon. Minister from Ottawa and myself have more in common than most Ministers 

of Public Works, in that our Departments deal mainly with buildings. In many provinces, it is the 

Department of Public Works which builds and maintains roads. On this occasion of the visit of the 

Federal Minister of Public Works to Saskatchewan, I gather that roads have been the main reason for his 

discussion with the three Ministers from the western provinces. I also gathered from the pleased 

expression on the face of the Minister of Highways as he sat in his seat this afternoon, that the visit has 

been satisfactory to everyone. 

 

At this time, too, Mr. Speaker, I would draw the attention of the members of the House to the green 

plants which are on the desks of everyone. For the benefit of the new members particularly, I would 

state that it is customary for the Department of Public Works to place on the desks these plants in tribute 

to that day which is so dear to the hearts of Irishman, and those descendants of Irishmen. Further, at the 

conclusion of this afternoon’s Session, each member is free to take these plants home or to dispose of 

them as he wishes. And finally, Mr. Speaker, I should inform the Legislature that the Provincial 

Horticulturist tells me that these are true shamrocks. 

 

I would like to take this opportunity, too, Mr. Speaker, of adding to all those speakers who have 

preceded me, my sincere congratulations to you on your election to the position of speaker of this 

Assembly. At this time too, I wish to assure you that, as the months pass, I am becoming more aware of 

the debt I owe you for the capable manner in which you formerly headed the Department of Public 

Works. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

5 

In assuming the responsibility as Minister of this Department, I cannot stress too much what I owe you 

in the fact that you have left behind you a smoothly operating, efficient organization. I have found a 

loyalty among the staff, as well as a keen desire to have the Department operate to the best advantage, 

which I must attribute in no small manner to your self, as former Minister, Mr. Speaker,. I have found, 

too, among the Branch heads, and others with whom I have come into contact in the last few months, a 

very high regard for you personally, and for your work as Minister. I wish to take this opportunity of 

passing on to you, on behalf of the staff of Public works, the best wishes of one and all for your personal 

health in the future, and for continued success in your new duties as Speaker of this Assembly. 

 

Because I think it would be of interest to the Legislature, it is my intention on this, the occasion of my 

first report as Minister, to review some of the history of the Department. It is unlikely, Mr. Speaker, that 

many people know that the Department of Public Works had been set up eight years prior to the 

formation of this province. It was in 1897, by an Amendment to the North West Territories Act that 

responsible Government came to the prairie. At that time, departmental government as it exists today 

was set up under the leadership of Premier Haultain. Six departments of Government were formed at 

that time, namely Public works, Agriculture, Council of Provincial Instruction, Territorial Secretary, 

Attorney General and Treasury. Of such importance, however, was the providing of public works in the 

newly settled North West Territories, that the members of the Legislature had seen fit to set up a Public 

Works Branch, even before the various Departments of Government were organized. This branch, 

headed by a Chief Engineer, was the first such separate Branch of Government to function in what is 

now the province of Saskatchewan. This Public Works Branch was set up three months prior to the 

formation of the six Departments of Government. It is this fact, Mr. Speaker, which gives us in Public 

works, the opportunity of claiming with some degree of pride that our Department had the honour of 

being the earliest formed branch of Government in Saskatchewan. 

 

Even before 1897, Public works occupied most of the attention of the elected members to the Territorial 

Assembly. We find that two Reports were published, dealing with Public Works in the years 1889 and 

1890. Following 1890, there was no further Report of Public Works, until the first annual Report of the 

Department was issued in 1898. The first commissioner of Public Works – the head of the Department 

of Public Works until 1909 was called Commission, Mr. Speaker, – the first Commissioner of Public 

Works was the Hon. James H. Ross, M.L.A. for Moose Jaw, who served as Commissioner until 1903 

when he was succeeded by the Hon. G.H.V. Bulyea, who remained at the head of the Department until 

1905. 

 

At the first election in the province in 1905, there was a change of Government, and the portfolio of 

Commissioner of Public Works was assumed by Premier Walter Scott, who remained head of the 

Department until 1912. At this 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

6 

time there was no change in the departmental organization of Government. There were the same six 

departments as set up in 1897. However, Public Works had taken on more branches, and was by far the 

heaviest Department of Government. Out of a total provincial expenditure of $2,420,000 in 1907-08, the 

Department of Public Works accounted for $1,292,000 or more than 50 per cent of the amount expended 

in that year. The Department at that time was organized into 11 branches, as compared to the six in 

1897. These were: Correspondence Branch, Accountants’ Branch, Coal Mines, Steam Boilers, 

Surveyors, Bridge and Ferry, Highways, Fire Guards, Water Supply, Public Buildings Branch, Local 

Improvement Branch. Of special significance here is the inclusion of the new Public Buildings Branch 

which was charged with the construction and maintenance of public buildings. Previous to 1905, the 

only public buildings in the Territories had been provided by the Federal Government. These were few 

in number, and after the formation of the province were turned over to the Provincial Government in 

consideration of the payment of $213,953. For this $213,000 the fledgling province became the owner of 

14 buildings. Some of these historical buildings are still in use today. The Government House property 

on Dewdney Avenue occupied as the Lieutenant-Governor’s residence until 1945 is presently leased to 

the D.V.A. for use as a Veterans’ Home. The old Government Legislative Buildings, also on Dewdney 

Avenue between Athol and Montague streets are presently leased to the Salvation Army. Regina’s Court 

House was originally built in 1894. Added to in 1924, it is still serving as a Court House. 

 

Since 1905 there have been many changes in the Government of Saskatchewan. New departments have 

been formed and new branches have been added. In this rearrangement, no other department has 

experienced more changes than has the Department of Public Works. In 1908 the Local Improvement 

Branch of Public Works became the Department of Municipal Affairs. In 1912 the Highways Branch 

became the Board of Highways Commissioners, and The Bridge Branch, the Surveys and Townships 

Branch, and the Fire Guards Branch, all part of Public Works prior to this, were taken into the newly 

formed Department of Highways. In 1915, the Department of Agriculture took over the administration 

of the Coal Mines Branch. In 1928 the Steam Boilers’ branch was transferred to what is now the 

Department of Labour. This left Public Works, Mr. Speaker, with one main responsibility, the 

construction and maintenance of public buildings. The Public Buildings Branch added to the Department 

in 1905, has become the Department of Public Works. That the construction and maintenance of public 

buildings warrants a separate Branch in itself, is shown first by the fact that Provincial buildings under 

the control of the Department now number 764. And secondly, that the number of employees of the 

Department total 403, of whom 30 are on the administrative staff. Third, that the Department of Public 

Works has spent on the construction or purchase of new buildings since 1905 the sum of $70,156,869 

and this does not include buildings controlled by the Crown Corporations or the Liquor Board; and 

fourth, that expenditures of the Department for the year 1955-56 total $7,661,000. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

7 

Mr. Speaker, in connection with the figures that I have just given, it is interesting to note first, that the 

$7.6 million spent by Public Works in 1955-56 is more than three times the total expenditure of the 

Provincial Government in 1907. And second, that of the total of the $70 million for buildings since 

1905, $24.7 million were expended in the 39 years from 1905 to 1944, and more than $45 million in the 

past 12 years. 

 

The Department of Public Works in 1905 was faced with the tremendous task of providing buildings for 

the province’s rapidly expanding economy. It is to the credit of the Department at that time that it went 

about providing these needs in a forthright manner. By 1915, ten years after the formation of the 

province. the buildings being maintained by the Department were the Government House here in 

Regina; the Legislative and Executive buildings here in Regina, too; and in fact this fine building in 

which we are met this afternoon, two normal schools, one in Regina and the other at Saskatoon; the 

School for the Deaf at Saskatoon; Detention Home for Boys at Wolseley, Hospital for the Insane at 

Battleford, 17 Court Houses, 19 Land titles buildings, and three gaols. In addition to this, construction 

was under way in Swift current and Humboldt of buildings to serve both as Court House and as Land 

Titles offices in those towns. In his report, H. E. Flack, Assistant Inspector of Buildings, begins his final 

paragraph with the sentence, “The year 1914-15 has been a fairly busy one, and all buildings are in good 

shape.” It is conceded when one examines the records, Mr. Speaker, that the 10 years from 1905 to 1915 

were indeed busy ones; not only for the Department of Public Works, but also for the whole 

Government of the province. 

 

Upon studying the records of these first 10 years of Saskatchewan’s history, one has to agree with the 

hon. Provincial Treasurer, when he stated in his Budget in our Golden Jubilee year, when dealing with 

the period of 1905-1915: 

 

“From the start the Saskatchewan Government faced tremendous responsibilities, and had to take 

calculated risks on future expectations. Because those risks were boldly taken, those early years have 

well been termed ‘Saskatchewan’s First Heroic Age’.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, those of us who were in the Legislature in 1955 will recall that the Provincial Treasurer 

further along in his Budget Address, from which I have already quoted, stated that the period in 

Saskatchewan’s history from 1945 to 1955 bore: 

 

“ . . . more than a passing resemblance to the first decade.” 

 

which as I have noted, has been described as ‘Saskatchewan’s heroic age’. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

8 

The hon. Minister proceeded further in his report, and said: 

 

“Evidence to support the claim and title can readily be adduced. A certain dynamism in Government 

characterized both. The courage to take risks in breaking new ground. As they built, we have 

attempted to build. In creating new and extending old services, we too, took calculated risks, with 

more assurance perhaps, for we had great expectations from our natural resources, which they did not 

have. We had seen the vulnerability of an economy based wholly on one industry, and to help in its 

stabilization and improvement, we increased expenditure on agriculture seven-fold. To speed the 

diversification so essential to our welfare as a province, we embarked upon programmes of resource 

development and exploration, established an integrated power system, and an associated rural 

electrification plan, and took the risk of initiating further commercial enterprises, to demonstrate the 

industrial potentialities of the province. 

 

We have made mistakes, to be sure, but never the mistake of cowardice, lethargy and despair. in short, 

Mr. Speaker, we have sought to broaden the foundations of the past so that we may build, during the 

second half-century, a better Saskatchewan.” 

 

And the records prove, Mr. Speaker, that this present Government through its programmes of resource 

development and exploration since 1945 has indeed helped to broaden the economic foundations of our 

province. 

 

This is certainly shown by the fact that the net value of commodity production in Saskatchewan 

increased from $339 million in 1943, the year before this Government took office, to $910 million in 

1956. In the same period, personal income in the province shot up from $438 million to $1,162 million. 

The Budgets brought down by the present Provincial Treasurer reflect this expansion in our provincial 

economy. The Budget of 1945-46, the first introduced by the hon. Minister estimated expenditures on 

revenue account of $36,212,000. This year’s Budget, the 13th consecutive by the present Provincial 

Treasurer estimates budgetary expenditures of $116 million. 

 

The Department of Public Works has done its best to keep up with this expansion in government 

services and programmes since 1944, by providing new buildings at a cost of $45 million. Just to list the 

buildings 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

9 

constructed would not do justice to the accomplishments of this Government. Without doubt the most 

outstanding building constructed since 1944 is our University Hospital at Saskatoon. Built at a cost of 

$10,027,000, this 525-bed hospital is staffed with specialists who are at the top of their professions. The 

hospital officially opened in 1955 is the core of the University medical centre. A medical college 

building opened in 1950 provides for the training of medical students. A new nurses’ residence for 

university hospital nurses, accommodating 272 was completed in 1956. Another fine building was 

officially opened on the University campus in this present fiscal year. The Murray Memorial Library, 

named in honour of Saskatchewan’s first University President, provided library facilities for the 

University, and as well houses the College of Law. The cost of this building is $1,357,000 to date. 

 

Another major undertaking of this Government in the past 10 years was the construction of the 

Saskatchewan Training School at Moose Jaw. This undertaking is indicative of the concern the present 

Government of this province has for those unfortunates of our population whose mental powers are 

deficient. The Department of Public Works which had considerable to do with the planning and design 

of this school is proud of the attention accorded it in the psychiatric field. ‘Mental Hospitals’ – a 

publication of the American Psychiatric Association, had favourable articles on this project, in both the 

November and December issues of 1955. In the November issue there is an article drawing of the layout 

of the 27 buildings, making up the training school. Below the half page picture, it says: 

 

“This is the first major psychiatric hospital constructed in the province since 1921. Until 1945, mental 

defectives were cared for in the two provincial mental hospitals, but temporary buildings were 

provided at the end of World War II. In 1949, the province authorized this entirely new institution 

with an ultimate capacity of 1,500 patients.” 

 

Then follows a seven-page article in the same issue entitled ‘Description of the total Establishment’ by 

H.K. Black, the Architect for the project. In the December issue of ‘Mental Hospitals’, Charles K. Bush, 

Director of the American Psychiatric Association, wrote in part as follows, regarding Saskatchewan’s 

Training School: 

 

“Because this institution contains so many good features, and seems to have been so well planned and 

organized, we have felt justified in publishing a longer article than usual, dividing the material 

between two issues, in order to do justice to it. Anyone who works, or has worked in a school for 

mental defectives will note many features which are not frequently 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

10 

seen in such institutions. From my own experience as Superintendent of a School of this type, it 

appears obvious that Saskatchewan has tried to provide the patients with as much comfort and 

individual consideration as possible. 

 

This is particularly remarkable, since prior to this time, the Province had no separate institution for the 

mentally retarded, and thus did not have the usual store of experience from which to draw when 

planning the School.” 

 

And then follows a five-page article on “Planning for the New School” by the present superintendent, 

Dr. Beddie. The cost of the Saskatchewan Training School at Moose Jaw was $8,154,000. From 1944 to 

the present, this Government has made further capital expenditures of $3,300,000 in connection with our 

mental hospitals at Battleford and Weyburn. This, Mr. Speaker, makes a grand total of $11,454,000 

expended for buildings for the care of the mentally ill and incompetent of our population. This amount 

averaging about $1 million per year for buildings alone, proves the concern this Government has for the 

mentally handicapped of this province. Surely, in itself, a fine humanitarian record! 

 

A building here in Regina, of which we are particularly proud is the Museum of Natural History. 

Completed as a memorial to the pioneers of this province in our Golden Jubilee Year, the Museum was 

officially opened by His Excellency, The Governor-General, in 1955. This museum has met almost with 

universal acceptance as the finest in Western Canada. I say almost, Mr. Speaker, because there are a few 

experts in this House who would dispute that fact. The people of Saskatchewan at large have welcomed 

such an institution as is proven by the attendance record. In 1955 there were 141,015 visitors. In 1956, 

there were 170,078 visitors, which is an average attendance in 1956 of 3,400 per week. 

 

Providing office space throughout the province has been of increasing concern to the Department of 

Public Works for several years. In Prince Albert, a provincial office building was constructed to house 

primarily the expanding economy of the north. In Regina, the Administration Building south of our 

Legislative Buildings was completed in 1955, and provides office space for several Departments of 

Government. It has been estimated that Government demands for office space are increasing at the rate 

of 5 per cent per year. To keep up with this expansion, it has been found necessary to plan for another 

office building, which will be placed on these Legislative grounds, south of the present Administration 

Building. 

 

Prior to 1944 there was only one nursing home operated in the province. This was the home for the aged 

at Wolseley, which was built in the early 1920’s. Two years ago, the fine nursing home at Melfort was 

officially opened. This year with the opening of the new nursing home, here on the legislative grounds, 

there will be nursing home accommodation 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

11 

provided by this Government for 559 guests at Regina, Saskatoon, Melfort and Wolseley, as compared 

to 75 in 1944. Truly, Mr. Speaker, another fine humanitarian record! 

 

I could go into greater detail to outline the accomplishments of this Government through the Department 

of Public Works, but I am anxious to review the 1957-58 Public Works Budget, before I give way to the 

next speaker. The budgetary expenditures for Public Works, Mr. Speaker, are divided into the customary 

two parts, ordinary and capital expenditures. Under ordinary expenditures there is an allotted sum of 

$1,996,170 which is an increase over that estimated for last year of $151,700. This item includes our 

administration costs, along with the cost of the care and maintenance of the 764 buildings in the 

province. I might mention, Mr. Speaker, that our administration costs, figured, on the total amount 

which the Department of Public Works has to spend this year comes to 1.6 per cent of the total budget. 

 

The capital budget with its expenditure of $4.5 mi on new construction, or major repairs, is perhaps of 

more interest to the honourable members. As has been previously mentioned, we are commencing 

construction of a new Court House in Saskatoon. The site is immediately north of the Y.M.C.A. building 

on Spadina Crescent. The architects, Webster and Gilbert, are now preparing final plans for this 

building. It is hoped to have work on this Court House started early in summer, so that it will be closed 

in by fall; thereby permitting inside work to proceed during the winter months. This will be a million 

dollar building, of this amount $200,000 is provided to cover costs for this coming year. 

 

Expenditures on buildings for the University of Saskatchewan will total $365,690. Of this $115,000 is 

provided for the Mackenzie Art Gallery here in Regina, and $250,000 for an administration building in 

Saskatoon. 

 

For the Department of Highways, we will put up an office and shop building at Tisdale; storage sheds at 

Assiniboia and Watson; a weight station at Regina will be completed, and storage sheds at Regina and 

Rosetown will be weather-proofed, all for $70,000. 

 

For the Department of Mineral Resources we will build a new sub-surface laboratory and core storage 

building here in Regina at an estimated cost of $254,000. The Fish Hatchery presently under 

construction at Fort Qu’Appelle for the Department of Natural Resources will be completed at a cost of 

$45,000. 

 

A five-storey office building for health and social welfare, along with a one-storey provincial laboratory 

will be started this year. The final estimated cost of this building, of these two buildings rather, will be 

approximately $4 m. The architect, H.K. Black, is busy 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

12 

finalizing plans and this building too, we hope to have well underway this year. It will be constructed 

here on the Legislative grounds, just south of the Administration building. The sums of $1,500,000 has 

been set aside for this purpose in 1957-58. 

 

It is planned to build a 20- bed hospital at Lac la Ronge, for which there is provided $150,000. the sum 

of $50,000 is to be spent on the physical restoration centre on the Legislative grounds. Public Works 

will spend $170,810 at the Saskatchewan Training School at Moose Jaw for farm buildings, farm-stock 

and farm equipment, for landscaping, for a greenhouse, for an irrigation system, for gardens, for fencing, 

and for sundry equipment, $185,000 will spend at the Saskatchewan Hospital, North Battleford, mainly 

to provide accommodation for an extra 120 patients. Major repairs, a sewage lagoon and roadways will 

take the rest of the estimated expenditure. 

 

At the Saskatchewan Hospital, Weyburn, $500,000 is being provided for alterations to the roof and attic 

space; for re-conversion of two basement wards, to replace an elevator, for blacktopping roads, for an 

addition to the filtration plant, to complete the incinerator and garbage disposal unit, and to remodel the 

power house. 

 

Work has commenced on a building for the Saskatchewan Research Council to be built on the grounds 

of the University at Saskatoon. To complete this, there is an amount of $320,000 in the budget. For a 

building to take the place of the present Boys’ School in Regina, which is being taken over by the 

Physical Restoration Centre, there is provided an amount of $100,000. The Regina Nursing Home will 

be finished, storm sewers, roads, etc., provided and landscaping commenced at an estimated cost in the 

coming year of $202,000. The total cost of this Nursing Home will be approximately $1,900,000. An 

elevator and shaft for the Wolseley Nursing Home held over from last year’s programme will be 

provided this year at a cost of $65,000. 

 

There is provided $301,00 for capital construction for the use of our own Department of Public Works. 

The Wascana Lake Drive will be further improved. Street lighting will be extended in the Legislative 

Building area, and new work done on the Legislative grounds. A water intake and distribution system 

will be provided for use of the powerhouse on these grounds, and for watering our lawns, trees, shrubs, 

etc. 

 

The Provincial office building at Prince Albert will be provided for ventilation from this sum, and 

besides these items, it is the intention of the Department of Public Works to build public accommodation 

or rest-rooms in the northwest corner of our park area, near Albert Memorial Bridge. This will prove of 

comfort to the many hundreds of people who visit the Legislative park facing on Wascana Lake during 

the summer season. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

13 

And now, Mr. Speaker, I must say that the preparation and presentation of this somewhat sketchy report 

on the history and the activities of the Department of Public Works has given me a great deal of 

pleasure. I trust it has been of interest, as well as of value, to the members of this Legislature. I can 

assure you I will support the Budget. 

 

Mr. M.J. Willis (Elrose):  Mr. Speaker, first I would like to extend my sincerest congratulations on 

your elevation and election to Speaker of this House, which has met with the approval of all members on 

both sides of this House. I am sure in all your decisions you will deal with us all impartially, due to your 

fair-mindedness. Last summer we were fortunate to have you present at part of our celebrations in the 

rural Municipality of Snipe Lake and the town of Eston on the 50th Anniversary, and at that time, to 

climax our celebration, sir, you had the honour of turning on the natural gas to the town of Eston, and I 

am sure this afternoon I express on behalf of the people of that area, our sincere thanks to you to have 

been our guest on that occasion. 

 

I would like at this time to express my sincere thanks to the people of Elrose constituency for the fourth 

time that I have merited their support, and I know when they supported me at the polls, it wasn’t a 

personal victory, but they wanted to send a representative to this House to sit at your right to support the 

Premier of this province who, through the years, so well has enunciated the policies of the C.C.F. in this 

province. 

 

Much has been said in this House with regard to the smallness of the majority at the polls, but I am bold 

enough this afternoon to predict, Mr. Speaker, that the present Premier will see a lot more leaders of the 

Opposition come and go, as long as his health remains with him. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  It won’t be in this House, though; it may be outside. 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose): Mr. Speaker, the interruptions across the way remind me of what Will Rogers 

once said. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  What did he say? 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  He said, when the talkies came in, ‘You have the voices, but they’re still dumb’. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  But Will Rogers isn’t around. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  How about something original? 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

14 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  Mr. Speaker, the people of this province will never forget from the time, in 

1944 when the political forces changed in this province, what has been done by the Premier of this 

province in the field of health. He brought in a hospitalization plan that no government would ever think 

of changing; but there is one institution that always will stand in the annals of time, and that is the fine 

University Hospital and Medical College in the city of Saskatoon. 

 

Many of my people from Eston, unfortunately, have had to go there for treatment, and without 

exception, when they have returned they have all stated this one fact, that it was beyond their fondest 

dreams to be treated and have the facilities that are offered at the University Hospital. 

 

I was rather amused, of course, when the financial critic of the Opposition said of the hospitalization – 

what does it cost? Sure it is costing us money. I have never found in life yet that there is something I got 

for nothing. We have all had to pay, but as long as you got value for your money, no one had any 

criticism. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  That isn’t what the Premier told you, 10 years ago. He said we were going to get it 

for nothing! “Without money and without cost.” 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  Mr. Speaker, I ask the indulgence – however, I think it is only courtesy that 

members of this House should have courtesy for the other fellow, and I have done that, I think, very 

successfully in the 13 years in this House. 

 

Now, when they talk about hospitalization, let us look at the past. 

  

Mr. Loptson:  It wasn’t supposed to cost anything. 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  Sure, the cost has gone up, but my friends, if they want to help the 

hospitalization plan, why don’t they urge upon those at Ottawa . . .  

 

Mr. Danielson:  Federal issue? 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  . . . who since 1919 have been talking of a national health plan which would 

save the people of this province $9 million every year. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  No. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  The Federal Government never told us it wasn’t going to cost anything, anyway. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

15 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  . . . All they do, Mr. Speaker, is try to defend the Government at Ottawa that has 

taken from 1919 to the present time, and the best information we have is that a part of the National 

Health plan will come in, possibly, if Ontario agrees, in 1959; but the federal election is next June, so I 

would say it would be about 1999. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  Maybe. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  You tell them, Maurice. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  If they’re all right, you don’t need any money here. 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  In regard to hospitalization, this party of which I have the honour to be a 

member . . .  

 

Mr. McDonald:  It’s fading away. 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  . . . were against the lifting of price controls in 1945. What happened to the 

costs, the items that go into the hospitalization plan? They were affected as was every other article and 

its cost. Those are the people over there who could have done something about keeping down costs by 

continuing price controls, and not letting everything soar out of all reason that going into a 

hospitalization plan. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  You’d have to cut your wages if you did that. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  Ask the Minister of Labour. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  What about your wages? 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  Mr. Speaker, I am sure the farmers in my constituency will be very pleased with 

the removal of the Ed and Hospitalization Tax on farm fuels. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  It is rather strange. Of course the Opposition say, “Well, now, we’ve taken it 

off”. But these taxes were here when we came into office in 1944? Oh yes, the Public Revenue Tax was 

on. Who took it off? 

 

Mr. Danielson:  We forced you to take it off. 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  What we’ve been doing is taking some of these taxes off and now they say, 

“We caused this to be taken off”. We didn’t take it off just before election time, either. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  You sure did. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

16 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  We did not. It was taken off at this session, and we had the provincial election, 

last summer. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  You’re mixed up, then. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  Public Re venue Tax? 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  The Public Revenue Tax . . .  

 

Mr. Danielson:  You always put them on after an election. You always put the taxes on after an 

election, not before. 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  The Public Revenue Tax was taken off in 1953, and now we are taking this one 

off, this year – the tax on farm fuel. 

 

Mr. Kramer:  It hurts. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  And put it on gasoline. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  That’s right. 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  As my constituency is predominantly agriculture, one of the problems that is 

affecting farmers in that area has been the low quotas of grain. Last year in certain areas, a total of a vie-

bushel quota was all that was marketed; and that is one of the crying needs in that area. It is not that we 

haven’t the grain, because we have some of the 1952 crop still there; we have our bins full; we have it 

piled on the ground. During the intervening years the farmers have spent a lot of money on storage, and 

I cannot see why the farmers, who put up granaries of proper construction, should not get storage 

charges as well as the elevator company that builds two or three annexes. The farmers feel the same 

about it in my area. 

 

In regard to the municipal grid system, mot of the municipalities in my area are very pleased with the 

allocation and what has been done in some of the municipalities already, even in the first year of 

operation. Much has been said in this Assembly in regard to rural electrification. We are rather amused 

sometimes – and I would be ashamed, if I were a member of a government that in their history of being 

the government in this province, electrified 40 farms in their term of office; in five years – eight farms 

per year. It is no wonder today they say, “Well, we’ll return to the farmers what they paid for it”. My, 

they’re generous. Santa Claus is coming early in the summer! 

 

Mr. Cameron: 30 years. Not eight years. 30 years. 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  Now we have told the people on two occasions what our proposition was in 

regard to rural electrification. 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  What was it? 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

17 

Mr. Willis (Elrose): We asked the people to endorse that plan, and on two occasions in this province, 

the people endorsed that policy and elected those members on this side of the House. Now the 

Opposition come along and say, “We’ll return the money.” Farmers are not going to be fooled. When 

the Liberals were in office the farmers did not get any electricity. There were no farms electrified, but 

there is a Federal election coming, next summer, and they want to get away from Federal issues. 

 

Some Opposition Member:  That’ll be the day. 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  And the people will be more alert, next summer, on federal issues even than 

they were last summer on provincial issues. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  They sure won’t. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Correct. 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  The financial critic was most amusing when he said that if they were in power 

they would pay 50 per cent of the education cost. 

 

Opposition Members:  Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Sure. 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  Sure. Hear! Hear! They’re in the opposition. Let’s look at the figures which 

they spent on education when they were in office. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  Sure, in the ‘thirties. 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  I am not going to take the years of depression. I am going to take 1943-44, the 

top grants that were paid by the Liberal party while they were the Government in this province. The total 

amount spent was $2¾ million. During that time they were paying the teachers $750 annually. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  The average was $1,100. You can tell from your own Department Report. Yes, sir, 

you can’t get away with it. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  I talked to Les Jansen. 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  Now, since that time the grants have been increased from $2¾ million 

progressively until in 1956 we will have spent $16,600,000 in school grants, and as our natural resources 

develop and more oil is brought into production, there will be more money spent on education. How 

does that compare, Mr. Speaker, with $2¾ million? And then they say we ought to do something! 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

18 

Mr. Loptson:  How much did you pay? 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  When this party on your right came into office, the Minister of Education paid 

teachers’ notes to the tune of $100,000 and that was in 1944. That is Liberal educational policy in this 

province. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  what percentage of the annual Budget was that in 1944? What are you paying now? 

Tell us. 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  Mr. Speaker, the member for Arm River is continually interrupting me this 

afternoon, and all I say to the member from Arm river is that I hope he comes once more into the Elrose 

constituency, because I have more patience than they have. He was there at one meeting and the meeting 

broke up, they wouldn’t listen to him. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  You’re telling lies. There was never any meeting that broke up that I attended. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  You come on down to my constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! Give the speaker an opportunity to say a few words. 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  Mr. Speaker, the member for Arm River yesterday made great things about a 

letter he received from someone prior to the election about a mental institution. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Didn’t you get it? Sure you did. 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  Yes, but I wasn’t so foolish as my friend over there to take cognisance of it. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  Take who? 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  Let’s look at the record, Mr. Speaker. When we came into office in 1944 at the 

institution at Weyburn there were 2,500 patients there; today there are 1,640. At the Moose Jaw Training 

School we have approximately 1,200 patients. We don’t say everything is fine. We have only been in 

office 13 years. We are gradually improving there, and we recognize that we will do more, and our 

building program has not been ended by any means. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  The best in the world! 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  However, there is one thing I would like to say, this afternoon, before I close, in 

regard to the South Saskatchewan Dam. The member for Arm River spoke about never having taken 

part in a debate before about the Saskatchewan River; however, I am very pleased that we have 

convinced him that we should have the South Saskatchewan dam built. When the Leader of the Official 

Opposition was speaking at prince Albert, 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

19 

he said he agreed with the Prime Minister of Canada that, when it was in the national interests, it should 

be built; but the Prime Minister is not convinced yet “that it is not in the national interest of Canada.” 

 

Mr. Danielson:  He never was convinced. 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  He’s right there, as far as that goes. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Quite an admission from you. 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  However, the member from Arm River yesterday got up and said, “It’s political 

football”. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Certainly. What did you do when you didn’t have it? 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  The people who have kicked the football out of touch have been the Liberals in 

this province . . .  

 

Mr. Danielson:  ‘Tommy’ Douglas. 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  . . . and they expect us to go and carry the ball back on to the field. Members of 

this party are not going to be the boys to go and carry the ball all the time. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  That’s what I hear. 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose):  Mr. Cass-Beggs made a report in regard to the power that would be developed, 

and the member for Arm River is living in the past. We have doubled the capacity for the generation of 

electricity in this province to keep up with the need. We have never stated that power development 

depended upon the development of the South Saskatchewan Dam. We are anxious to have it as an 

irrigation project first and foremost, because, if dry years come again in this province, we are very 

vulnerable. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  That’s Cass-Beggs speaking now. 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose): Now, the members across are beginning to be convinced that we need it, but I 

can tell them whey they want it – because it is a very ‘hot potato’. Next summer, when we have the 

Federal election, the Federal people will be put on the spot in the constituencies bordering on the South 

Saskatchewan river, and asked, “Why haven’t you done something, when you’ve been able to build 

dams in other provinces?” 

 

Of course they’re in favour of everything, Mr. Speaker, when election time comes; but when they do get 

in office they do nothing. And now they are trying to get off the hook, and are trying to get their Federal 

members or candidates off the hook on this issue, and the people in that area will not take them from the 

hook. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Did you hire Cass-Beggs? 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose): Mr. Speaker, I do support the motion. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

20 

Mr. Isaac Elias (Rosthern):  Mr. Speaker, the Budget which was brought down several days ago is a 

fine piece of writing from the standpoint of word choice, phraseology and literary values. When 

comparing it to the Throne Speech from the standpoint of contents, I find them to be in two opposites, in 

that the Budget Speech is empty of reasons for hope in the future, while the Throne Speech was too full 

of bouquets for past achievements. To offset the weakness of this budget it was delivered in a most 

pleasant and enthusiastic manner, and I would like to compliment the Provincial Treasurer on the 

presentation of it. 

 

I want to use a few minutes at my disposal to discuss this budget as I see it. In the physical analysis of it, 

I find that it contains 100 paragraphs. Of these, ten paragraphs deal with the review of the past progress; 

16 deal with provincial relations, either with the Federal Government or the municipal governments; 13 

are related to the new accounting system to be introduced; eight deal with the public debt and public 

borrowing, but the items in which the public is really interested are almost forgotten. One paragraph 

deals with highways and roads; one is on natural resources; two deal with agriculture, and I left the rest 

unclassified. Now, when studying it in detail, this Budget Speech that is bound in blue game me ‘the 

blues’. 

 

The first thing I would like to deal with is that of the provincial debt. When speaking of debt reduction, 

the Provincial Treasurer does not use the gross debt figure, but very conveniently uses the net debt 

figure, because, by doing so, he can show a reduction in the debt. However, at the time when the C.C.F. 

were bidding for power in this province, they, of course, had to show up the failings of the past 

government in the worst possible ways. At that time they used the gross debt figure and not the net debt 

figure as they do now. They said at that time that provincial debt exceeds $140 million. Well, I have 

here a statement showing the gross debt figure, and I find that the gross debt figure at that time, after 

deducting sinking funds was $141 million, but the advances to the public enterprises were $51 million, 

so the net debt at that time was $90 million. So they used the gross debt figure then, and the net debt 

figure now. 

 

Another thing that is rather peculiar is that practice of borrowing was strongly condemned in those days. 

Listen to these words: 

 

“This huge sum bears high interest to the money lenders. Interest or usury is a pillar of capitalist 

finance. We are in bondage to the financial system. We must free our country of the impossible burden 

of debt and interest.” 

 

Now, I have in my hands here a complete statement of the net debt of the province in 1940 to 1956. 

Since 1944 to the present, the gross debt, after deducting sinking funds, has increased by $121 ½ 

million. This statement also shows the amount advanced to Crown Corporations, and I notice that these 

advances have increased by $113 ½ million. That means that all those debts had 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

21 

increased by almost the same amount as the loans to these Crown Corporations have increased. Now, the 

contentious point, today, of course, is whether these loans should be considered as a public debt or not. 

Although I agree that these loans cannot be equally classed with the balance of the debt described as the 

‘net debt’, yet I don’t believe that the Provincial Treasurer is fully justified in saying that the $113 ½ is 

no liability to the people. I agree with the hon. member from Pelly (Mr. Barrie) that a debt is a debt. I 

would like to take the Provincial Treasurer’s own words to support me in this argument. On Page 16 of 

the Budget speech we read: 

 

“If a Corporation were consistently to lose money, the Government would ensure that the advances 

shown on the books were properly valued by appropriating as an expenditure sufficient money to 

make up the loss.” 

 

He there very plainly admits that conditions could develop, either through mismanagement or economic 

conditions, when Crown Corporations could become a losing proposition. They are no less exposed to 

this danger just because they are Government-owned. I feel very strongly on this point, Mr. Speaker, and 

especially at this time, because our whole economic structure is in a most precarious position. 

Economists everywhere agree that a recession could set it. The Hon. Provincial Treasurer knows well 

that “ill winds are blowing”, because in summing up the outlook for 1957 he speaks of ‘sharp 

deflationary forces from beyond our boundaries’. The Provincial Treasurer in another province, in his 

budget speech said: 

 

“I have not found a single economist of repute who is ready to say that our boom will continue 

indefinitely.” 

 

Bruce Hutchison expressed the same feeling in his article, entitled “Why Our Boom has Ottawa Scared.” 

And so, our future is uncertain. Therefore, the $113 ½ million advanced to the Crown Corporations 

could become a direct liability and a charge on the people of Saskatchewan. We are not altogether 

wrong in saying that the debt of our province is $222 ½ million instead of $64 million, as the Provincial 

Treasurer would like us to put it. We are not altogether wrong in saying that the yearly interest charge on 

our debt is $9 million per year instead of $2 ½ million, as the Provincial Treasurer would like us to put 

it. 

 

In dealing with borrowing of another $50 million this year, the Provincial Treasurer admits that plunging 

a province into debt is a dangerous practice. He said in page 19: 

 

“It is certain that the province cannot borrow more than this unprecedented sum without seriously 

impairing the enviable credit position we have built up over the past decade.” 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

22 

I am glad the Provincial Treasurer (Hon. Mr. Brown) just came in, because he, in speaking in the House 

on Tuesday, admitted that our province’s credit is completely exhausted and says: 

 

“As excellent as the credit of this province is, it certainly isn’t unlimited. The borrowing power of the 

province has been strained to the limits within the last few years. I am satisfied that further borrowings 

are completely out of the question.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, do we not all agree that those in the Legislature have a great influence on the destiny of our 

province? I contend that our Government has not exercised the necessary vigilance and foresight to 

provide for the time of economic decline. Let’s be prudent, when it comes to policy; let’s be realistic 

when it comes to planning. Yet our C.C.F. Government indulges in this dangerous practice primarily to 

further the government-owned businesses. This might be justified if the book showing surpluses of these 

Corporations, when paid into the Treasury, would help this Government to reduce some of the taxes, but 

just the opposite is true. For the toss of a little sop in the abolition of the Education Tax on farm fuels, 

which was, in the first place, discrimination, three more new taxes are added. 

 

Where people are under social Credit administration, instead of the Government turning its efforts to 

socialized planning, they administer on behalf of the people, and recognize, in practice, the individual as 

a shareholder of the wealth of the province. The cancellation of the first $28 on property taxes in B.C., 

and the oil and gas dividends on royalties in Alberta are examples of it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown:  It sure is. 

 

Mr. Elias:  Mr. Speaker, surely if the past records of the future outlook of our province are so good, 

then this Government should have seen fit to redeem some of the restrictions to bring Supplementary 

Allowance at least in line with those of other provinces. 

 

I would like to spend a few minutes now on the development of our natural resources. That nature has 

endowed us with a great potential wealth is an established fact, and that we have not received a fair 

return from the development of these is an experienced fact. I am happy to note that over $4 million will 

be spent on their development, but the results expected are not too gratifying. I notice the expected 

revenues in Saskatchewan for petroleum, natural gas, uranium and other mineral tax and other metals 

and minerals will be about $27 million. In Alberta, their expected revenue from that, of the $605 million 

that the Alberta Government has realized from oil revenues alone in the last eight years, 87 per cent has 

been returned to the people in the form of direct grants to their municipalities. At present these grants 

represent 50 per cent of the total municipal cost. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

23 

Mr. Speaker, I could give you many more comparisons, but I will not do so today. I am not making these 

comparisons to praise the administration of another province, nor to embarrass our own Government. I 

am only doing this to show that it is an undeniable fact that a Social Credit approach brings better results 

than a socialistic approach. I will read the last paragraph on page 6 of the Budget speech: 

 

“Based upon the encouraging experience of the past year, investment in resource development should 

continue at a high rate. The oil and gas development program is likely to expand still further . . . 

Uranium output is expected to double in value, and promising discoveries may bring still greater 

activity to our vast northern regions. The expansion of the potash and coal industries is positively 

assured, and prospects for a start on pulp and paper are coming closer to realization.” 

 

Although our province has made considerable progress industrially and economically, yet comparatively 

speaking we did not keep pace with others. Consequently our budget, although the largest in our history, 

does not make possible the services to which our citizens have a rightful claim. There are favourable 

things to say about the budget, and I am sure they will be said; but because of what I have already said, 

and because no definite promise of an increase in the supplementary allowance is given; because no 

provision is made to establish a fund for the purpose of aiding young farmers to get established; because 

this Government does not see fit to share the gasoline tax with the municipalities on a 50-50 basis; 

because the gasoline tax has been upped from 11 cents to 12 cents; because the $222 ½ million, although 

a record provision for education, falls far short of 50 per cent of the total cost of education, Mr. Speaker, 

I will not support the motion. 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville):  Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak on the budget, it appears that within 

the last few days we have seen the appearance of a second budget on the scene, and it appears that there 

could be some differences mentioned in the beginning of my address with regard to the two-budget 

addresses that we have heard that might influence the position of the people in this province within the 

last month. Oddly enough, in looking at the Budget Address which was delivered by the Provincial 

Treasurer, we find that, with regard to tax increases and tax reductions, the tax increases will amount to 

well over $2 million while the tax decreases will amount to roughly $900,000 so that actually in the 

Budget Speech that we heard here in this “Assembly, we find that taxes are being increased; it may be 

slightly, but I believe that it is a warning. Also, in some of the statements the Provincial Treasurer made, 

during his address, with regard to difference sections of the economy of this province, I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, it is a warning that there may be more forthcoming before the year is out, in the form of 

possibly not direct taxation, but of various forms of payments 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

24 

to be made by individuals in this province, which may mean a reduction in the business possibilities 

during the next few months, and a reduction in the possibility of the earnings of the people of our 

province during the next few months. 

 

In contrast to this approach to the problems of our people, we find that, in the budget presented by the 

Finance Minister at Ottawa, last night, any changes that have been made with regard to taxes are 

downward changes in taxation, and on top of that, large improvements have been made towards the 

welfare of the people, not only of the country as a whole, but the citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan as well. I am not going to say any extensive mention of the provisions that were handed 

down by our Federal Finance Minister, except to stress that the major portion of that address had to do 

with the welfare of the individual people of our nation. I believe that was the outstanding factor in the 

budget that was handed down, last night, by the Finance Minister of the Dominion of Canada. 

 

Returning to the question of the budget of our own province after those few references, I would just like 

to mention that, on listening to the hon. gentlemen on the other side of the House since the opening of 

this debate, I find myself in the position of congratulating one of the speakers, this afternoon. I am afraid 

it wasn’t the second speaker on the other side of the House; it was the first speaker – the Minister of 

Public Works (Hon. Mr. Willis). I believe I could pay him a compliment by saying that he is the first 

Minister on that side of the House who has done anything towards explaining the part which he is 

supposed to be playing in the Government of this province. The rest of the addresses which we have 

heard from the other side of the House, both from members of the Government and from others, have 

been, just as the Throne speech was before it, political addresses, largely those that have been on the air. 

After all, the Government managed to get a lot more people on the air. they have all been political 

addresses until they get off the air, and then sometimes they change their tune. Before the address is 

over, I hope to make a report on behalf of one of the Departments of Government here, which the 

Minister did not make when he was giving his address. Before doing that, I want to make a few 

references to other items that appear in the budget. I want to make a few references with regard to some 

of the other departments of government in my address in criticism of this budget. 

 

I believe that, actually, one of the most important des that was mentioned by a previous speaker is the 

Department of Education. I had the opportunity of making references to education when I made my 

contribution to the debate on the Throne Speech here in this Assembly a week or two ago, but I wanted, 

this afternoon, to make further reference to the question of education, because of the fact that I believe it 

is one of the most important departments of government, and one of the most important problems with 

which we, as legislators and we as citizens of this province, have to deal. 

 

With regard to the question of education, when I was home over the weekend we happened to deal with 

the budget of our own school district. We found that, even with a reasonable addition to the salaries of 

the teachers of our schools, after the statement that has been made by the Minister of Education (Hon. 

Mr. Lloyd) to the Trustees’ Convention, in which he stated that 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

25 

he thought the increased grants would mean increased revenues of roughly $200 per room for the 

schools of our province; we found that we would receive in the form of grants, after the statement that 

has been made by the Minister of Education, somewhere in the neighbourhood of $1,000 in our 

particular school,. Even with a conservative estimate that I mention with regard to increases in salaries, 

those increases in our school would amount to $1,350. In other words, more than 100 per cent of the 

total grant; and it will be a lot worse in many other districts than it is in our particular area. More than 

100 per cent of the total grant being provided in this budget is going to be paid out to the teachers in the 

province. I want to say that I don’t deny teachers their right to have the full share of the cost that is 

provided for education, but I do say to this Government, they have neglected their responsibility by not 

seeing to it that sufficient funds are provided, so that the people of this province can provide a suitable 

salary to the teachers of this province without further burdening themselves with taxes, and almost every 

member in this House agrees that this province cannot stand any further burden in that regard. So I say 

on the question of education, I do not think I, myself, as a member of this Legislature, could defend the 

budget of the Government of this province, because of the fact that it has not played a greater part in 

solving the question of education in our province today. 

 

There is one thing, Mr. Speaker, I have wondered about. In Britain, and in Canada I have often heard it 

said, that if a Finance Minister reveals what is going to be in his Budget Speech prior to the time that he 

makes that address, they quite often ask for his resignation. Now, it appears to me that three or four 

months ago we had indicated to us, in fact told to us in so many words, certain items of the budget 

which was presented to us last week by the Treasurer in this province. Now, I don’t know; possibly the 

rules of handing down the budget are a little different when it comes to a Provincial Legislature; but I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, ordinarily, that we in the provinces come under the same law as those in the 

British Parliament in England, and in the Federal Parliament in the House of Commons. Now, there may 

be variances from that. Possibly our laws do say that questions with regard to the budget can be revealed 

by the Minister of the Treasury prior to his making his address. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker (Attorney General):  What about the University grants? 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  But the fact is that those announcements were made prior to the time the Budget was 

handed down, and there were many people that were basing their demands on certain sections of the 

people of this province on the basis of statements made by the Finance Minister, and by the Premier of 

this province as to what was going to be handed, and I believe now they find they are disappointed. 

 

Hon. R.W. Walker (Attorney General):  Just beetling! 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

26 

Mr. Gardiner:  They find they are not going to get the grants, particularly with regard to schools, in 

the form that they felt they were going to come down. They are finding that the Government isn’t going 

to supply the money to provide them with the extra salaries which they feel are necessary. They now 

feel the burden is going to go right back on the taxpayer, or the individual school district, and they 

realize it is going to be a very difficult problem for those school districts, to pay the salaries that teachers 

are asking at the present time. I feel quite certain that not only teachers’ organizations but the trustees as 

well have urged on this Government the payment which other speakers have requested in this Assembly, 

of 50 per cent of the operating cost of the schools in this province. I believe the responsibility lies with 

this Government to carry their fair share of the cost of the administration of our schools which once 

carried out, would at least take care of 50 per cent of the responsibility for education in this province. 

 

Some references have been made to the question of power, and I don’t intend to say very much with 

regard to that question except this. In looking over the profits of the Power Corporation since the present 

Government came into office, we are told from time to time that the money just definitely wouldn’t be 

available to pay the cost of installing power to the farmer. If you look at the profits of the Power 

Corporation since 1944, 50 per cent of the money would be available and the profits of the Power 

Corporation have been paid in up to the end of 1956, to pay half of the $18 million that it would have 

cost to provide power to the farmers free of installation charge. So, I say, Mr. Speaker, there alone is one 

place where it should have come from. The only reason there were profits in the Power Corporation was 

the fact that the money was being taken out of the pockets of the farmers of this province, in order to 

have power installed on their farms. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  And so, Mr. Speaker, I say with regard to power the Government of this province has 

reaped profits from that organization at the expense of the farm people of this province, have received 

profits which they have turned back to the purpose of extension of the power system in this province at 

the expense of the rural people, in spite of the fact that the Minister plainly states that it costs more to 

provide power to the farms of this province. There is one thing I failed to mention in the Throne Speech 

when we considered the question of payment for power. It is not only the farmer who has been charged 

money in some cases for power. I have an example, in my own home town, the case of one of our 

residents who I would think, would be on an equal basis with anyone else in that particular community: 

He lives within the boundaries of the town. A bout five years ago when we had power installed, he was 

charged $250 installation charges in our town of Lemberg and when I went into business there, he came 

into my office on day (it was just before the election of 1952) and said, “The Power Corporation have 

just been down the street to my neighbour, and they have offered to install his power free of charge.” He 

came into my office, and he said, “I feel that if he is going to have power installed free of charge, then I 

should have the 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

27 

service for the same amount and I should have a refund coming to me on the installation of my power.” 

So I wrote to the Power Corporation on that occasion and asked them if they would make a refund to the 

gentleman who had paid the $250. I got a very nice letter back stating, of course, what their policy had 

been, what it was, and they said, “We’re very sorry, but under the policy of the Government we 

definitely could not pay anything back; but we suggest he go across and see his neighbour, and maybe 

his neighbour would be glad to chip in and pay half the installation charges of $250.” 

 

It wasn’t said quite in those words, Mr. Speaker, but that was the definite inference that was left in that 

letter – that he should go across and ask his neighbour for a contribution toward the payment of the $250 

that he paid previously. So it is not only farmers. This was a man in a town in this province who paid 

$250 for power installation, and there are other cases I have heard of since that time, that have taken 

place. The Power Corporation comes into towns now and draws a little map, and they say, as long as 

you live within the boundaries of that line you will have power installed free of charge. If you happen to 

build a house a little bit outside the boundaries of those lines, well, then, they are not so sure; they won’t 

guarantee that the power will be installed free. You may have to pay exactly the same as the farmer in 

the same area pays. People living right in the same community, living within the boundaries of the same 

community are being charged different rates for power installation in this province today. 

 

I am just going to remind my friends across the way of the fact that they are supposed to be socialists. 

Some of them deny it on occasions, but technically, I think most of them would claim to be Socialists. 

On the buses they’re Socialists; we all pay the same. It doesn’t matter whether we’re farmers, whether 

we’re from the city or the country, when we get on their buses we pay the same fare as long as we are 

going the same distance. With regard to most of their other Corporations, we can take the Saskatchewan 

Hospitalization scheme. Everybody is treated, or is supposed to be treated, on exactly the same basis, but 

when it comes down to the question of power installation is a different thing. One person in this 

province is treated differently from another person with regard to the rights and services of a 

Corporation operated by the Government of this province. I feel it is only fair that all of the citizens of 

this province should be treated on exactly an equal basis with regard to power installation, as they are 

with regard to most of the other government services that are provided in this province, or any other 

province in the Dominion of Canada, or provided by our Federal Government. 

 

I believe now, Mr. Speaker, I should take a few moments to deal with questions with regard to health. I 

regret the fact that the Minister is not in his seat this afternoon. I hoped that I might be able to teach him 

just a little bit, as he used to try to teach me, about the history of health in this province. I had the 

privilege of looking through one or two of the budget addresses of the Hon. Dr. Uhrich in the years that 

he held the post that my hon. friend holds at the present time, and do you know, Mr. Speaker, looking 

over those addresses on the budget that were presented by that Government, a man I imagine who is 

probably included, along with some others that have served politically 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

28 

in this province, as one of those politicians, I find that, reading through his addresses which Dr. Uhrich 

made on the budget, never once in the two or three addresses I have read through and have here on this 

desk, was there any mention made, or very little mention made, of the matter of politics. His report was 

a report to the people of this province on the conditions of his Department, of the problems of health in 

this province, and I hope here, this afternoon, because of the fact that the Department was almost 

ignored, except possibly to answer a few charges of certain members on this side of the House; because 

of the fact that his Department was ignored and was not treated in the same way as that of my friend, the 

Minister of Public Works, I intend to take a few minutes of the valuable time of this House to perhaps 

set straight some of the remarks of the Minister of Public Health which were made in his address. 

 

Most of you will remember that first he opened up with a great eulogy of my two friends sitting across 

the floor of the House from me. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  The ‘gold-dust twins’. 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  Some one says the ‘gold-dust twins’. I think that is quite appropriate, too. But first he 

said he appreciated very much the address of the Provincial Treasurer, and then he went on to tell what a 

great man the Provincial Treasurer was; what a great financier, and about all the great preparations, the 

pleading and begging for the services of the Provincial Treasurer of this province, and the fact that he 

was staying on here on his meagre allowance from the Government of this province, in order to give his 

untiring service to the welfare of the people of this province. As far as I am concerned, I don’t know 

who the Corporations might have been, but I am certain that probably had the gentleman been offered 

the position (and maybe will have the opportunity of being offered it, I hope, in another three years), that 

we will see then if he is able to earn as large a salary as he is at the present time in the province of 

Saskatchewan. But those eulogies were paid to our friend across the way, the Provincial Treasurer, and 

then the Minister of Public Health turned to the Premier of this province, and he said, since 1944 ‘the 

lights have gone on! 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas (Minister of Highways):  Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  He proposed that nothing had been done in the past regarding health, and since this 

man who is now Premier of the province – the great humanitarian – had taken over the reins of this 

Department, he had all of a sudden caused the Department to blossom forth to the great assistance of the 

people of this province, that he claims it has been since that time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak (Minister of Natural Resources):  He was right, too. 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  I know that the following speaker on this side of the House made slight references to 

the fact that there had been a provincial health department in this province, prior to 1944. He also made 

reference 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

29 

that perhaps something had been accomplished by that department; but I intend here for a few moments 

to give you a review of the history of health in this province, and perhaps, after that review, the people 

for the fist time – or it may not be for the first time; but I hope at least today they will realize that most 

of the benefits we enjoy in this province today in the field of health were pioneered, the basis was laid 

and a solid basis, and the majority of the work was done, by previous governments before 1944. 

 

My friend, the Minister of Public Works started back in the 1800’s, and we can, with the question of 

health in this province, start with 1898 with the first official organization of a health service in this 

province, when a public health Ordinance was presented to look after the welfare of the people, and to 

try to prevent the spreading of infectious diseases. Then we go down to 1902, when the Public Health 

Ordinance was amended, and further amendments followed in 1905, 1907 and 1908. In 1906, the man 

who did a great deal in this province for health was appointed to the position of Provincial Medical 

Health Officer. This person was Dr. Seymour, who held that position as well as the position of Deputy 

in this province for some years following. Shortly after that, the first Public Health Act was set up in this 

province, in the year 1909. I am going to read a few things here. I think the Minister of Public Works 

read his whole speech as far as I am concerned, and I am going to mention, or use the document I have 

before me for certain facts and certain figures which I will have to be making use of during the course of 

my address. 

 

So we go along to the set-up of the Department of Public Health under The Public Health Act, 1909. 

The first Public Health Act in the pro was written in that year. I am not going to follow all the terms and 

progress during the next few years. I’ll go on to 1923 when the Public Health Act was amended, creating 

a Department of Public Health in this province. To turn to some of the developments in that particularly 

short period, I would say it was a fine era; it was a time when many of the scientific developments with 

regard to health had not taken place. It is all very well for the present Minister of Public Health to stand 

up and talk about the great advances that have been made, as if they had been made by the Provincial 

Government of this province, and since the Premier had become Minister of that Department. It is all 

very well to do that after scientists the world over had developed in a few years, particularly during the 

war years, when doctors and scientists were working overseas, to assist in trying to prevent diseases that 

might spread in time of war, and much money was spent on that type of research. Discoveries were 

made which were not the responsibility of the government of this province; they were made mostly in 

other parts of the world, and some of them here in our own country of Canada. They were not made by 

the Minister of Public Health of this province. 

 

We find that, between the years 1905 and the time that this document was printed in 1924, there were 

six hospitals in 1905, and by 1924, 43 hospitals had been constructed in the province. In 1905 some 

1,078 patients entered the hospitals, and in 1924 some 32,000 patients had entered hospitals. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

30 

So you can see from the time this province was established in 1905 up until 1924 that great advances 

were made in that pioneering stage, as great advances and, I would say, probably greater advances than 

were made in any other province in the Dominion of Canada. There are many people who will say that if 

it hasn’t it is the fault of the Government that we have here at the present time; it has always had the best 

health set-up in this country, and one of the best known in the world. I will recognize that fact. My 

friends use the expression “the best in the world” once in a while; and I am going to use it here, because 

there were people back in these days when the Liberal Government was in office in this province, and 

handled the matters of health, that definitely came out with such statements with regard to the health 

problems in this province during the time they were in office. 

 

You know, there is another odd thing. During these years, T.B. was pioneered; cure for T.B. and the care 

of T.B. was pioneered in this province of ours in the form of the construction of the Sanatorium which 

now stands at Fort Qu’Appelle. Hearing my friend, yesterday, I began to wonder if actually I had my 

facts straight and if that building was constructed back before 1920. I began to wonder, because he said 

nothing had been done until the Premier of this province became Minister of Health. But we find, oddly 

enough, that during the years the Liberals were in (and not the last year, but in the early years of the 

Liberal administration), three hospitals for the treatment and care of patients suffering from the 

tuberculosis were built and constructed by the Government of this province, turned over to the Anti-

Tuberculosis League for operation with the assistance of contributions of the people of this province, 

grants from the Provincial Treasury, and as years went on, grants as well from the Federal Treasury of 

the Dominion of Canada. 

 

So we find that, by 1924, we had a pretty fair health system. When he was reviewing, he did mention 

one or two aspects of his department, I believe, in his address, particularly with reference to the 

statements that were made by the hon. member for Arm River on this side of the House, in regard to 

mental care; and during the course of his remarks he mentioned something about conditions of the teeth 

of the children of this province, and the people of this province. He mentioned something about the 

possibilities of maybe having dental clinics. Well, I find that back in 1926 we had dental clinics here in 

this province, and here is a statement that was made by Dr. Harry S. Thompson, at that time Field 

Secretary of the Canadian Dental Hygiene Council in the Dominion of Canada: “I wish I had space here 

to show a report of the Dental Clinics in Saskatchewan, which I received in this morning’s mail. This 

report is so comprehensive and well tabulated that it brings you a picture as clear as a photograph of the 

actual work accomplished. It shows the number of children treated, 1,786; teeth extracted, 2,821; 

number of fillings, 2,485; special treatments, 138. Surely we should take time to stand and stare at this. 

Close of 2,000 children receiving dental treatment; diseased teeth eliminated,” and it goes on . . . ”while 

we stand and stare, let us endeavour to visualize what this means to just this one province of 

Saskatchewan alone.” Then he states 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

31 

that it does not include all the expenses that were paid out for that purpose; but back in 1936 we had 

dental clinics, operated by the Department of Health, and then on the other side we find we had nursing 

services for the people of this province, not as extensive as the Department has at the present time, but I 

would be prepared to say that, in those days, our province had the most extensive – and I hope they still 

have, because if they haven’t there has been something neglected by the Government of this province, if 

they have not been able to maintain services at as least as high a level as they were when they took 

office in comparison to the rest of the country. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy (Minister without Portfolio):  Tell that to the people. 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  We find that they had their schoolwork; they had their visits from school nurses in 

those days. I had someone tell me, the other day, that it was so long since school nurses had come 

regularly in our part of the country they had forgotten they had ever been regular school nurses. Having 

attended school at Lemberg some years ago, I remembered when the school nurses used to come around, 

and we used to have our inoculations in the schools in the province, and in practically all the schools in 

this province inoculations were given to the children of our province. So we find that most of these 

services which the Minister of Public Health referred to, yesterday, had been given by Liberal 

Governments in this province throughout the years that had gone by. 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb:  That’s a lot of nonsense! 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  Now, what about the report of Dr. Sigerist, “Saskatchewan’s Plan for Health”? This 

is a little document with the hon. Premier’s picture on the front page. This is one paragraph of this 

particular little document. It says: 

 

“In the autumn of 1944, this authority” (speaking of Dr. Sigerist) “made a detailed study of 

Saskatchewan’s health services and health needs, and among a number of recommendations he made 

there was one that the people in this province continue to build on the foundations which they had 

made.” 

 

This Government has made its progress on the foundations that have been laid by Liberal governments 

in this province, and here the Premier of this province today admits that that is what they have been 

doing; they have been building on a foundation that has been well and truly laid by previous 

governments in this province, as admitted by their expert who was brought in, Dr. Sigerist. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas:  That foundation was never laid. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

32 

Mr. Gardiner:  This report is called ‘Saskatchewan’s Plan for Health’ and dated 1945. It was put out 

by the Provincial Government, so you don’t have to worry that it is propaganda. 

 

Now, I have the report here as well, and I am not going to try to read the whole report, but would like to 

refer to one or two portions of it. I noticed in passing, with a great deal of interest, the first one when he 

speaks with regard to hospitals, the recommendations made to the Department of Health, and to the then 

Minister of Health: 

 

“In view of the difficulties in transportation, particularly during the long winter, the policy should not 

be to crowd hospital patients into the large centres, but to treat them whenever possible . . . The policy, 

therefore, should not be to build many new large hospitals in cities, or to add considerable extensions 

to existing ones, but rather to erect a larger number of small hospital s in rural districts. 

 

“If the rural health centres with 10 beds each would provide 500 additional hospital beds, and relieve 

the larger hospitals for thousands of patients . . . ” 

 

I understand today that the policy of the Government is to discourage, if possible, the construction of the 

type of small hospital mentioned by Dr. Sigerist in his report. 

 

Public health services are mentioned: 

 

“The public health services in the province are highly developed and are carried on very efficiently.” 

 

He goes on to say this: 

 

“The policy set up by the appointment of the establishment of health districts.” 

 

But you know, when he mentions the establishment of health districts, these were originally established 

back in this pro in some of the years that I read about in one of the previous articles. Back in the 1920’s 

provision was made for the establishment of health districts in this province on a municipal basis by the 

Provincial Governments. 

 

Another question we have is the question of the municipal doctors. I suppose this is something else that 

has been developed by the present Government in this province – municipal doctors. Back in 1921 the 

first municipal doctor scheme in the municipality of Sarnia, located about 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

33 

75 miles northwest of Regina, was the starting of the municipal doctor system in this province. Through 

creation of the municipal doctor scheme and the municipal hospitalization provided in one form or 

another to serve 50 per cent of the people of this province. Of course, as the hon. Premier said in that 

little document I read to you, “We are going to build on the basis that has been presented to us by the 

Government which just went out of office.” And today his Minister of Health stands up and tries to 

claim that nothing had been done previous to the time that the Premier of this province became Minister 

of Health, in the year 1944. 

 

I could go on reading from this little document here about the praises that were given both to the 

Government of the day for the encouragement they gave to the system, but I don’t intend to spend any 

greater length of time dealing with the past. I am going to speak now of the present. 

 

I want to thank my hon. friend, the Minister of Public Works for praising some of the things I am going 

to mention now. I am sure they are all worthwhile schemes, and I am sure that both he and the Minister 

of Public Health would not feel that they had told only half the truth in presenting their addresses; that 

they had tried to leave the impression in the minds of the people of this province that here were great 

schemes. The Saskatchewan Training School – here is a great thing that was handed to us on a silver 

platter. Here is a great enterprise that has been constructed by the people of this province, through your 

Provincial Government for the welfare of the people of this province. What is the truth? I must admit 

that I was a little bit ashamed that, up until a few moments ago, I did not realize myself that the Federal 

Government plays almost as large a part in the construction of that building as the present Government 

sitting across the way. Here we have the facts. The Saskatchewan Training School at Moose Jaw, 

$1,872,000 contributed out of the Federal treasury of Canada, and I think when we are talking about co-

operation with our Federal Government – and we have had a so-called example of it here this afternoon 

– I am sure all of us appreciate the fact that the Federal Minister of Public Works appeared here, and 

spoke in the manner in which he did. I am certain if I were sitting, or happened to be sitting, down at 

Ottawa, or probably anyone else on this side or the other side of the House, said that Ottawa had 

provided public funds for the people of this country, and then have the Minister responsible for the 

welfare of that province stand up and say, “We did it. We built this; we built that. Nobody else had 

anything to do with it. We’re the only ones. We built the Saskatchewan Training School. We built the 

hospital s of this province.” Here I have a list – every hospital, dollar for dollar was contributed by the 

Government of this province was also contributed by our Federal Government at Ottawa. 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb:  How much did they contribute before 1948? 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  I think, Mr. Speaker, that it is time the facts were told to the people of this province. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

34 

Hon. Mr. Erb:  Yes, tell them the facts. 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  There are thousands of people who do not realize, because of the statements of my 

friends across the way that a dollar comes in for the construction of hospitals in this province. Never at 

any time except in a passing reference have I heard the Premier of this province who is, they claim, so 

interested in ‘humanity first’ and the welfare of health in this province, never have I heard him stand up 

and say that he appreciates the assistance that has been given in forms such as this . . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Erb:  How much did they contribute before 1948? 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  . . . by our Federal Government. $4,451,000 has been spent on the construction of 

hospitals in this province by the Federal Government since the year 1948. I will repeat that, so nobody 

will miss it: $4,451,568.15 spent by the Federal Government of our country in the construction of 

hospitals in this province. 

 

Premier Douglas:  And nothing before that. Not a dollar before that. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: Mr. Speaker, I haven’t got the records here, but I don’t imagine there was too much 

spent and I don’t think there would have been as much spent by the Provincial Government if it hadn’t 

been for the fact that they were put on the spot in this province, and in order to get money from Ottawa, 

they had to spend dollar for dollar in order to get that assistance. 

 

Some Gov’t Members:  Nonsense! 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  Mr. Speaker, we have heard too that ‘Oh this terrible Federal Government never 

provides anything for the people of Saskatchewan’. So we turn to expenditures for the first nine years of 

the National Health Program for Saskatchewan. $16,481,656 have come into this province in grants to 

the national health program since 1948; $16 ½ million. Yet my friends stand up and say they are the 

only ones in this province who are interested in the welfare of the children and others in this province 

with regard to matters of health. 

 

In reading the paper, this morning, I noticed there was a verification of the fact that those who are in 

charge, as it were, with regard to mental health in our province, are not too happy about the contribution 

of our Provincial Government towards work in that field. We find that the member for Arm River (Mr. 

Danielson) made a statement the other day; I don’t remember receiving the letter, but he read a letter to 

us. The Minister of Public Health, of course, stood up and claimed that everything was going to be all 

right; everything was being straightened out now that they had built the new building at Moose Jaw, and 

they were taking them all down there. He never mentioned at the time that the Federal Government had 

contributed, but I have already mentioned the construction of that building. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

35 

Some Government Member:  Oh yes, he did! 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  Oh no, he didn’t. He never mentioned a word about it. Neither did the Minister of 

Public Works when he was reviewing the history of the Department of Public Works here today. There 

was no mention by him of the fact that there was a solitary dollar spent on that building by the Federal 

Government. Here there were $1,800,000. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak:  And who is crying now? 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  And I suppose if we hadn’t had that report, the people of this province would not 

have realized that this money had been paid out in the last few years. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  That’s for sure. 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  Now to get down to the question of health today, Mr. Speaker, I hope to make some 

references to some portions of the Department of Public Health; some of the policies of that Department; 

some of the things I feel should be done in this province to assist in providing better health services to 

the people of our province. We have been quite fortunate in the last few months, and I want to express 

my appreciation to the Minister. I noticed in his report which he handed me the other day, that we are 

still just down for a tentative grant; I thought it was permanent quite a while ago. But I see he has on his 

answers presented to the House here, the grants to the Lemberg clinic are just tentative. He has the 

others as already having been paid. I understood that the grants had already been paid out, and that the 

whole scheme had already gone through; but that is one place, I guess, where I was wrong, according to 

the answer I received from the Minister of Health in this province. 

 

However, I do want to express my appreciation for the money that was contributed towards the building 

of that clinic. I want to say though that, up until the time that a few citizens of that town, with the 

leadership of the council, decided whether certain people in this province wanted us to have a doctor or 

not, we were going to go out and get a doctor in our town and in our community. I might say that back 

in 1920 we had two doctors in that particular town, and at the same time there was a doctor in both the 

towns on either side of the town of Lemberg, and there was a period of about two years that there was a 

stretch of country where there was only one doctor within 60 miles; one doctor within 60 miles of a 

heavily populated area along No. 22 highway, towns such as Esterhazy, Grayson, Stockholm, Dubuc, 

Killaly, Neudorf, Lemberg and Abernethy. There was one doctor from Esterhazy to Balcarres; one 

doctor serving the people on that entire line; and back in 1920 there were two in the town of Lemberg 

alone established there, one in Abernethy and one in the town of Neudorf. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

36 

About two years ago the council decided it was going to go all out and make certain that the people of 

our community had medical protection, because of the fact that the previous winter (you will remember) 

was the bad winter, the spring came and the roads were plugged, and there was a period of four weeks 

when the doctor in the next town ten miles away could not even get down to serve his patients in our 

community. If anyone took sick they had to get on the train and go on to Neudorf or Balcarres or wait 

until such time as the train came in, in order to get service – and that was one of the biggest towns on 

that entire line. We finally managed to persuade a very good doctor – we weren’t too certain at that time, 

we just had to take references; but we realize now that we have one of the best doctors, I believe, in the 

province of Saskatchewan. He has proved that to the people of that district and to the people of that area, 

and has today one of the finest practices in that surrounding neighbourhood, and he has only been there 

for a period of two years. Of course, we knew because that district always has had one of the best 

medical practices in this province, and because of policies of this Government, we had been refused for 

some period of time medical protection in our own centre. But when we got this doctor we decided we 

were going to have to provide him with some facilities. He didn’t have money of his own, so we decided 

we would purchase a building in the town and renovate it, and make a clinic out of it – a doctor’s office 

and residence; and it was only through accident that we discovered we could possibly get a grant from 

the Government of this province. It wasn’t because the Department of Public Health was out 

encouraging this particular thing and coming to the town and saying, “Here, we have a policy; we think 

you should build a clinic.” It was only after we happened to hear that the town of Fort Qu’Appelle was 

building a clinic with grants received from the Government of this province, that we started to 

investigate, and we found out that, sure enough, probably we might be able to get a grant for the 

construction of a clinic. So we went to our Union Hospital Board and we managed to get them to decide 

to take it over and go to the Provincial Government for grants in this particular case. 

 

Today we have a clinic, but we would have had it whether or not the grants had been available. The 

town was prepared to go ahead with it, and probably would have gone ahead and would have had it in 

much the same form as they have today. But we had to find out through accident. It was not through any 

advertising campaign of this Government to promote the construction and the building of clinics. The 

towns in this province that are without hospitals have been trying to persuade doctors to spread out and 

not all to gather up in larger centres in our province. I believe that, if a program of that type was 

broadened out and extended in this province, we would find that the majority of our communities could 

have a doctor at first-hand in their own community, and still have him in a position where he can make 

use of the nearest hospital that might be available to him. 

 

Of course, we in our town, would some day like to have a hospital, too. We still have hopes that 

sometimes in the future we may be in a position where we could build a hospital; but in the meantime, 

this matter of a clinic has made it possible for us to hold on to a doctor in that community, 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

37 

and a very good doctor, and enable him to build up a very profitable practice in our community over a 

period of the last two years. So I say, if that was broadened out, we could have medical protection for all 

the communities in our province, or at least the majority of the larger ones that today are without the 

immediate services of a practising physician in those particular communities. I think myself it would be 

much better if, around the area where there is a hospital, doctors were encouraged to go and live in the 

surrounding communities, and move from there to the hospital with the patients from the particular area 

in which they reside. I think with a program like that we could give much better assistance and much 

better health services to the people of our province. 

 

Within the last while there has been a program started with regard to the setting up of a health region in 

that particular area, and I want to say to the Minister that, as far as the establishment of that particular 

health region is concerned he will have my support in the establishment of that region as far as my 

particular constituency is concerned. I know that from being in contact with the health nurses of that 

particular area, for whom I have the greatest respect and admiration for the work they have been doing, 

in our area with the last few months – work that was encouraged, and I believe, urged by the doctor in 

our community, and I believe was made possible through the energetic work that he did in that 

surrounding area to get the health nurses to come down and use our community as a centre for the work 

that they are doing under their present program. So they are contemplating setting up a health region in 

our area. In questions to the Minister, and answers received from him, he has given assurance that if that 

region is established, and I hope that assurance will be borne out, by the fact that the region, if it is 

established there are nurses available – although it won’t be for three or four years. I know some of the 

regions around us where the people paid in their tax, what is it? Approximately 50 cents per person, I 

believe, in the particular municipality that happened to be paid in the form of a tax. There are many 

districts and municipalities that paid that money in for some considerable time before they received the 

services which they are receiving at the present time. So I say to the Minister I hope that when this 

region is established, the services will be made available immediately and not two or three years hence, 

after the people have paid for that service; that the service will be available immediately to undertake the 

work that is being done in other health regions in this province. 

 

With regard to the question of the doctors in the province, I believe that, for many years, we in 

Saskatchewan have had the services of a pioneering group of men in the field of public health, in the 

field of health services, of which we can be rightfully proud. I am only sorry that I must say that I cannot 

see that the medical profession in this province has much faith in the Government of this province, 

because of the fact that for the 13 years they have been in office, they have never yet been able to 

persuade a medical man in this province to run for public office, and to sit in the Cabinet as Minister of 

Health. Never before in the history of this province has there been a time when a Government has been 

unable to find a medical man 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

38 

to serve in the position of Minister of Health in this province. So I say, Mr. Speaker, that I am afraid that 

those who are really in charge of the health services of this province have not much faith in my friends 

who sit across the way, in their knowledge with regard to matters of health in this province, or for that 

matter, probably anywhere else in the country. So they have been unable, although our particular party 

on almost every occasion it has gone to the people, has had two or three men who were quite capable of 

filling the position of Minister of Health in this province with great distinction; men who knew the work 

they were supposed to be undertaking; men who did not require the services of the best doctor in the 

world to help them out. The Deputy Minister of the Department – I remember in Public Accounts, they 

said, “We have the best in the world”. Well, I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, they might be quite capable, but 

I am quite certain that if we had the best in the world here there would be . . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Erb:  If you had the kind we have now, you would have been doing something in those 

years, my friend. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: But I hope that sometime we might be able to find – I don’t think they’ll be here long 

enough to enjoy that distinction; before too long, within the next four years, we may find that we have 

someone who has the full knowledge of matters of health in this province in a responsible position, and 

in charge of the Department of Public Health in this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  What happened to all your doctors? 

 

Gov’t Member:  God help us! 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb:  Nonsense! 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  Mr. Speaker, in closing there is only one other item I would like to make reference 

to, and it has to do with the question which was brought up in the budget in Ottawa last night and that is 

the question of social welfare in our province. I did not realize the fact until a while ago, and I don’t 

think others did, as well, that allowances for the blind in Canada are paid on a basis of 75 per cent paid 

by the Federal Government, and 25 per cent contributed by our Provincial Government. I find that is the 

case and I hope it will be made full knowledge to the people of this province that the C.C.F. Government 

across the way is not providing pensions for the blind; they are providing 25 per cent of those pensions, 

and the balance comes from our Federal Government at Ottawa. So we go down the line to disability 

allowances – the same thing for them; it is a 50-50 proposition. The same principle is observed, though. 

There are contributions on both sides for the allowance; it is not all a one-way street. In other words, the 

contributions are made by both governments. Quite often you get out in the country and you wouldn’t 

realizes that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: You’ve got to be dead to get it, though. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

39 

Mr. Gardiner:  The fact is, the Federal Government has put this plan before the people of this 

province and the people of Canada, or no one would be getting these benefits. The Government over 

here did not provide them until the time that the Federal Government came into the picture, and they 

would not be here today except for the fact that the Federal Government offered this to this province, as 

they did to other provinces in Canada; and I will say that the only contribution that this Government 

makes is when it sends out a letter to anyone trying to leave the impression with them that it is entirely a 

responsibility of the Federal Government . . .  

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough):  Isn’t that true? 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  I have a copy of the agreement which was made by all the Ministers of Health in this 

country, including the Minister of Health in this province. There was nothing in that particular 

agreement that said – except the Minister of Health he can say now, “Oh yes, I was there. I asked them. I 

wanted more.” He signed that agreement and he accepts full responsibility, along with every other 

Minister of Health in this country, for the acceptance of disability pensions, and regulations were set up 

under which those pensions were to be made. Yet we find, I wonder often how the Federal Government 

has gone along as long as they have, Mr. Speaker, in presenting funds to the Government of this 

province, to be made political capital of, and that’s all they have been – ‘humanity first’. It’s the C.C.F. 

party as far as the Government of this province is concerned. I believe they have gone to the lowest 

point in this province with regard to services to the needy people of our province . . .  

 

Some Govt. Member:  Oh, now look! 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  I know during the last election and during the last Federal election, Mr. Speaker, — 

and I know whereof I speak; during the last provincial election people of my own community were 

threatened by members of the party across the way that if their member was not returned in that 

particular constituency, the next day they would lose their old-age pensions. 

 

Some Govt. Members:  That’s a lie. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: That was advertised by the party in office – one of their main officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak:  What about the heads that were going to fly in Melville? 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  I phoned up one of their main officials in the town of Melville on election day in 

1953, and I told him I was an old friend of his, and a gentleman had been over to see me and had been 

telling me all about these pensions that the C.C.F. Give, and asked him what that story was he gave him. 

He was a little suspicious and said, “Who is speaking?” I said, “Just an old friend.” So finally he said, 

“Well, this is what happened. The Federal 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

40 

Government sends the money down to us, and then we give you the old-age pensions.” That is the 

statement he made. That particular statement was just half true, but I am sure that man knew better than 

that, with regard to pensions for seventy and over. He knew quite well that every dollar, and every cent 

was being contributed by the Federal Government for those over 70 years of age, and I hope, Mr. 

Speaker, that people in the future will be well advised. After all, the Government in Ottawa doesn’t 

spend thousands of dollars of the people’s money trying to publicize the fact that they pay money out of 

their pockets to provide pensions. My friends across the way, I notice down at the hotel they have a 

pamphlet there that must cost them 75 cents. They have four or five of them down there every day (I 

don’t know where they disappear to in between). They are called ‘Progress of Saskatchewan’ – beautiful 

pamphlets put out to advertise the marvellous works of the Government of this province – such things as 

the ‘first to establish free cancer treatment’; right in the book, ‘Progress of Saskatchewan’ that free 

cancer treatment is provided by this Government – right in the book. I ask you . . .  

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough):  It’s true. 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  . . . what about mention of the fact that the Liberal Government had established this 

service? 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb:  Just like your larger school units. 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  As a matter of fact, I would like before I close, to read one item here in Dr. Sigerist’s 

report with regard to the question my friends are talking about here: 

 

“While it is true that a large percentage of all patients examined by the clinics have been found to be 

suffering from other diseases than cancer, yet it would not be sound to make a charge in the case of 

negative diagnosis.” 

 

(Do you hear that?) 

 

“ . . . and to diagnose all cases where the suspicion of cancer prevails represents an available public 

service. The increasing load of work put upon the clinic must be met with an increasing number of 

personnel.” 

 

And when this Government came into office they immediately put on a diagnosis fee of $10 for 

diagnostic purposes, and it has been there ever since they came into office. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  That’s the C.C.F. contribution! 

 

Mr. Cameron:  Yes, that’s their free cancer treatment! 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

41 

Mr. Gardiner:  The first Government in the province to provide free cancer treatment; and when they 

go around the country, they provide old-age pensions for those over 70; they provide disability pensions 

and so on. Regarding the disability pensions, Mr. Speaker, here are the facts. Every case that has been 

examined with regard to disability pensions, in the final analysis one doctor represented the Provincial 

Government across the way, and a social worker, and I am sure he must be appointed by our friends 

across the way; in other words, two representatives of the Government across the way are sitting in 

judgment on those cases and only one representing the Federal Government, and yet they would tell us, 

“Oh, if you don’t get it, it is the fault of Ottawa.” And they put this in their literature that they send out. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy:  Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. member a question? 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  I know it hurts, because it is supposed to be . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker:  Will the hon. member permit a question? 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  No, I won’t permit a question. I’ll give the hon. members the same treatment as the 

former Minister of Public Health gave us over here when he made his opening address. 

 

I have never, at any time since I have sat in this House, said anything in a personal vein about any 

member, but I was astounded the other day when my friend (I think I have always been able to call him 

that; as I said before, he was a teacher of mine) made the references to the hon. gentlemen on this side of 

the House as he did, in a sneering manner, and the words that he used on the occasion are not befitting 

of a Minister of the Government of this province, I am sure. I am sure that it would be a great shock to 

most of the residents of this province to know that a Minister of this Government would use these 

expressions in reference to a senior member of this House. Sometimes in a joking way we refer to one 

another across the floor of this House; but never before have I seen such deliberate attacks upon a man 

who has served many more years in the service of the people of this province than the present Minister 

of Health; never have I heard remarks equal to that flung across the floor of this House. Now, we may 

all make our mistakes from time to time, but I am afraid that, across the way, because of the criticisms 

that have been placed on them by members of the Opposition, they have been getting into a very jittery 

state. Most of them are new at the job; you have to give them a little leeway. Most of them have only 

been in their positions for six months. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  You don’t worry about that, do you? 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  But I have found, Mr. Speaker, that both in Committee and in this House, there are 

very few Ministers in this Government who know the business of their Departments and can answer 

questions without having experts at their hands. 

 

Premier Douglas:  What nonsense! 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

42 

Mr. Gardiner:  It isn’t nonsense, Mr. Speaker. We have noticed it on most occasions, and the other 

night, I remember, when there was a certain Act up, all at once, when they were getting into trouble, in 

ran the Provincial Treasurer to help them out and rescue them from the trouble that one of the Minister’s 

had managed to get himself into. Now, I am sure that, if they all get down and study within the next 

year, perhaps when we come back to our job in the Session in 1958, we will find that they have finally 

learned their Departments and will be able to give us some intelligent answers, I hope, that we can 

provide to the people of this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak:  You ask us intelligent questions, and we’ll give you intelligent answers. 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  Now, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that I have mentioned one or two of the branches 

of Government in this province for which the proper recognition has not been given, as far as I am 

concerned, in the budget that has been handed down by the Provincial Treasurer, particularly in the field 

of education, and the one I mentioned in the Throne Speech that was the most glaring fault of this 

present Government – education and the matter of our municipalities. There is one thing that has taken 

place in this province, Mr. Speaker, in the last three or four months, that would give this province, Mr. 

Speaker, in the last three or four months, that would give me cause to vote against this budget, or vote 

against this Government on any proposal, and that is their treatment of the rural municipalities in 

Saskatchewan in the last few months. I had the opportunity of listening when the Provincial Treasurer 

spoke in such glowing terms in his budget; it was an “inspiring sight”, I think, he said. Well, you know, 

when I cam in here the program I got was that there would be five Cabinet Ministers representing the 

Government; there will be so many representing each organization, and I don’t know, I ran out and tried 

to count them; but they sat around the table and as each one stood up and made his report of an hour and 

a half or two hours, I wondered when does the poor fellow who is sitting around, representing the people 

of this province get his chance to speak. 

 

When they went down to Ottawa, it was all nicely lined up by officials, as someone said the other day; 

their officials sat down and wrote out these nice documents, and we asked them if they put paragraphs at 

the bottom where it said that the only solution to this problem is the establishment of larger municipal 

units, or the county system. They said, “No, we put that there.” The Government took full responsibility 

for putting at the bottom, telling what has been done for the people of this province by this Department, 

the great accomplishments had taken place; and so we find that in the last two weeks a few people have 

had an opportunity to express their feelings with regard to the attitude of this Government, with regard 

to the actions of this Government at that particular meeting, and I can say that, on more than one 

occasion, I was ashamed to sit here and see representatives of the Government of this province treat 

representatives of the municipalities in the fashion that they were treated at that particular conference. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  They’ll know better next year. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

43 

Mr. Gardiner: And about the only answers they had for them was – somebody would tell a joke and 

that would settle the whole thing. Somebody would tell a joke, and then they were all right. But you 

know, it’s something like the elephant – he never forgets; and a few of us here remember a little bit of 

that as well. Within the last few weeks we have seen meetings of two representative bodies, and I am 

going to say two, because I was at the one meeting – I wasn’t at the one this week. I was at the Trustees’ 

meeting, and I am certain that, if it had not been for the confusion at the time of that vote, even that body 

which is consistent enough, men who are in larger school units – if it had not been for the confusion 

caused at the time of the vote, even those gentlemen would have turned down any reference to a larger 

system of municipalities in this province. The final answer was given yesterday by one of the largest 

representative groups of municipal leaders in this province, not by a good majority, not by 45 per cent or 

55 per cent, but by 100 per cent. They cast the question right back into the face of the Government of 

this province, where it should lie, and they said, “We are not prepared to accept any large change in the 

administration system in this province, and it is the duty of the Government to provide us with the funds 

to operate the municipal affairs of this province in the way that they can be operated under the present 

system. 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh:  Oh rot! 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  So I say I think the people, through their representatives, have given their answers to 

the Government of this province. In that particular conference, I remember the threats that were made. 

Threats don’t go with the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb:  They certainly don’t. 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  But threats were made at that conference by the Premier of this province: “Either you 

knuckle down, do as I say, or you won’t get another red cent.” 

 

Premier Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege, . . .  

 

Mr. Danielson:  He hasn’t got any privilege. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley:  That’s just his imagination. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! 

 

Premier Douglas:  On a question of privilege. The hon. member cannot quote me out of his own 

rather vivid imagination. If he wants to quote me, he must quote me from any part of the recorded 

proceedings of that Conference. I would appreciate it if he will not quote the part where I told them they 

“must knuckle down or they would not get a red cent.” 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  Mr. Speaker, I should probably have said that was the impression I got when sitting 

there listening to him. I haven’t got the report here. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

44 

Premier Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege . . .  

 

Mr. Gardiner:  No more point of privilege. I said that . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  I didn’t quote you. I was saying what my impression was. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! 

 

Premier Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, do I understand that the gentleman is now withdrawing that 

statement as a quotation from me, and now giving it simply as an impression which he gather. Is that 

right? 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  I said when I got up that it was my impression of what you had said, and I believe 

that it was the impression gathered by most at that conference, as things have turned out since, and 

through the actions of the representatives of the rural people of this province. Only yesterday, at 

Saskatoon, they have shown in a better fashion than anyone else has, what they think about the 

proposals of the Government of this province, and I hope that the inferences I received at that 

conference will not be carried out, and that the Government of this province will see fit to see to it that 

the municipalities and our schools are provided with sufficient funds in order to carry on the operations 

in such a fashion that every child in this province can receive proper educational services. If we do that, 

Mr. Speaker, if our Government could provide the portion that they should for the cost of education in 

this province, then I would say they would have the right to go to other avenues of Government. They 

would have the right, if they were people-paying the full share that they should be paying in the 

operation of our schools, to go to other bodies in this country and say, “We are paying what we think is 

our fair share”, and as far as the Official Opposition is concerned, we feel, as we said in our platform, 

that the Government of this province should provide at least 50 per cent of the operating costs of our 

schools. Since that has not been provided in the budget which has been handed down by the Provincial 

Treasurer; since other matters which I have dealt with this afternoon, have not been dealt with in the 

speech that was presented by the Minister of the Treasury of this province, I can assure you I will 

oppose the Budget. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley (Minister of Social Welfare):  Mr. Speaker, I have listened with a great deal of 

interest to the hon. member who has just taken his seat. He is very voluble and very energetic, and whole 

he has a very good voice, I suspect nobody enjoys the sound of it better than himself. While he was 

speaking I was reminded of something the hon. member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) said, when he 

spoke in this debate. He said it had been his experience to watch four or five men stand around leaning 

on rakes and watching another chap work. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  That’s correct! 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

45 

Hon. Mr. Bentley  Well, I would like to remind him and the member who has just taken his seat, and 

you, sir, that about 40 M.L.A.’s have been sitting here, this afternoon, watching the hon. member work 

himself into a frenzy over very little except his own imagination. 

 

The hon. member, when he first started to speak, said that he enjoyed the address of the Minister of 

Public Works (Hon. Mr. Willis). So did I. He said he enjoyed it because the Minister of Public Works 

had given the history of the “Department, and an explanation of its works. So did I for the same reason. I 

had hoped, until I heard the hon. member from Melville that I would devote all of my time to a 

description of the operation of the Department of Social Welfare. but, Mr. Speaker, not I am now 

permitted to for a moment or two; I will do that later on. I have to deal with one or two things that the 

hon. member talked of this afternoon, for I have lived here a long time, and raised a family in this 

province, and I haven’t gone around with my eyes shut, and I have failed to see the things that he says 

happened in the past take place. 

 

Mr. Gardiner (Melville):  There’s the facts. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley  Well, Mr. Speaker, he says there’s the facts. Somebody else over there says 

there’s the facts. They are not the facts so far as I can observe, and as far as the observation of many 

friends and supporters of the party, I am with can observe. 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek):  History records it, though. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley  If they had been facts, and if I were wrong, the members over there would have 

been more plentiful and would have been sitting here, and the people of Saskatchewan would never have 

discharged the Liberal Government that they were patient with for so long. 

 

Mr. B.L. Korchinski (Redberry):  It’s your propaganda that got us. Your C.C.F. propaganda. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley  The hon. member from Redberry (Mr. Korchinski), I believe is a teacher . . .  

 

Mr. B.L. Korchinski: Yes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley  . . . and I don’t think he instructs his students to interrupt him when he is giving 

any kind of a class lecture. I would assume that even though he doesn’t agree with what I am saying he 

would have the courtesy to keep quiet. 

 

Mr. B.L. Korchinski:  You don’t keep quite when we talk. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

46 

Hon. Mr. Bentley I rarely interrupt, Mr. Speaker. The member who just took his seat said he 

expressed belief in the equality of treatment of all branches of citizens in this province. As I say, I have 

lived in the province, a long, long time, and at the time he said that, he was speaking of Power. I have 

lived here for a long while, and until this Government came to power, I have known myself only three 

farmers who have had electric power on their farms, and they paid the whole cost of putting it there. 

And I have known lots of people in the urban centres who had power. That doesn’t sound like equality 

of treatment to me, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He mentioned that there were Ministers of Health in previous Governments in this province who did 

great things. I will agree there were Ministers of Health that tried. I had a lot of regard for Dr. Uhrich 

when he was Minister of Health, and I believe that he would have done many of the things that he knew 

in his heart should be done, and wanted most sincerely to do. For I remember in the election campaign 

of 1934, when he made the statement on the hustings that health was as important as education, and, 

therefore, should be provided by a government to the same extent that educational services are, and 

should be just as freely available to the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. I am just wondering after the Premier took my 

statement, are you quoting from his statement or are you just making an expression of what you 

remember he said in 1934? 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley  It’s all right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  I think the speaker should withdraw if it is supposed to be a quote, or if he is actually 

. . .  

 

Mr. Speaker:  The hon. Minister has said that he remembers hearing that said. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley  There is nothing to withdraw, and it is not being said in any sense of derogation of 

Dr. Uhrich. I am saying I know he wanted to do those things, and I remember him making that statement 

on the hustings. I also remember that, after the 1938 elections, when I am sure he was still thinking the 

same way, he was, I assume, prevailed upon to make a statement that it was impossible for the 

Government to do it. 

 

The hon. member from Melville said we had dental clinics back as far as 1936. Mr. Speaker, I said I had 

been a long time in this province. All of my children, except the oldest one, were born here, and he was 

raised here after I came back out of the army after 1919. So they have all been raised here, and they 

were all growing up and going to school, the time children’s teeth need care, in 1936; and I have never 

yet until this day known that there were clinics available. Again, I didn’t go around with my eyes shut. I 

challenge any of my contemporaries on that side of the House, and there are several there sitting now, 

and one or two that are absent, who are just as old and grey as I am; I challenge anyone of them to get 

up and state, when he speaks in this House, 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

47 

that he remembers and took advantage of a clinic that existed in 1936 in this province. 

 

Mr. Korchinski:  Mr. Speaker, could I answer that challenge. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley  I said when they speak, Mr. Speaker. I don’t mind, if he can prove it. As I say, I 

challenge any of them, and if he can – and I don’t think any of the rest of them can; if they can, I would 

like them to say so, for certainly they didn’t exist in any part of the province that I lived in. 

 

The hon. member who took his seat was dealing with health services and hospital and hospital 

construction grants. Again I remember the history of this province very well, and I remember prior to 

the coming in of the C.C.F. Government, the best we were able to get out of any Liberal or Tory 

Government (for the short time one sat here) in the way of assistance to hospitals, were small per diem 

grants, based on so much per bed, and no construction grants whatsoever. And when my hon. friend 

talks about not enough publicity in the way of clinics, I can remember also the history of this province, 

and the Legislative history, when in 1916, the Liberal Government of that day passed The Union 

Hospital Act, and if I remember correctly it came into effect the following year, in 1917. I might be a 

year or two out, but it was back before 1920 that The Union Hospital Act came into effect. That 

Government nor its succeeding Governments did not publicize that, because from that time until 1945, 

there were only 26 Union Hospital districts established in all those years, and since that time there have 

been well over 80 new ones. 

 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington):  You’re so wrong, it isn’t funny. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley  Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Cannington has no right to say I am wrong, 

because the actual facts of history are there. There were 26 Union Hospital districts in this province in 

1944, and there are now well over 100. 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough):  Is that not right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley  I listened with a great deal of interest to some of his quotations from Dr. Sigerist’s 

Report, and Dr. Sigerist was a fine and a noble old gentleman, and up to his day did a great many things 

not only in this country or in his own country, but in the world, to help improve health services all over. 

At the time he talked of having a number of smaller hospitals, it was generally agreed that possibly they 

were the best bet. I would like to remind the member from Melville (Mr. Gardiner) that it was about the 

same time that a very prominent public figure then and now in Canada, in Saskatchewan, was making 

the statement publicly that he wouldn’t have a tractor on his farm. But people change their minds, and 

conditions change, and it is very obvious that to do the things that Dr. Sigerist recommended in that 

particular instance, would not be conducive to the best hospital care at the present time. And the 

Hospital Plans of this province have been made to keep abreast 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

48 

from time to time of the latest known things in the scientific field of medicine and hospital care. 

 

He mentioned the construction grants the Federal Government gives to this province, and he quoted a 

figure of around $4 million, and it is true. Nobody disregards that $4 million. The hon. member you 

know, every time anyone says anything over here that he doesn’t like and doesn’t want to agree with, 

instead of waiting and disputing it, he giggles. I don’t know if he ever went to sea; I did in my young 

days. A lot of the members over there remind of a bird that there used to be at sea, we used to call them 

‘gooney birds’. They used to fly around more or less aimlessly at sea, and when a ship went by, if they 

were near it, they would come and settle in the rigging and then they wouldn’t move. They would sit 

there and blink stupidly at anybody that was around, and they had this qualification; they weren’t afraid. 

You could walk right up to them and they wouldn’t move. If you pointed your finger at them, they 

would open their mouths. If you touched them they would squawk. You can see the resemblance to the 

members on your left. We have never disregarded the value of the Hospitalization construction grants. I, 

as Minister of Health in this House myself, have told how much we received in those grants, but I 

accompanied it with the statement (and I will do so now) that the Federal Government did not come into 

the field of hospital construction until April 1, 1948 in spite of the fact that, early in the 1940’s, in fact 

late in 1939, they prepared a Health Services Act which they were going to introduce in this country. It 

lay in abeyance during the war years. It was brought out at the Dominion-Provincial Conferences of 

1945 and 1946, along with other propositions, whereby they would share the health services of the 

provinces all across Canada, to the extent of 60 per cent and the provinces’ 40 per cent. They didn’t do 

that; they didn’t carry out that program. The Conference broke up notably because one or two Premiers 

were not too agreeable – Quebec and Ontario; but in the main because the Federal Government didn’t 

want it to succeed. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  That’s a wild statement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley  They had no intention of carrying them out, because, Mr. Speaker, they could 

have carried them out. There was nothing to prevent Ottawa from carrying out any part of those 

Agreements, or suggested Agreements, with any province who wished to do so. Nothing to prevent them 

whatsoever. Nothing in the British North America Act, nothing in any legal way, just a matter of will to 

do so; and the Federal Government never had that will to do that kind of thing, and it did then, as it is 

doing now – it hid behind a cloak of wanting so many provinces (in those days all the provinces) to do 

it. 

 

In the meantime, this Government had, since it came to power, started to make construction grants to 

hospitals, and made what may seem like a small amount not, but in those days was a very notable 

amount in the cost of constructing the hospitals. In the years between then and April 1, 1948, this 

Government made grants of half a million dollars for hospital construction. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

49 

In those years you could build a hospital for about $4,500 to not more than $5,000 a bed. $1,000 a bed 

paid for one-fifth of the cost of that. However, when the Federal Government finally came in in 1948, 

price controls had dropped, the cost of building had gone sky-high, so the $1,000 that has been available 

per bed since that time is only worth very little, about one-tenth, or one-twelfth of the total cost of a 

hospital bed at the present time. And I would like my hon. friends to remember those things. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  How much is your $1,000 worth? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley  No, no, but . . .  

 

Some Hon. Member:  Is your $1,000 worth more than the Dominion’s? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley  You see, I pointed my finger and they opened their mouths and squawked. Every 

time you do it, you will find they react the same way, just like the gooney birds I mentioned. 

 

Then in a kind of sneering voice, after chastising the Minister of Health for what he said, using sneering 

remarks, he proceeded to sneer because this Government said it had introduced free cancer service. Mr. 

Speaker, I am going to repeat that statement, and I am going to have to do something now that I haven’t 

done for several years, repeat the story of how it happened. 

 

In 1944, Mr. Speaker, will you call it 5:30? I don’t want to go into this story right now. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  Take it as read. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley  No, you won’t take it as read. I am going to tell you the story. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  You want to polish it up a bit, eh? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley I am going to tell you the story. 

 

Some Hon. Member: Have a good supper, Tom; make it easy. 

 

Mr. Speaker  I will. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  We will call it 5:30 now. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

50 

CORRECTION OF NEWSPAPER REPORTS 
 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour):  In the report of my speech on page 22 in this morning’s 

‘Leader-Post’, this is the way it reads: 

 

“Some people wept crocodile tears for the poor farmers unable to market their wheat for nine days. 

But the fact that this wheat had been lying on their farms, or been in storage for two or three years 

without a market, did not seem to matter, Mr. Williams said.” 

 

Now, the actual word that I used was some “papers” wept crocodile tears. I would just like to bring that 

to the attention of the House, not “some people”, it was “some papers”, referring to newspapers. 

 

Mr. Ross A. McCarthy (Cannington):  In the Wednesday, March 13, 1957 ‘Leader-Post’ in 

connection with some remarks I made, speaking on a Resolution, it was reported there that I said:” 

 

“Cash advances would not solve the problem of the farmers in the eastern, northern and some portions 

of the west, because they have no wheat in storage.” 

 

I certainly didn’t say anything like that. What I said was that cash advances would not solve the 

problems down there. I said they didn’t carry over a surplus of wheat in those areas, but I certainly 

didn’t say they had no wheat in storage. That would be a foolish statement to make, and I would 

appreciate it if it would be corrected. And I didn’t say “west”, I said in the ‘eat and north’. I hope the 

press will give that the same publicity they did the other, because I didn’t make that statement, and if it 

goes down in my area, they will wonder what I am talking about. 

 

The Assembly resumed at 7:30 o’clock p.m., the debate on the Budget: 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley:  Mr. Speaker, when the House recessed at 5:30 I believe I was dealing with some 

of the remarks of the hon. member for Melville (Mr. Gardiner). He had made quite a speech in the way 

of volubility and volume. After this length of time, it is a little hard to remember what he said. It is 

probably fortunate that I took a note or two and maybe that will help us to refresh our memories as to 

where he was going to get when he sat down, and what I was trying to reply to. I seem to remember him 

saying in the course of his address (and I hope I am not misquoting him) that there were hospitals built 

in Saskatchewan by the Liberal Governments. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

51 

before the coming to power of the C.C.F. Have I remembered that correctly, or have I misquoted the 

hon. member? 

 

Mr. Cameron:  Under the Liberal Governments, when the Governments were in. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: Oh, ‘when’. Well, that would sound better . . .  

 

Mr. Gardiner:  You may be thinking of the sanatoriums. I mentioned the three . . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: No, I knew the sanatoriums were built, I believe, largely by the Federal 

Government, and then turned over to the Provincial Government for administration, that is for capital 

administration and so on, and for grants. And I again remember the days before the advent of this 

Government – in fact I have been here since shortly after the province was formed, and I remember that 

there were some general hospitals built, but they were built by the municipalities. In those days the 

Provincial Government didn’t even make a construction grant. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  Oh, yes! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley:  Oh, no, not a construction grant. If my friend will look up the record, he will find 

that they made operational grants, ranging up around as high as 50 cents a day towards the end of their 

regime, but no construction grants. 

 

I remember before the supper recess, I mentioned that while The Union Hospital Act had been passed in 

the late ‘teens, 1916 or 1917, actually it was passed in 1917, and I believe, came in in 1918, and I 

mentioned from that time until 1944, only 24 Union Hospital districts had been formed. The hon. 

member for Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) shook his head, and said that is wrong, and he still is shaking it. 

I just looked up the records during the supper recess, and my statement was correct. He can look it up 

himself by reading the Annual Reports of the Department of Public Health, and I am sure that the 

members across will agree that those Reports are not in any way inaccurate. The members across, 

knowing a good many people who are in the political field and that they associate constantly with, may 

regard the statements of a politician with some degree of suspicion, but I am sure they would never 

question the accuracy or honesty of civil servants who prepare our Annual Reports. 

 

Then, I believe the hon. member made a statement something like this: that the Provincial Government 

now, and since its coming to power in 1944 had never had a doctor as Minister of Public Health. That is 

true. I would like to remind the hon. member that the Liberal Government at Ottawa does not have a 

doctor as the Minister of National Health and Welfare. The only doctor on the Federal Cabinet is the 

Minister of National Revenue. So that kind of argument doesn’t carry much weight. Now, I am not 

blaming the Federal Government for not having a doctor as the Minister of National Health and Welfare; 

I would never think of questioning the advisability, for I am very fond of Paul Martin. If there is any 

such thing as a good, sincere and honest Liberal, 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

52 

in my opinion probably Paul Martin is one of them. And certainly he does as good a job as any doctor 

can do in the field he is in, under a Liberal administration. But to say that that is a point of criticism 

against this Government here, unless he is going to also direct the same criticism to the Liberal 

Government at Ottawa, is a bit of nonsense. We don’t need to go to the national Government, we can go 

to the province of Manitoba, and I know Robert ‘Bobbie’ Bend quite well; I rather like him. He is not a 

doctor, and he is Minister of Health and Welfare there, too. 

 

The hon. member then dealt with the old-age assistance program which is the pension shared between 

the Federal and the Provincial Governments for those age 65 and over up until they are not yet 70 years 

old, but just under. 65 to 69 is the usual way of describing it. He said that the Federal Government had 

made a generous gesture in the Budget Speech of Mr. Harris, last night, in the House of Commons. I 

would like to remind him that Mr. Harris, if I can understand the press reports — and I am only going by 

them now, for we have no official statement from him as to what part we will have to play in the shared 

program; but if I understand the press reports, Mr. Harris’ Budget Speech stated that the Federal 

Government will go as high as $46 if the provinces, with whom the Federal Government has 

Agreements, will share that $6. So the Federal Government is only going to go to $3, not to $6. 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  It’s to 70 and over. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley:  I am talking of the old-age assistance. That is what I am dealing with now under 

that heading of a note that I took: old-age assistance. Old-age security is another matter; that is a Federal 

responsibility which, of course, they tax us for. They have a special tax for that purpose. However, as to 

the old-age assistance, as I understand it, the increase in the allowance will be shared with any province 

that is willing to share up to $46 a month; and I think I am authorized to say at this point, that this 

Government is not going to disregard that offer. 

 

He mentioned also disability pensions — the disabled persons’ allowance. In his talk he said that people 

on this side of the House are continually pointing out to those who have not been able to be declared 

eligible for disabled persons’ allowance that it is because of the rigid Federal Government regulations. 

That is true. I do it myself, and will continue to do so are long as they are so rigid. But he followed up 

his statement (if I remember correctly again) by saying that this is an Agreement, and that we have 

signed an agreement under those regulations, and therefore, Provincial Governments who are parties to 

the Agreement are equally as responsible as the Federal Government. This is not so. It is true that my 

predecessor, the former Minister of Social Welfare, did sign an Agreement, but he did so protesting 

every step of the way because of the rigid requirements of the Federal Government in its regulations for 

eligibility for Disabled Persons’ Allowance. And when he signed it on behalf of this Government, with 

their authority, he did so knowing that if he didn’t sign it, some people were going to be deprived of that 

allowance; and 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

53 

because we didn’t want to see anybody deprived that could get in under the umbrella that was set, he 

signed it continually under protest. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am going to give the House the kind of information I think they ought to have. I 

have the Federal Act here: “An Act to provide for Allowances for Disabled Persons”. The short title of 

this may be cited as the ‘Disabled Persons’ Act’ and in the preamble: 

 

“Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate and House of Commons of Canada, 

enacts as follows:” 

 

And it is Chapter 55. Now the eligibility requirements are in the Act, Section 3, subsection (2): 

 

“Payments to a province pursuant to this section shall be made only in respect of a recipient who 

 

(b) is totally and permanently disabled as prescribed by the regulations;” 

 

So we will turn to the Regulations, Canada Gazette, part 2, Statutory Orders, Ottawa, Thursday, 

November 23, 1954 and we will read Section 2, subsection 2 of the definition of “disabled persons”: 

 

“(2) For the purpose of the Act and these regulations, a person shall be deemed to be totally and 

permanently disabled only when 

 

(a) The person is suffering from a major physiological, anatomical or psychological impairment, 
verified by objective medical findings; 

 

(b) the impairment is likely to continue without substantial improvement during the lifetime of the 
person and is one to which the concept of cure cannot be applied; and 

 

(c) as a result of such impairment, the person is severely limited in activities pertaining to self-care 
and normal living, such as being 

 

(i) bedridden or chairfast, 
 

(ii) unable to leave home without being accompanied by another person, 
 

(iii) normally in need of care and supervision for one or more of such self-care activities as 

dressing, body hygiene or eating, 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

54 

(iv) unable to perform such routine activities as climbing a short stairway or walking a limited 

distance, on a level surface, or 

 

(v) certified by a qualified physician to be under medical instructions to forbear from activities of 

the kind mentioned in sub-paragraph (iv).” 

 

Those are rigid regulations, but the most rigid and the important one that govern this is the one that has 

to do with self-care activities such as dressing, body hygiene and eating. 

 

Now, he mentioned also that the provinces must be responsible because they have two people on the 

team who assess the eligibility of these people. That is true. They don’t accept responsibility because of 

this; but, because of the agreement, we must have those people on; a doctor appointed by the Federal 

Government, a doctor appointed by the Provincial Government and a social worker appointed by the 

Provincial Government. And this is the team that is the disability Certification and Review committee. 

Now then these people have these regulations. Under these regulations, physical and social examinations 

are made. The first thing that is done when an application comes in is to establish the social and the 

economic eligibility, so the person is entitled under the Act of the Federal Government to share in this 

program. The next is the physical condition governed by these regulations. Is it to be expected that the 

people appointed by us are going to be unconscientious, or is it expected they are going to do what they 

are supposed to do? Not because they like it. They may themselves feel that the regulations are too rigid, 

but because they are bound by our Agreement and knowing that we have to do it that way, they deal 

with each case on the basis of the regulations. 

 

Another thing the hon. member mentioned in his talk was that it has been said by people on this side 

(and I have said it) that when we are in Committee, we try and have these eligibility requirements 

broadened. And I make the statement on my own responsibility that I have done that. At the last 

conference I attended last November in Ottawa, when we had the Committee meeting – that is the 

people from all the provinces meet with the Federal Department – again I pressed at that time for a 

broadened and a liberalizing (with a small “l”, pardon me) of the eligibility requirements. But I would 

ask the hon. member to take my word. He can say, “Oh, you can say that, but nobody was there,” 

Although if he asked the Hon. Mr. Martin, Mr. Martin will tell him I did. However, I won’t ask him to 

do that. But, acting under the authority of this Government here, on the 18th February, 1957 (that is less 

than a month ago) I wrote the Hon. Paul Martin and I was dealing with a number of things that I thought 

would be good for him to consider. Among those I said this, and I will quote one paragraph of the letter: 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

55 

“The Disability Persons’ Allowance program has been of great assistance to those who have proven 

eligible. However, I again urge that consideration be given to easing the disability requirements, so as 

to permit those who are proven to be physically and/or mentally incapable of being gainfully 

employed, to be regarded as eligible.” 

 

Now that in itself should constitute proof that it is not just in behind closed doors that we have asked for 

the broadening of the eligibility requirements, but have done so openly and will continue to do so. I can 

assure anyone here who is interested in it, that my predecessor also pressed for the same thing. That I 

gave as concrete evidence, so it can never more be said that we only say we do these things, but don’t 

come out openly and ask for them. We have done so, and the proof is there. By the way, I haven’t had a 

reply to the letter yet. I guess Paul has been busy. 

 

Hon. J.H. Sturdy (Minister without Portfolio): Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. Minister of Social 

Welfare a question. Is it not true that the social welfare worker on that board prepared the case history, 

but the disability of the applicant is determined by the two doctors? And one other question, is it not true 

that on occasion pensions have been given, which due to the Federal audit, have been disallowed and 

can’t be continued? 

 

Mr. Cameron:  He’s making a statement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley:  The answer is ‘yes’ in both cases, Mr. Speaker. The hon. member who asked the 

question was correct. The social worker does the actual social work in preparing the case history, and it 

is true also that the Treasury officials, the Federal Government examiners, have on occasion refused to 

pass, refused to approve, an application that has already been approved by the Committee here. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, most of the things the hon. member spoke of this afternoon had very little basis and 

fact. I don’t think we can blame him too much. His experience in the public field has not been as great, I 

suspect, as he would like to lead the House to believe. He has been here a month, and prior to that I have 

no knowledge of him having any parliamentary or legislative experience; but if he wishes to be an 

authority on all these matters, then I would suggest that he do like many of the rest of us had to do when 

we were younger, try and learn, if we hope to make ourselves aware of what is going on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker (Attorney General):  That’s hopeless for him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley:  Now, he mentioned a thing that I think I had better mention also, and I am sorry 

that the hon. member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) is not in his seat again, and I say that without any 

evil intention. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

56 

Mr. Cameron:  The hon. member is not well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley:  I am really sorry, but I would like him to hear this, and I think it is important that 

members on all sides of the House hear this. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  The hon. member is not well this evening. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley:  I am very sorry for that. You can give him my best regards and I hope he 

recovers, and you can tell him what I have said, because I would say it if he were here; I am sure you 

know that. So what I want to say, I must say it now, because this is my last chance to speak on the 

debate, unless I am permitted to adjourn it and proceed on Monday. But mental hospitals were 

mentioned this afternoon. They were also mentioned by the member for Arm River when speaking in 

this debate, and the member for Arm River read a letter, or he quoted from a letter I should say –I don’t 

think he read it at all – and I am not sure whether he tabled it but I don’t think he read it at all – and I am 

not sure whether he tabled it but I think it is a letter that I remember quite well was distributed pretty 

freely last spring before the provincial election, and it appeared in a number of weekly newspapers. If it 

is the letter I think it is, it was written by a Marion Binning from Moose Jaw, and the letter is full of 

untruth and misrepresentation. The writer of the letter – if I am correct in assuming it was Miss Binning, 

then I want to say that she knows better, because after she had written the first letter, she was given 

information of what the situation was at Weyburn. and when she said that Weyburn is only rated as a 

650-bed hospital, she is absolutely incorrect in the statement, because we have had that hospital 

checked. We know that it is rated from 1,200 to 1,250 by the American Psychiatric Association and 

competent medical and psychiatric people in Canada. That doesn’t mean it is not overcrowded; but my 

hon. friend should remember, when their members make such statements, that in 1944, when this 

Government came to power, there ere nearly 2,600 patients in that hospital. Now, if Miss Binning was 

correct, and it is only a 650-bed hospital, then it was overcrowded 100 per cent, because it is rated at 

1,250; but if you are only going to rate it at 650, under a Liberal Government it was overcrowded to the 

extent of four times its rated capacity. It was badly overcrowded; it is still overcrowded to some extent; 

but because of the renovations and the reconstruction, and because of the type of treatment, the 

population in that hospital has been going down until now it is less than 1,700, I believe – 1,625. 

 

These are things, I think we should all try and remember, and when we are dealing with matters that 

affect the lives and the welfare and the comfort of the people, we should not make statements that are 

going to cause unrest and unease on the part of families who may have some member of the family a 

patient in one of those institutions. 

 

Again the member for Melville (Mr. Gardiner) – I don’t know where he got his information, he probably 

read an Act that was passed and jumped to a conclusion, because he said that the Liberals had started 

free cancer treatment. Now I don’t like the word ‘free’ in the first place. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

57 

You don’t get anything free that is any good; but you do get cancer treatment in this province without 

cost to the patient at the time that he needs it. Everybody shares it. It is not free, but it is available to the 

patient, so we will put it on that basis; and I will try not to use the word ‘free’, because I don’t like it. but 

it is available. but that was provided by this Government. 

 

I want again to point out to my young friend, if he wants to learn, that the Act was passed by the Liberal 

Government in April of 1944. Now, remember, April of 1944 was six years after 1938. The Liberal 

Government had been elected for the last time, so far, in 1938. It had gone its four years, and taken on 

the fifth, which it had a legal right to do, and then asked for a special dispensation of Ottawa to go 

another year, making six years. They were just a bit reluctant, to say the least, to face the country at that 

time. If they had been as good as my young friend this afternoon tried to make them appear to be, they 

would never have had any need to worry about an election. We would have all supported them right 

through the years, because there wasn’t a C.C.F. at one time. We were all either Liberals or Tories, one 

or the other. We had no other choice. It is because of the utter ineptness and inability and the lack of an 

earnest desire to do something that turned a great many of us into looking for another political outlet, 

and we found it, and here it is. But again coming back to it, don’t forget that in 1944, the Liberal 

Government here was facing an election, after hanging on to office for a longer period than they had any 

moral right to do, and, without a special dispensation, any legal right to do, and they had to go to the 

country with something, and they passed an Act, The Cancer Control Act, permitting people to have 

cancer services without cost to themselves, and it is called in the vernacular ‘Free Cancer Services’. 

Now, they hadn’t preceded this by one single plan. They hadn’t made provision; they hadn’t discussed 

the matter with the doctors who have to give the service. Every time we want a collective service from 

the doctors for a group who are on public assistance, we go to the doctors and negotiate, so that we 

know when a patient who has a right to that service is going to get a service, wants to provide it. The 

Liberal Government had not done this. They had made no approach to the surgeons or the doctors of this 

province in the spring of 1944, to make their free cancer serves available and effective. It was this 

Government that did it, and that is why it took another eight months after this Government was elected 

to make cancer services ‘free’ (as they are called) or available to the people, because those negotiations 

had to be gone through and the necessary estimates had to be provided in the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think possibly that is enough time to spend on the comments of my young friend, this 

afternoon. In this debate, other speakers have spoken, on both sides of the House, and on that side of the 

House, sir, your left – it’s a funny place to have such ‘rightists’ over on your left, sir, but that is where 

they are. We are told that the C.C.F. people paint a gloomy picture of the situation in Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, we don’t 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

58 

paint a gloomy picture. I never paint gloomy pictures, because I love this province too much. I have got 

my roots pretty deep in it. But we do not believe that we should wait until disaster strikes before we 

finally raise a protest against policies which will bring about what we believe will be disaster. That is the 

difference between telling a man that you see a fire starting in the corner of his house, or wait until the 

house is ablaze and then run up and say, “Well, I knew your house was on fire, but I didn’t like to 

disturb you, because you were having supper.” Possibly, Mr. Speaker, although as I say I have lived a 

long and possibly misspent life, I have never been accused of having hallucinations. Hallucinations are 

only usually visions that come to people who haven’t got a very good sense of reality. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  Haven’t got all their marbles. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley:  I sometimes wonder what goes on in the minds of some of my friends whom I 

know. I am going to refer now to my venerable and hon. friend from Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson). He will 

grin now a little bit, and probably dispute what I am going to say, but I am going to offer him an 

opportunity to do that. I picked up the paper last Saturday afternoon, the ‘Leader-Post’ of March 9, and I 

read a news report of a meeting that the hon. member for Saltcoats had held at Minton, and this is what 

he said – I am going to quote just two paragraphs, because they are pertinent to what I want to say. This 

is what he is reported by ‘The Leader-Post’ to have said. Now, I know the hon. member for Saltcoats 

and the hon. member for Melville will differ in regard to the political stripe of ‘The Leader-Post’. I am 

sure the member for Saltcoats will agree with me that, in the main, it is a strong supporter of the Liberal 

political party. The member from Melville will eventually learn that too, if he lives long enough, and 

keep his eyes and ears open. And by the way, Mr. Speaker, you know it has been said, that the Lord 

provided everybody with one mouth and two ears, and therefore, they should listen twice as much as 

they talk. That is another lesson our friend from Melville might learn. However, here is the quotation 

from the paper . . .  

 

Mr. McCarthy:  Same to you! 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  Sticks and stones may break my bones, but words will never hurt me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley:  . . . and I quote. He said, so the paper says: 

 

“If enough farmers heeded C.C.F. propaganda, there would be so much opposition to the Wheat 

Board, it could not continue. 

 

“All this criticism of our wheat marketing policies is criticism of the Canadian Wheat Board. It is not 

agriculture Minister J.G. Gardiner or Trade Minister C.D. Howe who determines our wheat marketing 

policies, but the Wheat Board, Mr. Loptson said.” 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

59 

Mr. Loptson:  That’s right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley:  Now, you see what he is trying to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  Of course, it’s right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley:  You see what he is trying to do? He is trying to leave the impression with is 

listeners – and I understand they weren’t very good listeners, that they were rather obstreperous, and 

didn’t welcome him too gaily, however, he is trying to . . .  

 

Mr. Loptson:  A good meeting there, anyway. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley:  . . . persuade his listeners that the C.C.F. is opposed to the Wheat Board. That is 

what he is trying to do. Now I am going to challenge the hon. member for Saltcoats in this debate, or in 

some other debate following that he produce in writing a copy of a speech that he has ever made in the 

last 23 years, or a copy of a press report of any speech he has made in the last 23 years, which has 

shown him definitely in favour of the Wheat Board system of marketing grain. But I am going to go 

further. 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough):  He didn’t vote last night. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley:  I am going to challenge him to get up in this House and state without evasion, 

equivocation or mental reservation of any kind, that he believes the Wheat Board should be the sole 

marketing agency and that the Winnipeg Grain Exchange should be abolished. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  I’ll have my say before you are through. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley:  Now, Mr. Speaker, according to my hon. young friend from Melville, he 

mentioned at the start of his speech that he was glad to hear one Minister get up and talk about his 

Department, and as I mentioned when I rose this afternoon, that had been my intention, and I will 

reciprocate my hon. young friend by saying this. If he expects to hear definite Reports only, with no 

political colouring at all from the Ministers or the members on this side of the House, he should do the 

same thing and report on what he really believes should be done, that isn’t being done, or shouldn’t be 

done, that is being done, himself. But if anyone made a political speech, he made it this afternoon; not a 

good one, but a loud one, and pure politics from start to finish. However, he did it, and I replied to it at 

some length and I believe explanatorily to the hon. member, and now I am going to speak on the Budget 

and my Department. 

 

I want at the outset to express my thanks to the Provincial Treasurer (Hon. Mr. Fines), and to the 

Treasury Board, those that were responsible (and I can take some that responsibility myself in a small 

way) for making it possible for the Department of Social Welfare to discharge its 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

60 

responsibilities. I have only been the Minister of Social Welfare for a few months. I am very happy with 

the Department. I have found that the former Minister left a well-organized and a loyal body of people 

on the staff there, who knew what they were supposed to do, had the proper philosophy and outlook 

toward people, which is necessary in a Department of Social Welfare, and the consequence is, I have 

been extremely happy in succeeding him in this position. And because of the provisions made by the 

Provincial Treasurer in his budget for the Department of Social Welfare to carry on its work, I see that 

we will be able to discharge our responsibilities this coming year within the boundaries of the revenues 

available in this province. 

 

I would like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that Social Welfare is only one of the humanities dealt with by a 

Government, the other two being Health and Education. These deal with people, not with roads or 

buildings or bridges, or cutting down trees, or digging up metal, or boring for oil. These are the 

humanities and they are important; and ‘Humanity First’ is the flag that flies at the masthead of the party 

that sits over here. And of the total Provincial Budget, $61 million is devoted to these three humanities, 

or 53 per cent of the total. Mr. Speaker, I state with all sincerity that dollar for dollar available in the 

Provincial Treasuries in Canada, no Government in Canada exceeds Saskatchewan in generosity to its 

people who are old or who have had misfortune. Because there are a number of new members in the 

House, I am going to describe to some extent the operation of the Department. 

 

The functions of the Department are laid down in the Department of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 

Act, and the various Acts that are administered by the Department. And they are summarized in broad 

terms on Page 9 of the Annual Report which everybody has on their desks, if they care to look at it, and 

I will quote: 

 

“ . . . to give financial assistance to persons in need; to ensure the protection of children; to help clients 

use the resources of the community and the resources within themselves to cope with the problems 

they face; to provide physical care, including custody, to certain groups of people; to help local 

communities to provide low cost housing and to develop an organization for defence against disaster.” 

 

That briefly covers the operation of the Department. 

 

Now our ultimate objective so far as it is possible is to meet the economic and social needs of our 

citizens, and to see that they are met in such a fashion that the preserve the dignity and integrity and the 

usefulness of the people who receive our services. I think everybody will agree that is important, 

because no matter how kindly you might be to people, unless you leave them with a sense of dignity, 

unless you leave them feeling that they have not been treated as something that requires paternalism or 

charity, but rather help them to build up their own resources, then you haven’t 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

61 

done the job you should do. You should leave them after any help has been given, feeling that they are 

self-reliant, and that they have some place to go. This requires a pretty competent body of people; it 

requires some very, very able staff, staff that know how to do these kinds of things. You see it would be 

very easy to get people who can go out and assess the economic means of an applicant for social aid, or 

some particular thing. It wouldn’t be hard to find somebody who could go out and find a neglected child, 

and say the child is neglected. It isn’t very hard to go and apprehend somebody who has offended the 

law. It is quite another matter, however, to find the underlying causes that brought about any one of 

those conditions and to try and eliminate the cause and that is the basic job of Social Welfare. The 

economic needs must be looked after, custody must be taken of persons who require it; but in the main it 

is to find out and remove as much as possible the things that cause those conditions. That is constructive. 

Because of that, a social worker has to make some very grave decisions. For instance, for adoption, or it 

may be sent to a foster home, but no matter where it goes, what happens to that child is of vital 

importance to it, and to other people. The consequence is that you have to have very able people to make 

those kinds of decisions. You see the disposition of a child and all that goes with it could be a very 

happy experience, or it can be a very tragic experience, for the child, and, therefore, the greatest amount 

of care has to be taken, and you have got to have good people, well-trained people to do that kind of job. 

 

We don’t have too many of that kind of people yet in the world. They are increasing in supply to some 

extent, but we haven’t been able to recruit all we would like to have of the high quality that we would 

wish for; but we are trying, and we feel that the results of the ones that we have had has shown that their 

careful attention to the details of all these things that I have mentioned, has been well worth while and 

has paid big dividends. Many of them have worked long past the call of duty insofar as hours of work 

are concerned, and have spent a great deal of time and thought and study in trying to bring about a 

happy solution to a broken home, or a family of neglected children, or a delinquent boy or girl, or any of 

the things that come to their attention. 

 

Ordinarily if you are going to do some physical thing, you could set it out in a table. You could say we 

built so many buildings this year, or we have dug so many holes, some were dry and some were wet, or 

we did this, that and the other, and you can show it in a table. You can’t do that with regard to human 

beings. You can’t set out statistically the number of people who have been, or who might have been, lost 

to society and who have been reclaimed to society, or brought back into society with dignity and 

integrity, as you can in the other things that I have mentioned. So you can’t give a statistical review of 

those kinds of things; but nevertheless there is evidence that a great many people have benefited by the 

work of the staff of the Social Welfare Department. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

62 

It isn’t like other things either. People who have the services of Social Welfare don’t as a rule go out and 

talk about it over the beer-mugs, or the tea-cups, or wherever they happen to meet. You see, if a person 

has a serious operation, a goiter, an appendix, or cancer or something, as a rule they are fairly proud of 

it. They have been treated; they have been cut open; they have been put back together again; they have 

survived and they are happy. They want to tell about it, because that isn’t something that the rest of the 

society regards as reprehensible. 

 

In the field of Social Welfare, however, it is different. For instance; we give a great deal of service to 

unwed mothers. We don’t expect an unwed mother, after she has been happily assisted to readjust 

herself to society, to go out and start bragging about it, or to tell over the tea-cups what has happened. 

We know that she is not going to do that, and we wouldn’t want her to, and we would never divulge any 

of her history to anybody. But we know it does happen to 500 or 600 or 700 people every year in this 

province, and every effort is made to help them deal with their problem. It is a great emotional strain 

when it happens. And then the decision as to how to bring up the child has to be made. We give her all 

the help that we can, and we never pressure her to what she should do. We help her make up her mind. If 

she wants to keep the child, we try and help her provide for it, and find a place for the child. 

 

And this again is important. Many of these children are adopted, and there are many, many parents in 

the province who want to adopt children. Sometimes (and I would like everybody to remember this) you 

will find adoption parents wondering why they didn’t get a child when they asked for it. The thing we 

regard as the most important or the most importance is the welfare of the child, and we never try to find 

a child that will fit a home; we try to find a home to fit the child. All that requires extremely able people. 

 

I will deal with some of these matters later on in my address, in a little more detail possibly, but I want 

to give just one or two illustrations to show the nature of the work of the Department of Social Welfare 

and its staff. We have one Branch that is rather new in this field. I expect we would all wish the Civil 

Defence had never become necessary. The state of the world, however, convinced the Government of 

Canada, that there had to be some form of civil defence in the event of disaster, and they asked the 

provinces to co-operate. The province of Saskatchewan did co-operate, and under the able 

administration of my predecessor, a Branch was set up in the Department of Social Welfare for Civil 

Defence, and Disaster. Now we have never yet had to face the contingency of war, or a military attack, 

nevertheless, this Civil Defence Branch has been able to organize the province in such a way that they 

are capable of dealing much more effectively than they would have been capable had Civil Defence 

never got started. I think a very important aspect of this is that the exercises that the Civil Defence 

Branch has carried out in co-operation with the local organizations with which it deals had not been 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

63 

mock or sham fights such as we have had in military training and which are necessary, they had been 

actual on-the-ground jobs, facing disaster. I remember when Eastend was flooded out (that is in my 

constituency)_ in 1952, Civil Defence was on the job helping the health workers and the other workers 

there evacuate the people, and nearly everybody had to be evacuated from Eastend; finding places in 

Shaunavon and surrounding places to billet the people, attending to all their needs in that way, and 

finally helping to assess the damage done and to provide through Government channels the necessary 

finance to help them. 

 

The same thing happened in areas of Swift Current City in that year. It wasn’t as disastrous there. Last 

year, Civil Defence had a tremendous job to do in some of the flooded areas, and I have yet to meet 

anyone who wouldn’t say that they had done a most notable job in that field. So we are now proud of 

our civil defence organization, because of the job that it has done and is able to do, and because of the 

organization work and training that it is giving to the people of this province in the way of home 

nursing, fire fighting, first aid, and the general reception and dispersal of evacuees in disaster areas. 

 

They had another job handed to them recently, which they have done most excellently. I refer to the 

Hungarian refugees. I suppose we are all extremely sorry for the occurrence that caused a tremendous 

number of people to have to leave their own country. But it happened, and something had to be done 

about it. The Prime Minister of Canada issued an invitation to some of the refugees from Hungary to 

come to Canada. He got in touch with our Premier and asked if Saskatchewan would be prepared to take 

some, and the Premier immediately said ‘yes’. Very little time was given to organize or plan for their 

reception; a hurried meeting was called, and everybody who would be interested, particularly those in 

civil defence, not only in Government but in the city were invited to take part. The necessary 

organization was set up under the Department or the Branch of Civil Defence, and they were given the 

actual working job of providing the reception centre, and receiving them, caring for them while they 

were there, working with the immigration officials for the dispersal to proper places, taking care of the 

financing of them, meeting them and so on, and they have done an extremely valuable job. 

 

The member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron), when he was dealing with the Budget, made I think, some 

rather unfortunate comments. If I remember correctly — I am not quoting directly from his speech, but I 

am quoting what I remember, or stating what I remember – he said that Hungarian refugees are reluctant 

to come to Saskatchewan, and then he cited that we had lost trainload after trainload. That isn’t correct. 

We have agreed, of course, to take every contingent that has been assigned to us; but during Christmas 

and in January there were three contingents assigned to us that finally didn’t come, and when we asked 

for the reasons, we were told (and I assume that we were told the truth) that the reason was that many of 

the people in the shipment from which these might have come had relatives or friends in other parts of 

Canada where they had been assured of a place to go. It was obviously natural 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

64 

that they would go to those places. I would like my friends to remember that we have a grave shortage 

of agricultural labour in this province, and of the nearly 500 of these refugees we have had so far, less 

than 25 have been farmers. Now, again, I want to remind my friends that I wrote to Mr. Pickersgill, the 

Minister of Immigration, and pointed out the need for us to have farmers. On the 31st December, I wrote 

as follows: 

 

“As you know, farming is still the principal industry in Saskatchewan. It would consequently be most 

desirable if refugees skilled in farm work were channelled to this province.” 

 

There hasn’t been any change. We are told that there are a lot of farmers coming out of Hungary. Many 

of what are called ‘the peasants’ over there (which we call farmers when they get here) are leaving that 

country. We would like to have them here, but for some reason we are not getting them here. It can’t be 

because there are no farm jobs here, because there are. 

 

I suggest that some of my friends on your left, sir, some of the hon. members who are acquainted with 

the people in Ottawa and surely must have some affinity with them, might advise them that it would be 

desirable to send us more farmers and tell them that we don’t particularly need jockeys, unless some of 

my friends over there would like a jockey or two. If they do, I will have a couple assigned to them. We 

haven’t a great deal of need for jockeys in Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to deal with another aspect of our operations in the Department, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to deal with our Corrections Branch for a moment or two, if I may, because I think that is rather 

important, and every once in a while there is one aspect of that branch particularly that is subject to 

some criticism from the opposite side of the House. Ordinarily, people who are offenders, you take them 

to court, you sentence them to whatever the judge says, you put them in gaol, and you lock the door, and 

that is it. We don’t regard those people that way. We regard them as people who can be reclaimed, 

particularly the younger ones. So we have in this province a pretty well worked out system of probation 

as well as custodial care, and we have divided our operations this way. We have divided them into the 

adults, and there again sub-divided them into two groups, and the juveniles, male and female. When 

people are apprehended, one of our social workers provides a case history for the judge, or the 

magistrate (whatever the case might be) in order to give him some idea of the social history of the 

person charged, wherever it is possible to get it. It is very likely then that the judge may regard him as 

capable of responding to probation or suspended sentence, in which case our probation services in the 

adult field in Regina, Saskatoon, and Moose Jaw become effective. We are hoping that we will have a 

probation field for adults right across the province, as soon as trained staff are available, but probation 

staff are extremely important, and must be specially trained if they are going to be effective. We do, 

however, have it throughout 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

65 

the province for juveniles, and the result is that we have not now the juvenile delinquency problem 

(which I will mention in a moment or two) that we used to have. 

 

I would like to deal with just the Regina gaol for a moment, because that is the younger group of the 

adult offenders, whom we have in our custody. It is reserved mostly for people in the southern part of 

the province who have sentences of 30 days or less, regardless of age, and for offenders who have more 

than 30 days, who are under 25 years of age. The reason for that is, we are developing very useful 

facilities in the Regina Gaol, and we believe that these younger offenders are more likely to be 

rehabilitated into normal life, if they are kept together and given the kind of trade training that they can 

absorb before they come out. So we give them training in carpentry, shoemaking, tailoring, motor 

mechanics, power mechanics, some building trades, as well as training and help in academic subjects. 

And, Mr. Speaker, again, people who have gone through that and have been rehabilitated to ordinary life 

and have a job, are not likely to go out and advertise, “Well, I was in gaol, and the Department of Social 

Welfare treated me and trained me, and now here I am, a respectable citizen again.” They are not going 

to do that like the fellow that can say “I broke my arm and had it set, or I had a haircut.” He is rather 

careful, and so we don’t expect to be able to give statistics and names on these matters; but I think every 

right-thinking member of this Legislature would be most happy if we could give him a list, if we weren’t 

breaking confidence, of a number of people who have received Journeymen’s Certificates from the 

Department of Labour, who are now employed in this and other cities in the province of Saskatchewan, 

who at one time were inmates of the Regina Gaol, and are living happy lives, not only here, but in other 

parts of Canada, and even in the United States. 

 

We have a very careful training program for staff. Our Custodial staff of the adult institutions have a 

three-year training program, much of it at the university level, and the result is that when they graduate 

they are competent in the field of training and handling and dealing with the kind of people who come to 

us because they have offended some law. There will be another class graduating in April of this year. 

The last one graduated about a year ago. 

 

The Prince Albert men’s gaol is reserved mostly for the people in the north with short sentences, and for 

men offenders over 25 years of age. We do have some program of training in some trades, but as yet we 

have not the intense training program we have for the younger people in Regina. We are hoping to 

develop it, and then we will be able to rehabilitate a lot of the offenders in the P.A. gaol. 

 

The Prince Albert women’s gaol never has a very large population, I am glad to say, and those that do 

come into it, unfortunately the majority are Indian women. I assume that they have offended the law 

mostly in 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

66 

minor ways and they find their way in there, and so we try to give them some training in good 

housekeeping methods, cooking and sewing and so on. 

 

Now we come to the Boys’ School. These are the juveniles, and I hear sometimes complaints because of 

the cost. I believe it was the member for Pelly (Mr. Barrie) who objected to the cost. I would like to 

explain. When this training school, the Boys’ Industrial School was envisaged some years ago, we had 

70 delinquent boys under 16 years of age who were sentenced to our custody. A place for them burned 

down outside of Regina (anybody can go out there and see the ruins) and it was deemed advisable by the 

Minister of Social Welfare and his staff, that these 70 boys be placed in an institution where they could 

be trained and rehabilitated, the same as I talked about the older prisoners. But there were 70 of them at 

that time, and because of that it was necessary to have a fairly large place. What happened was that, 

because we have been able to recruit better probation officers, better social welfare workers, people able 

to deal with incipient delinquencies in the villages and the families where it first showed any evidence, 

we have been able to reduce the number within the past two or three years, from the original 70 down to 

anywhere from 20 to 13 and even as low at times as nine boys, some going and some coming all the 

time. 

 

The Department is going to have to give up the Industrial School for Boys as a Physical Restoration 

Centre to the Department of Public health, or people who require it, and we are going to find other 

accommodation. But I want to make clear to the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, the importance of the work 

that was done, that reduced that case load from 70 down to between 10 and 20, and if in doing that the 

residue of those boys cost this Government and the public of this country $13 or $14 a day to do that 

job, I say it is money well spent, and no one has any moral right to object to that. I am positive if my 

friend from Pelly (Mr. Barrie), who I know to be an honourable man and a man with a kindly heart, had 

taken the trouble to find out why those costs were there, he would have spoken in a different manner. I 

invite him to go out and have a talk with Mr. Fornataro, or any of the people who are responsible for the 

care of these boys, to have a talk on why we do these things, and he will find no criticism even if the 

expense of keeping them does seem pretty high per individual. These are disturbed boys. We have one at 

the present time who only a few days ago tried to kill one of the attendants with a chair. Well, I don’t 

know if he tried to kill him. When he gets in a tantrum, you don’t know whether he is going to try to kill 

somebody or not; but he certainly intends to attack them and commit bodily harm, as much as he can. 

Now he is not a bad boy the rest of the time. Surely he is worth trying to save. We could have said, 

“Well, there is no use monkeying with a kid like that; he is so bad, we will get rid of him, lock him up 

and leave him behind bars.” You wouldn’t want that done. This Assembly wouldn’t, and the people 

wouldn’t. We are trying to get that boy out of that attitude, and the other ones the same way. It will cost 

some money to do it, Mr. Speaker, but surely human beings are worth something, worth the amount of 

money and the attention that we give in order to try and save them for society. And again, put on a hard-

boiled business lines, if we let seven or eight of those boys out running around the country, just bring 

them in and give them a few days’ custody at a cost of $4 or $5 a day, and then they get out and burn 

down a building, which is what 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

67 

one of them tried to do on his dad’s place the other day, or steal a car and kill somebody on the road, or 

break into a house and steal something, the cost is greater to society. So either on humanitarian grounds 

or straight hard-boiled, hard-headed business grounds, it is worth doing, and so I make no apology 

whatsoever for the cost of those boys’ keep. 

 

It will be noted that the cost of this correction program will be very close to $1 million — $945,000 to 

be exact. We can deal with it more in detail with the Estimates come up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a bit disappointing, the hon. member for Melville was the one who said that he 

wanted a Minister to give a clear-cut report on his Department, and now, when I have done so, the 

member for Melville disappeared. He doesn’t want to learn, or better yet, he doesn’t want to know; he 

just wants to talk. Now here he is back, that is good; I am glad to see him back. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  I timed him. He was out three minutes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley:  Then, Mr. Speaker, we have other responsibilities. There are a number of people 

we find them here and there, who are disabled, and we try to help them overcome those handicaps. They 

are not eligible for disabled persons’ allowances, the requirements of which I have already told you; 

nevertheless, they are disabled or unable to earn a living. We try to help them recover some of their 

abilities to the point where they can compete ordinarily in the labour market, if not wholly successfully, 

then to the point where they can hold a job and feel self-supporting. This requires a great deal of 

treatment. First, social treatment, because people who are in that condition frequently get the ‘blues’. 

They feel that the world is against them. They have got to have somebody show an interest in them, and 

to build up their self-respect, and if you like, their ‘ego’ to the point where they will believe that they 

can be resurrected, that they can do something for themselves, that they can enjoy a measure of dignity 

and independence. 

 

We try to help those people through vocational training, and academic education and training, where 

necessary. We help them financially in the way of maintenance, clothing, transportation, where 

necessary; if they can afford to pay some of it themselves, we expect them to do so, but if they require 

help, we don’t withhold financial help; we try to see that they get it. We try to place them in 

employment through the National Employment Service with whom we enjoy very good relations, even 

though it is an agency of a Government with a different political outlook than ourselves. 

 

We also co-operate with the Federal Government, mostly through the Department of Education, in the 

training of handicapped people under what is called Schedule ‘R’ of the Canadian Vocational Training 

Program. In that case the Federal Government helps to carry some of the costs. Now, this program itself 

will cost in the neighbourhood of $40,000 in the coming year. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

68 

We have another group of people for which the white people of Canada should be eternally and 

everlastingly ashamed, but they’re here, and something has to be done about them. We have the 

depressed mentally group. I don’t know that anyone here can take special blame for the past history, 

whether we can say, just as I said before, we can and our forebears can all, or should all, feel some 

shame for the way we have treated those of a different coloured skin than ourselves. Anyway, it has 

happened, and history has produced some people whom we call the Metis, and many of them are living 

on a very low standard. Their education and their skills are not such as make it possible for them to hold 

the kind of jobs that we expect our own youngsters to be able to handle. They haven’t developed the 

good work habits that attract employers, and the result is, as I say, they live in very depressed 

circumstances, and something has to be done about it and this Government is making an attempt, I think 

a very notable attempt. Yet there is apparently no horizons that I can see, but a very effective attempt 

has been made in arranging for some of the children of these needy people at least to get to school and to 

get the academic education. 

 

The Department of Social Welfare has built three schools for these folks: one at Duck Lake, one at 

Crescent Lake and one at Crooked Lake, and the schools at Crescent Lake and Crooked Lake have had 

to be doubled in size. The Department, I say, builds them and operates them except for the classroom. 

The teachers are provided by the Department of Education, and of course, the standards and curricula 

syllabus of training and so on are under the control of the Department of Education, which assures that 

these children get exactly the same as the children in other classrooms of the program do. We pay the 

cost of operation. 

 

We have done a little bit more than that, and are still continuing to do it. We have trained a number of 

these youngsters when they have shown an attitude and willingness, and we could persuade the parents 

to allow them to do it, to take their vocational training in some particular field of endeavour – it may be 

technical in the mechanical sense, or it might be technical in the clerical sense, and a number of the 

children have been very successfully established in jobs in other communities. We feel that in itself, as 

an example, will be an encouragement to the other needy people to show what their children can do if 

they give them the first opportunity and the encouragement to take advantage of our services. 

 

We also have done other things. We have helped them improve buildings. We have asked them to pay 

when they could; when they couldn’t we have provided such things as timber, lumber and roofing, 

windows and so on to help put up their buildings, and we have helped them establish Credit Unions, 

market gardens, livestock-raising projects, fishing and farming projects, and things of that nature, on co-

operative enterprise lines. We operate a two and a half section farm at Lebret, and on that farm there are 

10 Metis families living, and they work on a work-and-wages program. That is one form of project. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

69 

Whether it is the best one or not, I suppose, might be open to question, but we hope it is producing, and 

we think it is doing some good. However, we have another type which is somewhat different as another 

way of experimenting to find out which is the best way to help these people to help themselves. Down at 

Willowbunch we own a ranch, and we lease that ranch to an organized Metis co-operative there, and 

they operate on that lease. At Lestock we have another project where we did own the place, we 

developed it, and then sold it to a Metis co-operative. So we have the one that is government-owned and 

run at Lebret; we have the one that is owned by the Government but leased to a co-operative at 

Willowbunch, and we have the one that the Government did own, but re-sold on a long-term basis on 

good terms to an organized boy at Lestock. We are trusting that out of those will come a guidance to 

show what is the next best thing to do in order to help re-establish these people, and make them feel that 

they belong to society as the rest of us like to feel that we do. It will be around a $60,000 operation in 

the coming year to attend to this particular phase of our program. 

 

Now I come to the last thing I am going to speak on tonight, Mr. Speaker, then I will ask the indulgence 

of the House to adjourn the debate. I want to mention this one thing tonight, because I think it may be 

interesting to the folks here. I refer to alcoholism. I would like to be able to say that the problem is of 

sufficient importance, and has felt so for some time, hence the former Minister of Social Welfare was 

authorized and took very effective steps to set up a Bureau of Alcoholism in the Department of Social 

Welfare. Through this bureau we try to find out what are the causes, because it is generally accepted in 

medical science, now that alcoholism – I don’t mean the kind of alcoholism that might cause a fellow to 

go out and have a bit of a party and drink a little bit too much tonight, and then maybe go on another 

couple of days and then sober up – that is sort of a partying way. I mean the kind where people are 

impelled to keep on drinking until they are absolutely in the gutter both physically and mentally, and 

also economically. That is a disease, or rather it is recognized as a disease. I am not speaking with 

authority; I am speaking from, I believe, the voice of authority, though, when I say it is a disease. We 

are trying to tackle the problem by trying to find out all the things that cause this, and then trying as 

much as possible to eliminate the cause. So the bureau acts as a liaison between the different 

government agencies, like Education, Health and the other agencies of Social Welfare, and the 

professions and the organizations such as A.A., and church organizations and so on, that are interested in 

this problem. Through those methods we believe we are making a good deal of headway in discovering 

the causes, and we hope in some way to discover how the causes might be removed, and those who have 

succumbed to the causes might be brought back to sobriety on a continuous basis. There will be around 

$18,000 spent on this program, and I am sure, as our progress continues in this field and as we gain 

more information, we will find the Government ready to provide greater amounts when they are sure it 

can be spent effectively in this field. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

70 

Mr. Speaker, I would not have held the House so long if my young friend from Melville (Mr. Gardiner) 

had not made the speech that he did, but I could not let my young friend go ahead and rant and rave for 

over an hour about things that he knew nothing about, without an attempt at least to give him some 

information which, in his more mature years, he might be able to make some use of. 

 

With those few works I ask your permission to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

“Bill No. 54 — An Act to Amend The School Act.” 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Minister of Education):  Mr. Speaker, the greater part of this Bill could be 

adequately discussed in Committee. However, there are one or two comments that ought to be made in 

connection with it. It does provide for a slight extension of the right to appeal in regard to changes of 

boundaries of school districts. Procedure here is that a group of ratepayers or a school board may apply 

to have land transferred from one district to another. In the case of rural districts, and in rural 

municipalities this goes to a rural municipal council. Following the decision of the rural municipal 

council, the Act at the moment says that any of the school boards concerned may appeal to the Minister 

against the decision of the rural municipal council. It seems, however, that there is some justification in 

saying that not only may school boards appeal, but that a majority of the persons whose land is involved, 

would also have the right to appeal, and an amendment here gives to that majority the right to make such 

an appeal. 

 

The other point to which reference might be made is that an amendment is proposed to make more 

certain just what we do mean by a school year. At the present, I am afraid, there is some conflict in the 

Act in that at one point it says “200 days” and at another point it says “such number of days as the 

Minister may declare.” Because of the occasional difficulty in getting in 200 days without using a rather 

awkward time for starting school after holidays, or during the Christmas holidays, we arranged, a few 

years ago, that school might be opened for 199 or 198 or 200 as the Minister might declare in certain 

years. The amendment says that the number of days definitely shall be that which the Minister declares 

at the beginning of the year and this removed a seeming conflict in the Act at the moment. 

 

I would move second reading, Mr. Speaker. 



 

March 15, 1957 

 

 

71 

Mr. McCarthy:  May I ask a question, Mr. Speaker. Does this apply to larger unit districts, or just to 

the smaller districts as we know them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd:  Any district. 

 

(Motion agreed to, and Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at next sitting.) 

 

“Bill No. 58 — An Act to Amend The Executive Council Act.” 

 

Premier Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, I believe the House is going to pass the Act setting up the 

Department of Travel and Information. This would simply add to the list of Ministers provided for in 

The Executive Council Act. I want to make it clear that this does not provide for another Minister. It 

simply provides for the portfolio which will be assigned to one of the existing Ministers. 

 

I would move second reading of this Bill. 

 

(Motion agreed to and Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at next sitting.) 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 10.:00 o’clock p.m. 


