




















































Hansard: February 18, 1958


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

4th Day 

 

Tuesday, February 18, 1958 

 

The House met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

DEBATE ON ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The House resumed from Monday, February 17, 1958, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 

Mr. Davies (Moose Jaw City) for the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Leader of the Official Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I am glad to welcome the 

university students who are present in this Chamber today. I hope that your stay will be an enjoyable 

one. It is unfortunate that you are going to have to listen to me, this afternoon, and to the Premier, this 

evening. 

 

We want to wish you well in your work at the University, and I am sure we all hope that you will all be 

successful in your endeavours there and in your final exams, which will be before you in a few short 

weeks. We also hope those of you who will be graduating after this term will seek to give the benefits of 

your increased knowledge to the province of Saskatchewan. We also hope to have the opportunity of 

seeing all of you at the banquet, this evening. 

 

Yesterday, when I said a word or two in this same debate, I mentioned the share of education costs that 

were being borne by the Government of the province of Saskatchewan and I mentioned that the share 

was the lowest in Canada. At that time someone on the other side of the House (I am not sure who it 

was) challenged me to produce figures to prove that point. Well, I have the figures in my hand. Now it is 

most difficult to prove anything that happened last year, because of the fact that the figures are not 

available from the Dominion Bureau of Statistics, and, of course, the Annual Report of the Department 

of Education has not been made available to the members yet. Thus the last year for which we have 

complete figures from the Dominion Bureau of Statistics would be for the fiscal year 1953-54; and for 

that year, I would like to point out again that the share paid by the Government of the province of 

Saskatchewan to education is the lowest in the Dominion of Canada. These figures are taken from the 

Annual Report 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

2 

of the Department of Education and from D.B.S. figures. In the year 1953-54, the province of 

Saskatchewan paid approximately 26.6 per cent of the total cost of education. By 1955, this had 

increased to 30.5 per cent, and there were additional sums of money voted to education in 1956-57; but I 

would imagine that the percentage of the total cost of education has remained somewhere between 26 

and 30 per cent of the cost of education. If this is not the lowest in Canada today then it is among the 

lowest, and again I want to refer those people, who question my figures, either to the D.B.S. or the 

Annual Reports of the Department of Education as tabled in this Legislature. 

 

Yesterday I also mentioned one or two things about agriculture in Saskatchewan and I believe I 

mentioned that the Speech from the Throne only made passing reference to agriculture. As a matter of 

fact the Speech from the Throne said this: 

 

"The most serious threat to agricultural solvency is rising farm costs and falling farm prices." 

 

There is no suggestion in the Speech from the Throne that we, as a province, or that the Provincial 

Government of this province, can do anything about this problem. Apparently they are prepared to sit 

idly by and let this condition prevail as it has prevailed over the past several years — it has been 

mentioned in speeches from the Throne over the last several years. 

 

I also attempted to point out that there were some things we feel that the Government of Saskatchewan 

ought to be doing to help agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan. Today, I want to point out some 

of the things that the present Government has been guilty of since their term of office began — some of 

the things they have implemented that have increased the cost of production, as far as the farmers of 

Saskatchewan are concerned. 

 

First of all, they have caused land taxes to increase to the point where they are the highest of any place 

in the Dominion of Canada. I haves here in my hand a copy of a brief that was presented to the 

Department of Education here in the province of Saskatchewan by the School Trustees' Association. On 

Page 5 of this report you will find a table giving you the rates of municipal taxes on real property in 

Canada. You will find that Saskatchewan is paying $68.02 per capita in taxation annually, which is the 

highest figure for the whole of the Dominion of Canada. Well, of course, this not only affects farmers; it 

affects all of our people who are paying taxes on real property. 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

3 

Another move of this Government has been to increase the gasoline tax by some 71 per cent since they 

came into office. Another increase directly to our farmers is the increase in farm truck licences. In some 

instances it has been increased as much as 300 per cent. Then we have another tax (you might call it), 

and that is the compulsory insurance premium on farm trucks. We have the new mineral tax of three 

cents an acre on the farmer's land. We have an increase in the sales tax, or the Education and 

Hospitalization Tax, from two to three per cent. We have increased dues on lumber, fence posts and 

virtually all the products of our forests of which many of our farmers use a considerable quantity over a 

twelve-month period. 

 

Then we have the Government, supposed to be the friend of the farmer, which has imposed a large part 

of the capital cost of constructing rural telephones or rural electrification lines on to the farmers of this 

province. Connecting fees for telephones have been increased by 100 per cent. One could go on most of 

the afternoon, telling of instances whereby this Government has been responsible for increasing costs to 

the farmers of this province. And, rather than facing up to this problem, they make bare reference to it in 

the Speech from the Throne, and indicate that this situation exists, but there seems to be little or nothing 

that this Government is prepared to do about it. 

 

Several times over the past two years, the Government of Saskatchewan (and the Premier and the 

Provincial Treasurer are more responsible than anyone else, as far as I know) has endeavoured to tell the 

people of Saskatchewan that they are being so generous and so fair with our municipal governments and 

local governing bodies. At a meeting in Saskatoon in December of 1956, a C.C.F. political meeting, the 

Provincial Treasurer was the guest speaker, and he said this: 

 

"The Provincial Government, since 1944, has given increasing assistance to the municipalities, which 

amounts to more yearly than the Federal tax revenue subsidy." 

 

Then he presented a list of so-called assistance which totalled about $31 million. Then you will recall 

that, back at the Provincial-Local Government Conference of a little more than a year ago, this same line 

was adopted at that Conference, and the Provincial Treasurer again presented a document to that 

Conference and it was entitled: "Provincial aid to Local Governments." Included in that document was a 

list of expenditures, that he totalled up to $26 million, as so-called aid to local governments. In addition 

to that, he added $11 million, which is the Province's share of the hospitalization plan; and he came up 

with a total of $37 million. 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

4 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if the Provincial Government of Saskatchewan considers all of these grants they are 

making to local governments, if they think for one moment that they are accepting some municipal 

responsibility, then I think they should all get a copy of The British North America Act and read it. They 

should go back and read some of the speeches they have made, from time to time, on public platforms 

and elsewhere throughout the province of Saskatchewan. Surely, we haven't arrived at' the point where, 

for instance, education is now a municipal responsibility. Is it? Not according to the Premier, it isn't! He 

made a lot of speeches on education at one time and another and in one of them he said this: 

 

"The British North America Act, which is Canada's constitution, makes education a provincial, not a 

municipal, responsibility." 

 

Now the Provincial Treasurer and the Premier tell us that when any grants are paid towards education by 

the Government of Saskatchewan then they are relieving the municipalities of some of their 

responsibilities. 

 

What about social welfare? Included in Social Welfare we have such things as social aid, old-age 

assistance, child welfare, disabled person's allowance, tuberculosis control, care of cancer and polio 

patients, preventive health services, correspondence schools, secondary highways and all the rest of it, 

and now these are included as municipal responsibilities according to the Government which sits on 

your right. Mr. Speaker, as I said yesterday, if this were the case, what would be the need of having a 

provincial government? We could just throw in the whole sponge and say to the municipalities, "you 

take over". 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are not municipal responsibilities. They are responsibilities of the Provincial 

Government of this province and of any other province in Canada, and past governments of this 

province and of every province in the Dominion of Canada have accepted that fact. Certainly in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and elsewhere in Canada, from time to time, provincial governments have 

called on local governments to help than administer such problems as I have just outlined to you, for the 

simple reason that, in the municipalities, they are much closer to the people than we are here, as a 

provincial body. 

 

There is one other thing I should like to say about agriculture and that relates to farm prices. Again, the 

Provincial Government seems to think there is nothing it can do, or that it has no responsibility as far as 

farm prices are concerned. I say that every 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

5 

governing body some responsibility as far as farm prices are concerned. One of the reasons we have 

difficulty here in Saskatchewan, in getting a fair price for many of the agricultural products we produce 

is the fact that we have no storage within the province of Saskatchewan to take care of those products. I 

think I mentioned one time, speaking in this Legislature that probably it might be well for the Provincial 

Government to invest some of their millions in storage plants in thin province, rather than investing than 

in some of the enterprises that have gone broke and that have cost the people and the treasury of this 

province considerable sums of money. 

 

Another thing we as a Provincial Government ought to be taking look at is farm credit. I have always 

maintained that there is a need, as far as agriculture is concerned, for three types of credit. We need 

short-term credit, intermediate-term credit and long-term credit. In Canada, the needs of our farmers, as 

far as short-term credit is concerned, have been to a large extent taken care of by The Farm 

Improvement Loans Act. I think everyone realizes what we mean by short-term credits. It is credit that 

an established farmer needs to probably buy new machinery or to improve his buildings or to improve 

the property he now owns. Under The Farm Improvement Loans Act, that is what farmers have been 

able to do throughout not only Saskatchewan, but other parts of Canada. In the province of 

Saskatchewan, under The Farm Improvement Loans Act, approximately $200 million has been put into 

circulation, and as we all know the interest rate on that money is some five per cent. 

 

In the 'intermediate-term credit' field, under Federal legislation, the Canadian Farm Loan Board has 

gone a long way toward solving this problem. I sometimes think that the management of the Canadian 

Farm Loan Board has been a little stringent. I think there are cases where people who ought to have been 

able to get a loan, ware unable to do so. But again, the Board has filled a great vacuum that existed here 

in the province of Saskatchewan, and to date it has loaned about $39 1/2 million to farmers in 

Saskatchewan at the same interest rate, namely five per cent. But again, the Canadian Farm Loan Board, 

or intermediate-tem loans, only fill part of the need of agriculture. Farmers who are already established 

are able to borrow money under this Act to enlarge their holdings, but this Act never was designed, and 

has never been suited for loaning money to the young farmer or to anyone who wanted to begin farming. 

The only people who have been able to obtain that type of credit are those who would come under The 

Veterans' Land Act and there, I think, we had an example of what can be done for young people who 

want to enter the farming profession today. Under the Veterans' Land Act, some $40 million has been 

loaned to veterans in the province of Saskatchewan at an interest rate of 3 1/2 per cent. 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

6 

I believe that the Government of Saskatchewan ought to have a program whereby they can lend money 

to prospective young farmers of this province. I have in my hand a submission to the Government of 

Saskatchewan by the Saskatchewan Farmers' Union, and one of the first recommendations in this 

submission is for long-term credit. Apparently the Farmers' Union are of the same opinion as myself, 

and that is that the Government of this province, if the had any faith in agriculture, or any concern for 

agriculture would get off their haunches and do something about it. There are three legislatures in 

Canada, I know of, that now have provincial legislation that makes it possible for the young farmer, or 

the new farmer, to borrow money over a long period of years at a low interest rate. 

 

In the province of Quebec, for instance, one could borrow 75 per cent of the appraised value of farm 

property; the repayment period is some 39 1/2 years; the interest rate is 2 1/2 per cent. It is an excellent, 

plan. We all realize that, if the interest rate is some 2 1/2 per cent, the Government of the province of 

Quebec must be subsidizing the money that they put into this loan plan in Quebec. In Ontario, 80 per 

cent of the appraised value of the land can be borrowed by the young farmers. There is a repayment 

period of 25 years, with an interest rate of 4 1/2 per cent. In the province of Alberta, one can borrow up 

to 40 per cent of appraised value with a 20-year period for repaying the loan, with an interest rate of 4 

1/2 per cent. In Alberta the maximum amount in the fund to be loaned out to prospective young farmers 

is some $2 million; and the maximum loan is $7,500 per farmer. I do not believe the legislation in 

Alberta goes far enough, but it has certainly gone a lot farther than any thinking in Saskatchewan let 

alone legislation, as far as the Government is concerned. If we have money to loan to endeavour to 

attract industry to our province, why on earth haven't we money to loan to the biggest industry in 

Saskatchewan at the moment, and the biggest industry this province will ever have — and that is 

agriculture? 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Have you no faith in the farmers? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — No, they haven't. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Are you prepared to see the young people of this province have to leave 

Saskatchewan — young men and young women, who if given the opportunity, would be farmers in this 

province? Do you feel they should not be given that opportunity, and that we should be chasing them out 

to other parts of Canada? That is exactly what is happening; and the Premier, himself, has said: "Well, 

maybe it isn't a bad idea if some of them 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

7 

leave the farms and go to the cities." The farm family has made Saskatchewan what it is today, and yet 

the Premier scorns at the farm family in this province. 

 

One other thing I would mention at this time with regard to agriculture, and again it is mentioned in the 

submission of the Saskatchewan Farmers' Union. I refer to crop insurance. The Provincial Treasurer is in 

charge of the insurance office and he is always telling us about all the profits he makes. Well I wonder 

why he isn't prepared to put on a little crop insurance. We have agitation from all farm organizations, 

today, for some sort of a comprehensive crop insurance plan. My belief is that to have a workable crop 

insurance plan in Canada, it should be on a national scale right across the country! But I think it is 

obvious to all of us that we are not going to get any national plan until such time as the provinces are 

prepared to take the lead. As I mentioned yesterday, time and time again the province of Saskatchewan 

has taken the lead in legislation that has been followed by other provinces of Canada. Why couldn't we 

give the lead as far as crop insurance is concerned in Saskatchewan? I think we can, and I think that, if 

the Government of this province has any faith in agriculture, or any desire to see it prosper, they should 

be prepared to take the lead. 

 

I noticed in the report of the convention of the Canadian Federation of Agriculture, meeting in Montreal 

last January, they asked for extension of farm credit; they asked for crop insurance, and they asked for 

bigger and better programs as far as soil and water conservation are concerned. Speaking of oil and 

water conservation, we have a problem in Saskatchewan that comes under water and soil conservation. 

What are we doing about it? We are doing some work, yes; but the one place where we are falling down, 

Mr. Speaker, is that we are not giving any help to the individual farmer to take care of his conservation 

and soil and water problem. I want to qualify that statement and say that we are giving some engineering 

assistance to our farmers; but there is no legislation in this province whereby a farmer can get the money 

to carry out the program he would like to carry out on his own farm. Here again, provincial governments 

across Canada are giving some assistance. For instance, in the province of Ontario, under the Ontario 

Drainage Assistance policy, as much as 75 per cent of the cost of drainage projects on an individual 

farm can be borrowed; as much as $3,000 for every hundred acres of land can be borrowed to carry out 

drainage work. There is a four per cent interest rate. In the province of New Brunswick, in the year 

1956, 174 farmers borrowed money to carry out drainage work on their own farms. I can see why we are 

not able to do this in Saskatchewan under the present Government, because last year, there was 

approximately 4 per cent of the budget used for agricultural purposes — just 4 per cent! Yet here, it is 

the major in- 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

8 

dustry of this province, and this so-called 'friend of the farmer' government is prepared to spend 4 per 

cent of the total budget for agricultural purposes! 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Shame! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Lollypops! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn to industrial development. We have heard a 

lot about industrial development over the last year or two, most of it, again emanating from the Premier 

in speeches that he has made here and there and elsewhere around the province. However, if one takes 

the trouble to turn to any relevant statistics that are available anywhere in Canada, you will find that the 

industrial development in Saskatchewan is not keeping pace with that of the rest of Canada. It is not 

keeping pace with our two neighbouring provinces which have similar economies to the province of 

Saskatchewan, very similar natural resources, similar climates, and, I presume, the same kind of people. 

So why are we lagging behind — not only behind Canada as a whole, but behind our two neighbouring 

provinces? Well, I think there are good reasons, and I am sure the people of Saskatchewan now realize 

that there are good reasons. 

 

I want to refer (as I mentioned a moment ago) to some of the statements that have been made by 

members opposite with regard to industrial development. First of all, I want to refer to a speech made to 

the 12th Annual Convention of the Saskatchewan Board of Trade meeting in Swift Current in October, 

1957. The Premier dusted off that old speech he made here about a year and a half ago, and he delivered 

it; and the newspapers covered it. The report of that speech appears in the 'Leader-Post' of October 24, 

1957. I want to refer to some of the statements made by our Premier at that time. The first statement I 

want to refer to is this: 

 

"The development of base metals in northern Saskatchewan last year alone, exceeded that of Manitoba 

and Alberta combined." 

 

Mr. Cameron: — The old gag! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Something new has happened! Saskatchewan, last year (according to the Premier) 

produced more base metals than Alberta and Manitoba combined. 

 

Well now, we want to clear one thing. As far as I can make out uranium is not classified as a base metal. 

I may be wrong. Some of the people who ought to know are confused as to whether it is or not; but, for 

the purposes of my presentation here this afternoon, I am not including uranium. I am going to deal with 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

9 

the base metals of copper and zinc. Before I do that — if the Premier hadn't used the words 'last year' the 

statement would not have been too bad; but when he used the words 'last year' he indicated that 

something new had happened — Saskatchewan was now producing tremendous quantities of copper and 

zinc. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Base metals, copper and zinc are not produced at all in the province of Alberta, and 

never have been. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — There isn't anything there. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I don't know whether there are any base metals in Alberta, or not. I wouldn't know. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — They never have produced any. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Oh yes, they have. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — There is only one area in the three prairie provinces that produced base metals, 

copper and zinc, and that is on the boundary line between Manitoba and Saskatchewan — the Hudson 

Bay Mining and Smelting Company at Flin Flon. What are the facts? Commencing with the year 1942 

— not 1956 — but 1942 — and since, the volume of these metals produced in Saskatchewan exceeded 

the volume produced in Manitoba. You will recall, Mr. Speaker, that the first discovery in that area was 

in the province of Manitoba; and they got working underground, and found that this vein ran over into 

Saskatchewan, and pretty soon they found that the best vein was in the province of Saskatchewan. From 

1942 to this day there has been more of these two metals produced in Saskatchewan than in Manitoba. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Hooray! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Well, I think you should tell your Prettier the fact of this, and if he wants the 

authority for the figures that I am giving you, they come from the Canadian Mineral Statistics of 1886 to 

1956, and the pages are 96,100, 101 and 104. I don't suppose the Minister of Mineral Resources would 

even have a copy of this particular document. 

 

Let us go back and take a look at what has happened. Never, since this Government came to office, have 

they produced as rich copper and zinc as was produced the year before they came into office in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Talk about industrial development — mines: in 1943-44, there were 178 

million pounds of zinc and copper produced in Saskatchewan. Remember that figure — 178 million 

pounds. 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

10 

That dropped to a low of 116 1/2 million in 195-51. By 1954-55, we were back up to almost the figure 

of 1943-44 — 176 1/2 million pounds; but, last year, when this great development was going on and 

reached a new peak which superseded Manitoba and Alberta, do you know where we were? We 

produced 147 1/2 million pounds, compared to 178 million back in 1943-44. Tremendous expansion! 

Something new has happened! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Progress in reverse. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — What about the precious metals? What about gold and silver? We have exactly the 

same situation. Never since this Government came to power has there been as much gold and silver 

produced in Saskatchewan as was produced the year before they came into power. The year they came 

into power there was 2,726,000 oz. of gold and silver produced in Saskatchewan, but last year, when we 

had really gone out through the roof (according to the Premier), we produced not quite half that amount; 

we produced 1,241,000 oz. If you want the authority for my figures they are from the 'Saskatchewan 

News' of January 7, 1958. This is a document that is prepared and published by the propaganda bureau 

of this Government. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — They should put a censor on it! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Before we leave mining, I should say a word about uranium. We have tremendous 

development in the province of Saskatchewan so far as uranium is concerned. In my opinion, we have 

one of the finest uranium mining areas that exists anywhere in the world. Thank goodness that a federal 

Liberal government was wise enough to find it and to start it, and to put it into production and 

development. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Socialism! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — A Crown Corporation, too! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Well, it certainly paid off a lot better than any provincial Crown Corporation we 

have had, anyway — something I could not say about most of the provincial Crown Corporations. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — The key to success. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Now let us turn to manufacturing. We are continuously being reminded of all the 

new industries that are coming to Saskatchewan, and some C.C.F. members have been so unkind as to 

say; "Why these Liberals would do anything to prevent industrial development or manufacturing from 

coming into Saskatchewan." 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

11 

Premier Douglas: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Well, you know we will just do anything that is honest and right to encourage 

anybody to come into the province of Saskatchewan and develop our resources. We will co-operate with 

your Government or with any other government that wants to bring development to the province of 

Saskatchewan — within limits. We are not prepared to go as far as some of you people apparently have 

been prepared to go in the past. 

 

Again, I want to quote from the speech of the Premier at Swift Current with regard to manufacturing. 

This is what he said: 

 

"In the field of manufacturing, the Premier said that $310 million was realized last year, which is an 

83 per cent increase over ten years ago." 

 

He said that 200,000 persons were now receiving employment through these industries. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Too high. It should be 20,000. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — The 200,000 figure, I presume, is a press error; I think the figure should be 20,000 

and that was the figure that was used a short time later when making a broadcast over a local radio 

station. How he arrived at the figure of $310 million, I don't know. The Dominion Bureau of Statistics 

for the same year give us a figure of $301; but I am not going to argue whether it is $301 or $310, 

because, to all intent and purposes, it doesn't make any difference as far as my argument is concerned. 

 

Now, if we were to take it for granted that we were producing 8.5 per cent more in the line of 

manufactured products since 10 years ago, that would be a great accomplishment to the industrial world 

and to the Government of Saskatchewan, and I would be the first to compliment them, if that were the 

case. But, my friend, the hon. member from Moose Jaw (Mr. Davies) yesterday kind of shot holes 

through the Premier's Speech at Swift Current, when he said: "You know, when you're making 

comparisons, you should have the constant dollar value." I agree with the member from Moose Jaw, 

because $310 million today would not have been $310 million ten years ago. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Liberal inflation. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Ten years ago, what was the figure in Saskatchewan? We'll go back even more than 

10 years ago. We'll 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

12 

go back to 1944, and we will find that the value of manufactured articles produced in Saskatchewan in 

1944 was about $176 million. Well, if we want to use this constant dollar, then we'll get a formula and 

we'll take 1935 to 1939 as the base period, or equalling 100. Thus, in 1944 your base would have 

increased from 100 to 129.1. By 1956, it would have increased to 231.5. So we get an equation for 

figuring out just what $310 million in 1956 would mean in dollar values of 1946 or 1944, and the 

equation is as follows: 

 

$176 million x $231 1/2 million 

(base) 129.1 

 

We find that Saskatchewan, if they had kept pace with the manufacturing that was going on here in 

1944, should have produced $314 million in 1956 — some $4 million more than the Premier claims we 

are producing, and some $13 million more than the Dominion Bureau of Statistics claims. Well, I don't 

know how you can call that prosperity or progress. In constant dollar values, we are not producing as 

much in the manufacturing field today as we produced in 1944. 

 

One could bring the figures up to date for this year, and you would find that, if we are to be keeping 

pace with the production in the manufacturing field, in 1956 it would be necessary for us to produce 

$323 million worth of manufactured products in this fiscal year. I doubt very much that we will be able 

to do that amount out of the manufacturing industry in Saskatchewan. 

Let us compare this figure of $301 million (which is a D.B.S. figure) with what is actually happening in 

our two neighbouring provinces. What was the figure in Manitoba for 1956? What was the value of the 

manufactured products of Manitoba? Again, I say a similar economy, similar people, similar climate, 

similar everything, except they have not had the experience of this Socialistic plague that we have had 

here in Saskatchewan. The figure in Manitoba was $667; million in Alberta, $702 million; but in 

Saskatchewan, $301 million. Great progress! I don't think you can blame the Liberals for that. There's 

only one party you can blame for that. There's only a segment of a party you can blame for that, and 

there it sits, on the right, the Government of this province. 

 

These figures are taken from the "Preliminary Statements on Manufacturing", which is a D.B.S. 

document, page two, for the year 1956. They are not my figures. They are figures produced by the 

Dominion Bureau of Statistics, that neither the Premier of this province; nor anybody else in Canada can 

refute or deny. 

 

Now, what about employees in manufacturing? Well, the Premier said that the figures should be 20,000 

(and I agree with him) rather than 200,000. I am perfectly prepared to accept it as an error so far as the 

press or the reporter or somebody is concerned. 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

13 

But what about employees? If we were going ahead by leaps and bounds and making great progress in 

industrial development and the manufacturing development in this province, one would think there 

would be considerable numbers of people employed in the manufacturing industry. Well, in 1956, and 

referring only to manufacturing, there were 11,768 people employed in manufacturing in Saskatchewan. 

In the same year, there were 42,711 employed in that industry in Manitoba. In Alberta, there were 

37,571. Is it any wonder we have unemployment in Saskatchewan today? How many people were 

employed in the manufacturing industry in Saskatchewan the year before the gentlemen opposite came 

into power? 12,361. Great progress! We have progress from 1944 to 1958 to the extent that we now 

employ 11,768 compared to 12,361 in 1944. And they call that progress! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Progress in reverse. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Now we've used these figures before, and the Premier has complained about it, and 

I think he was going to complain just now, and then he changed his mind. He has said . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — I'll complain just as much as ever. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — . . . you shouldn't just consider manufacturing. You should broaden the base and 

take in all the branches of industrial development. Let's do that. Okay, we'll take a look at it that way. 

We'll take a look at all the people employed in the nine leading industries, including forestry, mining, 

manufacturing, construction, transportation, public utilities, trade, finance, including insurance, and the 

services. Surely that's a big enough field for comparison, isn't it? I am even including the Provincial 

Treasurer's insurance office! 

 

Now, what are the comparable figures as at September 1, 1957 for the three prairie provinces? In 

Manitoba, on September 1, 1957 in the nine leading industries there were 141,000 people employed. In 

Alberta, there were 164,000 people employed. In Saskatchewan there were 71,000. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Man, oh man! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — What progress! What prosperity! 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Backing up that time! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — We're just trailing along so far behind that it is difficult to see the tail-light of the 

other two provinces. I want to emphasize again that people are the same, the natural resources are the 

same, the climate is very similar. Why are we so far behind? 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

14 

Again these figures are taken from the "Employment and Payroll Division" of the D.B.S. of September, 

1957, page 2. 

 

What about capital investment? Again the Premier has referred to capital investment on many occasions. 

In Swift Current, in the speech to which I referred a while ago, he made this statement, and I want to 

quote it to you. He said: "There were $600 million spent on capital investment, last year." Well, for 

somebody who hasn't taken the trouble to look up to see what comes under capital investment that 

would be quite a statement and it would be a wonderful thing if that $600 million had been spent for 

new industries and one thing and another in Saskatchewan. But what is included in the figure of $600 

million, Mr. Speaker? I am not saying the figure of $600 million is wrong. It is correct. But when you 

use that figure you should go on and tell the people what it means, because included in the $600 million 

figure you have schools and churches — they are not industrial developments. You have hospitals, you 

have houses, roads, farm machinery, farm buildings . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Even piggeries! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — . . . and a multitude of things. This is not industrial development, or development in 

the manufacturing field, and no individual should attempt to convey to the people of Saskatchewan that 

that is what it is. If you want a figure for manufacturing in Saskatchewan, the investment last year, was 

not $600 million. It was $19 million. 

 

Again for the same period, what was the figure for Manitoba? Not $19 million, but $35 million. What 

was the figure for Alberta? It was $77 million. Why are we again, I want to ask you, Mr. Speaker, and 

ask the people of this province — why are we not able to keep pace with our neighbouring provinces? 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Because we've got C.C.F. — Socialism. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Nineteen million dollars in Saskatchewan, $35 million in Manitoba, and $77 million 

in Alberta was spent, last year, to develop manufacturing industry in the three prairie provinces. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — The Socialists again! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — All right. What about petroleum and natural gas? 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Socialist stagnation. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I could speak for a long time on the petroleum and natural gas industry in 

Saskatchewan and western Canada. There is a long story that could be told there. 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

15 

Mr. Kramer: — Keep the gas rolling. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — As long as you are in the House, we'll have no difficulty in doing that. 

 

All I am going to say about petroleum and natural gas is that to the end of the fiscal year 1956-57, the 

province of Alberta had received into the provincial revenue account some $670 million out of oil and 

gas. We in Saskatchewan received $32 million. When one considers that those people who were taking 

part in that oil and gas development started their search here in the province of Saskatchewan, and for no 

reason other than that Government over there, left this province and went to Alberta, this figure could 

very well be reversed today. 

 

Premier Douglas: — That is not true, and you know it. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — It is true, and you know it, and neither you nor anybody else can produce any 

evidence to substantiate the fact that they left this province for any other reason than you chased them 

out. 

 

Premier Douglas: — They didn't leave it. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — They did leave it. Before this Session is over we shall . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — You'll chase than out. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — . . . bring a few documents into this House and a few maps, to substantiate the 

statement I have just made. 

 

Premier Douglas: — That's what you were going to do before, but you didn't bring them in. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Well, in any case it isn't a very good record if one of our neighbouring provinces 

can get $670 million out of gas and oil, and we get $42 million. In the meantime geologists tell us there 

is probably more oil-bearing formations under the province of Saskatchewan than any place else in 

western Canada. Sure, we've got some development here, and no one is happier than I, or more proud, 

and I wish this Government well in encouraging the development of oil and gas in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Certainly, But you are the people who missed the boat and left us in the position that we 

are in today. 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

16 

Opposition Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Our markets are being curtailed in the world today. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Not Saskatchewan's. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — We may not be able to sell as much oil over the next, two years as we have in the 

past, and I think we should have been in on the right end of this oil development, and that was in on the 

beginning, not on the tail-end. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Hear! Hear! We should have been in ten years earlier. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — What about loss of population. One would think that, if we had tremendous 

developments in Saskatchewan, especially in the industrial and manufacturing fields, we would be able 

to increase our population. But what has happened in Saskatchewan? D.B.S. reported on population 

throughout Canada on June l, 1957, and our population at that time was 879,000 people in 

Saskatchewan, compared to 881,000 people the year before. So last year when all this progress was 

taking place, when we were developing by leaps and bounds, we lost 2,000 people. Not only did we lose 

that 2,000 people, Mr. Speaker. The natural increase of the province of Saskatchewan last year — that is 

the number of births less the number of deaths in the province in one year — would be something over 

17,000 people; so last year we just didn't lose 2,000. We lost 2,000 plus 17,000 which is 19,000 people. 

Now probably 19,000 people didn't mean too much to the average individual; but suppose all of a 

sudden some year the city of Prince Albert jumped up and moved away. Everybody would be quite 

excited, wouldn't they? Well, here we have lost approximately the total population of Prince Albert out 

of Saskatchewan. Progress in reverse! 

 

What does this mean when we lose people from the province of Saskatchewan? It means a loss of 

revenue to the province of Saskatchewan in many respects; but one thing that it affects, as most of us 

have probably overlooked, is the amount of money that we can receive under the Dominion-Provincial 

taxation agreement. Every time there is a decrease in population in Saskatchewan, we receive less 

money, and there are two reasons we are receiving less than we expected. First of all, the populations of 

Ontario and British Columbia have increased faster than anyone would have thought possible. The 

second reason is that the population of the province of Saskatchewan has decreased faster than anyone 

would have thought possible. So we lose out on both ends of the deal. Is it any wonder that, when some 

newspaper people in eastern Canada attempt to estimate what we will receive under 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

17 

the Dominion-Provincial taxation agreement, the Provincial Treasurer (Hon. Mr. Fines) never agrees 

with them? Well, he has the inside track, because he realizes he is driving more people out of 

Saskatchewan than anybody would ever give him credit for. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Flew the coop! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — What happened in the province of Ontario, for instance, during the year 1957? They 

had an increase in their population of 217,000 people. British Columbia had an increase of some 89,000 

people. Some people may wonder why I use British Columbia and Ontario. I do so because they are the 

two provinces which the Government of Canada has used to figure out this formula for the distribution 

of the national wealth of Canada under the Dominion-Provincial Taxation Agreement. Last year, 

Saskatchewan was the only province in Canada which lost population. Sometimes we look upon the 

Maritimes as not being too prosperous an area of Canada. I have heard people in the west say, "Well, we 

should be more kind to them under the Provincial-Dominion taxation agreement." 

 

Even they were able to increase their population, but we, and we alone, in poor little old Saskatchewan, 

under the creeping paralysis of Socialism, are the only province in Canada that could not accomplish 

that feat. 

 

There are other things that one could say, and perhaps I should say, about population. Perhaps I should 

tell you what has happened over the period that this Government has been in office in Saskatchewan. 

What has happened? Our population has increased, during the term of office that this Government has 

been in power. (I don't hear anything over there). We had increased from 836,000 people to 879,000 

people in Saskatchewan — an increase of 43,000 people from 1944 to 1958. 43,000 people is just about 

the number of immigrants that came into Saskatchewan over that period of time. All right. What 

happened to all the people who were born here; in other words, our natural increase? Where did they go? 

Well, they certainly left Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — They went up in smoke. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — And do you know how many of them left Saskatchewan? From 1944 to 1958 some 

176,000 people! Again, 176,000 people may not mean too much to a lot of people; but that is the 

equivalent of the population of the city of Regina and the city of Saskatoon and two or three other 

communities added in. What would the people of this province say if they were told that over the next 

14 years the city of Regina and the city of Saskatoon and two or three other communities were going to 

pack up their bags and leave Saskatchewan? That's exactly what has happened in the term of office this 

Government has been in power. 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

18 

During the same term of years, the population of the Dominion of Canada has increased by about 4 1/2 

million people. Our share of that increase ought to have been about 325,000 people; but in place of that 

it was 43,000. 

 

Now I want to turn to rather a cute little subject — the pulp mill. You know, we have been going to get a 

pulp mill in Saskatchewan for a long time. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Haven't they got that built yet? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I was going to put a question on the Order Paper, asking when we could expect to 

have a picture of the new pulp mill. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — We're „on the verge', Minty! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — One of the first occasions I can recall on which we were told we were to get a pulp 

mill in Saskatchewan was back in 1946 — 11 years ago. That was when the Premier was speaking to a 

public meeting in the home of the Minister of Highways (Hon. J.T. Douglas) in October of 1947, and he 

said we should be getting a pulp mill pretty soon. Well, in November of 1948, after having spent some 

six weeks in Europe, the Premier announced on his return that some British and Swedish representatives 

were coming to Saskatchewan, in a matter of months, to survey the situation regarding the building of a 

pulp mill in the province. Two weeks later, Mr. Douglas announced that he was leaving by plane for 

New York to discuss with U.S. industrialists the possibility of developing Saskatchewan's pulpwood 

industry. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — That's terrible. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Then in September, 1952, the Provincial Treasurer (Hon. Mr. Fines), while on a 

two-and-one-half month trip to Great Britain and Europe, said Saskatchewan was going to get a British 

pulpwood industry, and on his return he said there was hope that a European business would give the 

province its first pulpwood industry. Apparently nobody paid too much attention to those 

announcements, because they kind of died the day after they were made, and that was the end of that. 

But then we were told, a few months later, that the Anglo-Canadian Pulp and Paper Company, their 

eastern interest, were going to build a pulp mill in Saskatchewan. As a matter of fact, the Premier said 

that this company would invest $30 million in a pulp mill in Saskatchewan. Well, they haven't spent a 

dollar, and we still haven't got a pulp mill. The Anglo-Canadian Pulp and Paper Company flew the coop. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Like our population. 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

19 

Mr. McDonald: — Of course they were an eastern Interest. They couldn't interest them, apparently, in 

our pulp so they moved from the east to the west. They went out to Vancouver, and a gentleman by the 

name of R.G. Campbell (I believe his initials were) was going to set up a pulp industry in Saskatchewan 

— Waskesiu Forest Products Limited, and on May 31, 1956 — remember May 31, 1956; it was almost 

close to June 20th, wasn't it; something very important was happening on June 20th, there was a 

provincial election. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Yeah! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — So on May 31, 1956, the Premier realized that he and his seat-mate, then the 

seat-mate one removed (the Minister of Mineral Resources) had made so many announcements about 

pulp mills that it didn't matter what they said; nobody was paying any attention to them anyway. So he 

got Mr. Campbell to issue a joint statement, just a few short weeks before the provincial election, 

announcing that a pulp mill was going to be built in the Prince Albert area. Now, what was the 

announcement? This was a dilly. I want to quote to you, Mr. Speaker, and to read into the records of this 

Legislature just what a pulp mill would do for Saskatchewan. Here is an account from the Saskatoon 

'Star-Phoenix' of May 31, 1956, of the joint statement of the Premier and Mr. Campbell. It reads as 

follows: 

 

"Construction of a pulp and paper mill costing between $50 million and $60 million will be 

undertaken on a site near Prince Albert, it was officially announced today." 

 

"The agreement for the project, largest single industrial undertaking ever planned in Saskatchewan, 

was signed this week in Regina. An announcement of the scheme was made jointly by Premier T.C. 

Douglas and Robert G. Campbell, of Vancouver, one of the principles of the company involved. 

 

"The pulp and paper mill, likely to be a forerunner of similar other projects in Saskatchewan's vast 

northland, has been estimated can support, in perpetuity, four pulp mills, but this will be the first in the 

province. Construction of the pulp mill may possibly get under way this fall, should the company have 

completed its financing before that time. 

 

"The mill and its logging operations will give direct employment to some 3,000 persons.” 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

20 

There are over 2,000 unemployed in Prince Albert today — too bad we didn't get the mill into 

production. 

 

“. . . and will have a payroll of approximately $9 million annually." 

 

They had it all figured out: how many people the mill would employ, and what the payroll was going to 

be. 

 

“. . . and it will create indirectly, employment for some 5,000 persons, and the expectation is that the 

pulp mill operation will eventually double the population of Prince Albert." 

 

What an announcement! This was on May 31, 1956. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Now they're going to build! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — It was officially announced that an agreement had been signed, so all we had to do 

was to get the cement and the lumber and we were in business. But what happened? We'll read you 

some more: 

 

"The start of construction is scheduled for the 1st of June, 1957, but Mr. Campbell said there was a 

possibility that the start might be made this fall. Once construction gets under way, the work will be 

pushed night and day to reach the earliest possible production date, possibly in 1958." 

 

"The Saskatchewan Power Corporation indicates that power requirements of the pulp mill could bring 

into early economical development of a hydro-generation of 140,000 kilowatts at Fort a la Corne." 

 

Why, this pulp mill has developed to the stage where we had to build a dam to generate power for the 

pulp mill! And this power project was begun some years ago and abandoned; we didn‟t even get started 

this time. 

 

"The company's program also envisaged the construction of a chlorine plant in Saskatchewan. 

Chlorine is important as a bleaching agent in the pulp operations. A chlorine plant should, or could 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

21 

make use of common salt from the Unit area or from the potash development near Saskatoon, where 

the salt is recovered along with the potash. 

 

"Main plants and auxiliary buildings of the mill will be situated on a square mile of land adjacent to 

Prince Albert. A stock pile of timber of approximately 220,000 cords will be maintained at the plant 

site." 

 

How many cords have you got stacked there, today? Now, as if that wasn't enough, the Premier went on 

the radio and made a radio address, and oh! There are some figures here that are staggering. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Read them. Read them! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I don't think I should take the time of the House to read that. What has happened to 

the pulp mill that Mr. Campbell and his associates were going to build? I understand that Mr. Campbell 

now has flown the coop, and now I understand we are trying to got some people from Los Angeles to 

build the pulp mill. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — They're going south! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — We've been to the east, we've been to the west, we're now down south. Where are 

you going next? Is there somebody up at the North Pole that would help us build a pulp mill? I would 

venture to make a wager with any member of this Government, if I my be allowed to do so, that during 

their term of office, unless they pledge the resources of this province and the wealth of this province to 

construct a pulp mill, it will never be built as long as you jokers are sitting over there. 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): — Wishful thinking? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — And is it any wonder? Is it any wonder when you think of the treatment that people 

who had money to invest in industry, pulp mills, and the like, have received from this Government? Mr. 

Speaker, if you were a great industrialist and had huge sums of money, and were looking for some place 

to invest it, and you were looking at our province, and while you were looking at it, you happened to 

hear one of the Premier's addresses when he called you a 'huckster' or a 'quick-buck artist' or a 

'capitalist', would you be very much interested in coming to Saskatchewan? 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

22 

At a nominating speech to a C.C.F. convention here in the city of Regina, the Premier referred to these 

people, these terrible capitalists, as 'hucksters' and 'quick-buck artists'. Then we want them to come and 

invest their money in our province. I ask you why, even yesterday the member for Touchwood (Mr. 

Meakes), when he was addressing this Legislature, referred to these capitalists, these terrible people. Mr. 

Speaker, there are only two ways of getting development. Either the government can do it through 

Crown Corporations (which God forbid), or capital must come into this province from other parts of 

Canada and other parts of the world, and develop our natural resources for us, and we're going to call 

them a bunch of hucksters and quick-buck artists and capitalistic robbers and thieves. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Shysters, too. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — How on earth can you expect them to come into Saskatchewan? That is the main 

reason we have this stagnation. 

 

What about the agreement that was signed between Mr. Campbell and the Provincial Government? 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — It never existed. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — During the provincial election, I challenged the Premier to produce this agreement. 

My friends in the Social Credit Party challenged the Premier to produce the agreement. Do you know 

what his answer was? He said that "if that Social Creditor Bennett, out in British Columbia will tell us 

all about the Sommers' case, I'll tell you all about the pulp mill." 

 

Mr. Loptson: — That must be the same kind of a deal! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Who knows! We may know quite a bit about Mr. Sommers before long, but I doubt 

if we'll ever know too much about this proposed pulp mill, because last session the agreement was 

tabled here in the Legislature at ay own request. What was it? It wasn't an agreement to build a pulp 

mill. It was an option on some timber lands in Saskatchewan. There is an awful difference, you know, 

between an option on some property to get the raw materials that would be needed in the industry and in 

building the pulp mill itself. As I say, I doubt very much if we are going to get the development of the 

major industries in Saskatchewan until such time as we change our attitude towards people, companies 

and corporations which have the necessary finance, the necessary knowledge and managerial ability. We 

have got to change our attitude towards those people before we are even going to catch up to our 

neighbouring provinces, let alone keep pace with them. That is one of the reasons we are suffering here 

in Saskatchewan today. 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

23 

I would like to conclude my remarks with a few words on unemployment. I was very interested in the 

remarks of the member for Moose Jaw yesterday with regard to unemployment. I was pleased to note in 

the Speech from the Throne that the Government was prepared to carry on those work projects that were 

started, last fall, during the winter months, in an effort to keep as many people employed as possible. I 

was also pleased to note that they were going to buy some of the materials, this winter, that they 

anticipated they would need for the coming construction season. I was also pleased to note that the 

Provincial Government was prepared to co-operate with the Government of Canada in endeavouring to 

do what they could as far as unemployment is concerned. What have they been doing in Saskatchewan? 

The Government of Canada suggested they build some roads in the north. I am not opposed to building 

roads in the north. In fact I have advocated it for years. That's no answer to the unemployment problem 

here in Saskatchewan, however. Sure, we have a few people who would be prepared to go into northern 

Saskatchewan for employment, but I don't think there are many people will go from Regina, Moose Jaw, 

Saskatoon, or any other larger centre in Saskatchewan. We need action here in the province of 

Saskatchewan — provincial government action. 

 

As I mentioned yesterday, what have the planners been doing that you have not got this new women's 

gaol under construction? Have you decided you don't need it? If you don't need it, tell us. We'll tell you 

something else you need: get your planners working on that for a year or two. 

 

What happened about this technical institute? I think what scuttled the institute was the quarrel among 

the members opposite as to whose city it was going to be built in. Let's make up our minds what city it is 

going to be built in, and build it, now — not sometime when we have full employment, but now when it 

is needed to give employment in this province. 

 

What about the power building I mentioned? Are you going to build that? Well, I don't know. A little 

robin told me that the Power Corporation was in trouble financially. Could that be why you're not 

building it? 

 

Premier Douglas: — Did that robin come from the 'Leader-Post' editorial office? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Why are you not building it? I had no robin from the 'Leader Post'. Maybe you 

have; I wouldn't doubt it a bit, but I haven't. Why haven't you got this building under construction at this 

very moment? What about the bridge over the North Saskatchewan River, whether it be at Petrofka or at 

Prince Albert? You know, you are endeavouring to convince the people of both areas that they are going 

to get the bridge before the other one. 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

24 

Prince Albert people are told: "You'll be first", and the Petrofka peoples are told, "No, you will be first." 

But then the member for Prince Albert (Hon. Mr. McIntosh) let the cat out of the bag when he told 

Prince Albert that they would be first, in public. 

 

What about your negotiations with the Los Angeles firm for a pulp mill? Let's close the negotiations; 

let's get under way and let's build a mill — not only one mill. I agree with the statement of Ministers of 

the Crown of this Government that there is, probably room and enough forest land in northern 

Saskatchewan to support three or four mills in perpetuity. Let's get on with the job so that the people of 

this province who are unemployed today can at least look forward to full employment in the future. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by my desk-mate. Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek): 

 

That the following words be added to the Address: — 

 

"We respectfully submit that in the opinion of the Assembly, Your Honour's advisers have failed to 

implement a comprehensive agricultural program for Saskatchewan, or an aggressive plan of 

Industrial Development which would provide full employment." 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

25 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier): — Mr, Speaker, may I begin by joining with the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. McDonald) in extending a word of welcome to the University students who are here 

from Saskatoon. We are delighted to have you here, and the members of the Legislature are pleased to 

play host to you each year on this occasion. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition regretted that you have been asked to listen to him and to me; but that is 

one of the prices you pay for coming down here and exposing yourselves to that sort of treatment. As a 

matter of fact, this is a sort of meal you are having today. First of all you had the appetizer, which is 

usually somewhat sour, in order to stimulate your appetite. Down in the dining room you will get the 

entrée, and that will be followed by your dessert — sweet and very pleasant to the taste. 

 

I would also like to take this opportunity, personally, in extending a word of welcome to the students 

from the Western Christian College, which is located at Weyburn. They have been visiting here, today, 

and I would like to say to them how delighted we are to have them. I want to extend to them on behalf of 

the members of the House, our pleasure in having them attend the Session. 

 

I would like, too, Sir, to extend my congratulations to the mover, the member for Moose Jaw (Mr. 

Davies), and the seconder, the member for Touchwood (Mr. Meakes), on the able manner in which they 

opened this debate yesterday, in moving and seconding the Address in Reply to the Speech from the 

Throne. I think both of them did themselves, and the constituencies they represent, proud in the fine 

presentations they made to the Legislature. I personally want to congratulate both of them and the 

people who sent them here. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition I must also congratulate on the very forceful manner in which he delivered 

his speech and say to him that I always enjoy listening to him. I managed to restrain my natural tendency 

to butt in when he said something I think is not quite according to the fact. But I enjoyed his speech very 

much. 

 

I was interested in noting that when he started he described the Speech from the Throne as a very barren 

document, and talked about the fact that it was not even a skeleton. That sent me back to reading the 

various Speeches that have been delivered in this House by various Lieutenant-Governors. If my friends 

really want to sae some barren skeletons, they ought to go back and read the Speeches that ware read in 

this House during the Liberal administration. 

 

Yesterday, the Leader of the Opposition said that the Speech from the Throne, this year, sounded like a 

series of news reports. There was certainly no news in any of the Speeches from the Throne from 1934 

to 1944, Mr. Speaker. There was no news to announce; 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

26 

no announcements to make; nothing very much to say. Take the one, for instance — 1939. You can pick 

any of the. This one opened with a paragraph on Her Majesty the Queen visiting Canada. One was on 

the prospects of the crop. Another paragraph said how small the crop was, and commented on its poor 

quality. Another commented on the Trade Agreement and another one talked about a trade agreement 

between Canada and the United States. Another paragraph talked about an industrial development board; 

another one talked about conditions prevailing in the northern areas. One advocated standardization of 

types of contract, and the next paragraph talked about the Federal Parliament having passed the 

Municipal Improvements Assistance Act . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. I thought that when an amendment had 

been moved to a motion, discussion should be confined to the amendment until it has been disposed of. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on the point of order, the hon. member ought to know that on a 

Speech-from-the-Throne debate or on a Budget debate the motion and the amendment can be discussed 

together. If my hon. friend doesn't want to have that done, we'll take the vote on the amendment now, if 

my hon. friend wants that. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — If you declare you are doing that . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — That's right. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That is the procedure we have been following. It's quite all right. 

 

Premier Douglas: — The next paragraph went on to talk about the work which had been done by the 

Co-op Creameries. One talked about northern Saskatchewan. The long period of depression was 

mentioned; another commented on the fact that Chief Justice Martin was being appointed to a committee 

to look into school administration. The next talked about what the Federal Government had done in 

setting up a youth training program. The last talked about bringing in an Act for co-operative 

association. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — This was the Speech from the Throne! 

 

Premier Douglas: — And these are the gentlemen . . . 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — What year? 

 

Premier Douglas: — The year 1939. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — What was the budget then? 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

27 

Premier Douglas: — We are not talking about the budget. We are talking about a 'barren' Speech from 

the Throne. These are the gentlemen who come in and talk about a 'skeleton' of a Speech from the 

Throne. I want to say that, if the gentlemen opposite in any one single year, could have come in and 

announced any one of the projects which this Government has completed during the past year, they 

would have had streamer headlines, and the entire Speech from the Throne would have been devoted to 

it. If they, in any one year, had been able to complete the power program which was completed in 

Saskatchewan last year, or the great gas services that were set up in various parts of the province; if 

they, in any one year had been able to complete the Trans-Canada Highway and a microwave system 

across the province of Saskatchewan; if they, in any one year, had been able to announce the progress 

being made in production of oil, in the development of the potash industry, in the production of uranium 

or in the new industries that have come into the province, about which I shall have more to say in a little 

while; if they had been able to announce any one of these things, they would have thought they had a 

very good Speech from the Throne. But you can go through their Speeches from the Throne from 1934 

to 1944 and you will not find a single one in which there was one announcement that was on a par, in 

terms of importance to the economy of the province, with any one of the statements which I have just 

made. The Leader of the Official Opposition has been on his favourite theme of the 'creeping paralysis' 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — . . . “The creeping paralysis of socialism." They love to roll this phrase off their 

tongues. Well, Mr. Speaker, that might fool some people who have only been here the last few years. 

My hon. friends have tried this same tactic in the elections of 1948, 1952, 1956. In the election less than 

two years ago, the Leader of the Official Opposition went to the people of the province and said "I'm 

ready to assume the office of leading a Government in this province. I'm here to save you from the ruins 

that are bound to fall as a result of the creeping paralysis of Socialism." 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Steady, Tommy. 

 

Premier Douglas: — But, there weren't any takers, Mr. Speaker. There weren't any takers of this 

magnanimous offer of my hon. friend to sacrifice himself upon the altar of public service. Why? It is not 

because of my hon. friend, but because the people of this province have good memories. They remember 

a creeping paralysis that didn't come from Socialism. They remember a creeping paralysis that came 

from inertia and incompetence and a lack of aggressive action on the part of the Liberal party during the 

thirty-four 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

28 

years they were in office in Saskatchewan. The people of this province have not forgotten that from 

1931 to 1944, there wasn't a loss of a few thousand. There was total loss in terms of the people who left 

this province, plus the natural increase we lost — a total loss to this province of 250,000 people. You 

forget that in 1936, the year after the y had taken office, the population of Saskatchewan was given at 

986,000. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Get up-to-date. 

 

Premier Douglas: — 986,000. By the time we took office, this had shrunk down to 821,000. When you 

add that loss to the loss through natural increase, we lost a quarter of a million people . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Where are we today? 

 

Premier Douglas: — . . . under the Liberal administration. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — You're following the same pattern. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Now, the Leader of the Official Opposition says, of course, he regrets that there 

hasn't been more development in Saskatchewan. Certainly, he and his party will do everything they 

could to help. No doubt of that, Mr. Speaker. We had a good example — talking about the cement 

industry in Saskatchewan. To help the cement industry sell its shares and get people to put their capital 

into developing an industry in Saskatchewan, the Federal Minister of Agriculture in Ottawa makes a 

public statement that the clay around Regina would never be any good for cement. This is the way to get 

industries in Saskatchewan! 

 

Mr. Gardiner (Melville): — That sure scared them. 

 

Premier Douglas: — This afternoon, the Leader of the Official Opposition heard a 'little robin'. Yes, 

he's got birds in' the belfry, too. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — That's better than bats. 

 

Premier Douglas: — He heard a little robin tell him that the Power Corporation is in financial 

difficulties. Mr. Speaker, this is the way to help development. This is the way to make it possible for a 

public utility to go out and raise money to develop power and to develop gas, by having the Leader of 

the Opposition, a responsible official, stand up in the House and say that he has heard that the Power 

Corporation is in financial difficulties. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Is it true? 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

29 

Premier Douglas: — This is the way the gentlemen opposite are anxious to help extend and expand 

industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Table the report. 

 

Premier Douglas: — The Saskatchewan Power Corporation is in no financial difficulty. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Good! Good! 

 

Premier Douglas: — But the remark made by the hon. gentleman, this afternoon, proves what I've said 

from this place again and again, namely, that if the Liberal party cannot run and control this province in 

the clutch of their political machine, then they will do the next best thing; they will try to destroy it, and 

leave it a barren waste, if they cannot dominate it. It is for that reason that the people of this 

Saskatchewan, on four occasion, have refused to hand the Government of Saskatchewan back to them, 

because they know, perfectly well, the Liberal party has never had any interest in the welfare either of 

this province or of its people, but only in the welfare of the political party, the liberal party, and the 

hacks who make it up. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — We've never paid out to our friends anything like you have, anyway. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Now, the Leader of the Official Opposition made some (I thought) startling 

statements yesterday, as well as today. One of the statements he made was, "Since when did hospitals 

become the responsibility of the municipality?" He said today, "Why, my friend should read the B.N.A. 

Act." Well, I wonder when he read it last and where he found anything in the B.N.A. Act about 

municipalities. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — There isn't anything in it. You created them. 

 

Premier Douglas: — The provinces under the British North America Act had certain responsibilities. 

Health, education and welfare, roads, etc., are amongst those responsibilities. This Legislature has 

created municipalities, so that people living in certain communities can organize themselves, can tax 

themselves, in order to provide certain services, schools hospitals, roads and other services. The 

Provincial Government has the responsibility of assisting them insofar as it can. 

 

When my friend asks, "Since when did the hospitals become the responsibility of the municipality?" I 

want to say that hospitals have always been the responsibility of the municipality. 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

30 

Until the C.C.F. Government came in, they had the sole responsibility for all construction costs, and that 

there was never a construction grant paid to local hospitals until 1945 when the C.C.F. in Saskatchewan, 

the first province in Canada, began to pay hospital construction grants. That was followed in 1946 by 

Federal legislation under which the Federal Government then began to pay matching grants for hospital 

construction. Until this Government came in, the municipalities had all the responsibility of hospitals. 

As a matter of fact, as far as the operation of hospitals was concerned, all any government (prior to this 

Government coming into office) ever paid was fifty cents per patient-day toward the operation of the 

hospital. If the hospital had a deficit, that deficit had to be met by the local municipality. I lived in a 

municipality which year after year with monotonous regularity, had to meet a deficit from the hospital. 

The same was true in Regina, Saskatoon, and for other hospitals. It was not until this Government set up 

a hospital plan in January 1, 1947, which in the main has taken care of hospital deficits, that hospitals 

have been able to operate on a sounder financial basis. 

 

One subject my friends should never raise is the question of hospitals. There have been three times as 

many Union Hospital Districts set up since this Government took office than were set up in the entire 

thirty-nine years before we took office. There were only 26 union hospital districts in Saskatchewan 

when we took office, and today there are considerably over 100. The number of hospital beds in this 

province has been doubled. That is the result of the financial assistance which has been provided and by 

the fact that under the Hospital Services Plan, there is not the same danger of large operating deficits. 

 

The Leader of the Official Opposition yesterday, made some reference to education. Again, the Liberal 

party, as it is proving in other political fields, is much more generous in opposition than it ever is when it 

is in office. They left office in 1944, and what a legacy they passed on! They left behind them 

dilapidated buildings. They left behind them thousands of teacher's notes — unpaid. One of the first 

tasks of this Government was, not only to pay off millions of dollars of relief and seed grain debts, some 

of which we are still paying to Ottawa, which these gentlemen left on our doorstep, but also to start 

paying off notes which had been given to teachers in the thirties for their salaries when their salaries 

could not be paid. There may have been some excuse in the thirties, but there was no excuse in 1944 for 

allowing thousands of dollars of these notes to be still unpaid. 

 

Mr. Korchinski (Redberry): — Would you permit a question? 

 

Premier Douglas: — Yes, Surely. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — When was the last note paid to any teacher in 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

31 

this province? What year? 

 

Premier Douglas: — I could not tell my hon. friend. He could ask the Minister of Education (Hon. Mr. 

Lloyd) that; but I know we paid off thousands of dollars of these notes after we took office. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — You never paid any. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — When was the first one paid? 

 

Premier Douglas: — I am not interested in when the first one was paid. I am interested in the fact that 

this Government had to pay off thousands of dollars of these notes. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You never paid any. 

 

Premier Douglas: — My hon. friend says we never paid any. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — No, it came out of the education fund that was set up by a Liberal government. You 

didn't pay any. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes, that's what it was set up for. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Premier Douglas: — Here is the oracle of Delphi, who has finally opened his mouth and out has come 

the wind! Now, I'll tell my friend. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I told you. 

 

Premier Douglas: — He said we didn't pay it — it came out of the education fund . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Set up by a Liberal government. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — They were mostly all paid before you got in. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Now if the hon. gentlemen will just keep quiet . . . 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — They were all paid before you got in. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The notes were all paid up to 1944. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Here is a good demonstration of my friends' love of democracy. I sat and listened, 

this afternoon, to more misstatements of fact per minute than . . . 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

32 

Mr. McDonald: — You didn't listen to any. Mr, Speaker, on a point of privilege, the Premier has said 

that he listened to more misrepresentations . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Misstatements of fact. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — . . . misstatements of fact. Neither the Premier nor any other individual in or outside 

this House can contradict any statement, with any substantial figures, that I made here this afternoon. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, that is precisely what I propose to do is prove these misstatements of 

fact . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You can't; it will be just like your story on the pulp mill. 

 

Premier Douglas: — . . . but I want to point out that the hon. gentlemen opposite — while I listened to 

the speech of the hon. Leader of the Official Opposition — are now proposing to do their very best to 

prevent me from doing exactly what I propose to do. I don't mind interruptions and I am not going to be 

intimidated by them. The Leader of the Official Opposition says we didn't pay off these teachers' notes 

because they were paid out of the education fund. Mr. Speaker, the education fund was there from 1933 

to 1944. Why on earth didn't the Liberal party pay off those notes? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — They did. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — They were all paid by 1944. 

 

Premier Douglas: — There were thousands of dollars of these notes that had to be paid off when this 

Government came into office. I asked the Leader of the Official Opposition yesterday, when he talked 

about what a small part of the education cost the Provincial Government was paying, to substantiate his 

statement, and I was surprised when he came in and quoted, today, the figures for 1953-54. Now it is not 

difficult for him to get later figures than 1953-54. He knows the amount that was provided for in the 

estimates, last year. It is not hard to find out what the school boards had levied for, and then take the 

total amount and see what the percentage is — the one or the other. But he follows his statement in order 

to buttress his rather weak argument by quoting the figures for 1953-54, and he said: "I imagine the 

percentage has stayed pretty well the same." Well, of course the percentage hasn't stayed pretty well the 

same! 

 

I have here the December 1957 issue of the 'School Trustee' and there is an article in it on "Financing 

Education" by 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

33 

Mr. A.B. Douglas who, I believe, is vice-president of the School Trustees' Association. He has placed 

the table on the record. Here is an interesting fact. In 1945, the cost of education in the province was $14 

1/2 million. Provincial grants were $3 million. The provincial contribution was, therefore, 21 per cent. 

The average cost of education per pupil was $83. By 1953-54, (the year my hon. friend quoted), the cost 

of education was $33 million. Provincial grants were $7 1/2 million. The percentage was 23 per cent and 

the average cost per pupil had gone up from $83 to $200. My hon. friend knows that in each succeeding 

year since that time we have stepped up our contribution. In that year, 1953-54, it was $7 1/2 million but 

the next year it went up to $10 1/2 million; then $11 1/2, million; then $13 million, and then $16 million. 

Last year the total cost of education in the province was $49 million. Provincial grants in the estimates 

were $16 million. As a matter of fact, when the Supplementaries come in, it will be higher than that. But 

even taking the figures in the estimates, the percentage of the provincial contribution is 33 per cent — 

not the 23 per cent my friend talks about, in 1953-54. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege again. I have never used the figure 23 per cent. 

The last figure I gave was 30.5 per cent, which was for the year 1954-55. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Well, of course, the figure now, I am pointing out to my hon. friend, on this table, 

is 33 per cent. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — For what year? 

 

Premier Douglas: — For 1957. It is 33 per cent on the basis of the grants provided for in the estimates. 

When the supplementaries are added to those grants, I think the percentage will be 34 or 35 per cent. I 

want to point out . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Could I ask you this question? What are you quoting from? 

 

Premier Douglas: — I'm quoting from the table contained in the December issue of the 'School 

Trustee'. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Just to make one point clear. I don't want to interrupt . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — No. No. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I don't like to do that. But speaking on this point, I said that I had used the figures 

from 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

34 

the last Annual Report of the Department of education and the last figures available by the Dominion 

Bureau of Statistics. At least, there are no figures available from D.B.S., or the Department of Education 

later than the figures I have used. It may be in that . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — I'm pointing out that my hon. friend can quite easily obtain the figures by taking 

the total amount which the School Districts are levying for, plus the education grants, to find out the 

total expenditure. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — But those are only estimates. 

 

Premier Douglas: — But I think these facts are accurate. The fact is that from 1940, with a Liberal 

Government in office, when the cost per pupil was $83, and when they were contributing 21 per cent of 

the cost of education, last year we come to the place where the cost per pupil was $268 per pupil, and 

where the Provincial Government's contribution was better than one-third of the total. In other words, 

despite the tremendous increase in cost per pupil, despite the fact that there is a much higher standard of 

educational cost, this Governments as of 1957, was contributing more than one-third of the total cost of 

education, as compared to about one-sixth when a Liberal Government went out of office. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — The total grant last year was more than the total cost of 

education in 1945. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Yes, the Provincial Treasurer just points out that in 1945, the total cost of 

education in the province was $14 1/2 million of which the Provincial Government contributed $3 

million. This past year, the provincial grant alone was over $16 million, so that we contributed in 1957 

to education, in grants, more than the entire amount spent on education back in 1945. 

 

I am not saying that we think this is the end. As we have said in the Speech from the Throne, we propose 

to keep on adding all additional revenue we can secure to increase grants to school districts and to 

municipalities, and we have always hoped that we would move steadily toward the goal of providing, on 

the average, half the total cost of education. I do want to say, Mr. Speaker, that it ill becomes any party 

whose contributions were less than $3 million a year; whose contributions amounted to about one-fifth 

of the total cost of education in the province, to be finding fault with a government which today, in one 

year, is contributing more for grants than was being spent in all the educational services of the entire 

province 12 years ago. 



 

February 18, 1958 

 

 

35 

Mr. Speaker, there are some other things I want to discuss, particularly with reference to what my friend 

has been talking about today, including industrial development and agriculture in Saskatchewan. I think 

I shall leave that until tomorrow. With leave of the House, I would move adjournment of this debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned.) 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 4:50 o'clock p.m. 


