



















































Hansard: March 25, 1958


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

29th Day 

 

Tuesday, March 25, 1958 

 

The House met at 10:00 o'clock a.m. 

on the Orders of the Day: 

 

MOTION RE CAPITAL FUNDS FOR MUNICIPAL WORK PROJECTS 

 

Moved by Mr. Wood (Swift Current) seconded by Mr. Thiessen (Shellbrook): 

 

"That this Assembly, recognizing the pressing need of municipalities for schools, hospitals, roads, 

streets and sewer and water facilities, together with the strained credit resources of municipal and 

provincial government; and 

 

"Recognizing also the immediate need to provide new employment opportunities together with the 

desirability of shifting investment emphasis to socially useful capital works, urges the Federal 

Government to make capital funds available at low rates of interest for municipal work projects, 

specifically by reviving and broadening the Federal Municipal Improvements' Assistance Act of 1938." 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, we are all well aware in our modern way of living of 

the necessity of industrial capital for such things as factories, machinery, office buildings, steamships, 

etc., for the production and the distribution of the goods that we use every day of our lives. I am sure that 

everyone here, today, will also agree with me of the necessity for our social capital, composed of the 

schools, universities, churches, hospitals, public utilities, roads, streets and utilities; that these are also of 

equal, if not of greater importance to us; even though at times perhaps the benefits that we derive from 

them are a little less tangible than what we obtain from the products of our industrial capitalization. 

 

I would like to take a few minutes, this morning, to assess the extent of the need for social capital in 

Saskatchewan and in other provinces of the Dominion, but especially Saskatchewan. 



 

March 25, 1958 

 

2 

 

Let us first look at the position in regard to our schools. The schools throughout Canada are undergoing 

a certain amount of need for new buildings on account of the increase in population. There has, as we all 

know, been a large increase in population across Canada. In Saskatchewan, due to the mechanization of 

our farms and to other economic reasons affecting the farmer there has been a large migration from the 

farms and as a result, over the last 20 years, there has been a lessening of the population in 

Saskatchewan. However, in the last few years, over the period of the last five or six years, there has been 

an increase again, due to the efforts of this Government to establish within the province industrial 

development. That has resulted in an increase in the population of Saskatchewan, although a small one 

in comparison to the increase in other parts of the Dominion. 

 

But, I want to point out, this morning, that our need for schools in Saskatchewan is not so much because 

of the increase in population, but because of the movement of that population. In the last decade and a 

half there has been a tremendous movement of the population in Saskatchewan and this is more 

especially noted in regard to the school enrolment. In 1932-33, the total school enrolment in the province 

of Saskatchewan was 225,000. In 1949-50 this had dropped to 157,450. It was up again, in 1956-57 to 

181,442. That is the total enrolment, but I think that the division of this enrolment is very interesting and 

enlightening. In 1932 the total rural enrolment was 131,349, which in 1949, had dropped to 75,599, and 

in 1956-57 had continued to drop until it was very little more than 56,000. It dropped from 131,000 to 

75,000 to 56,000 — that is the rural schools. In the villages, in 1932, we had 37,000; this dropped, in 

1950, to 34,000, but was up again in 1956 to 40,000. The towns, in 1932 and 1949, showed hardly any 

change; they remained pretty well at 20,000; but in 1956-57, they went up to 33,000. The cities — in 

1932 there were 36,000, which dropped in 1949-50 to 26,000; but in 1956 it was increased to over 

51,000. 

 

You will notice that in the country schools there has been a continuous drop, and a large drop, in the 

enrolment; but in villages and town there has been an increase; and in the case of the cities and the 

villages it has been a huge increase. This has had a definite bearing upon the costs of the need for 

construction of schools in Saskatchewan. Because pupils leave a farm community and that school 

becomes more or less vacant that does not in any way increase the room for those same pupils when they 

move to the city. The fact that there are empty schools in the country doesn't help the situation insofar as 

school buildings in the cities are concerned. Added to this, in many cases we have had to expend money 

on buses to move pupils — those few who are left in the rural communities — to the urban centres in 

order 



 

March 25, 1958 

 

3 

 

that they may receive their education. This is quite noticeable; in 1954, we had 8,726 pupils conveyed by 

school buses, while in 1955 this figure rose to 12,724 — just about exactly 4,000 more or one-third more 

in the matter of one year. 

 

In the overall picture of school buildings in Saskatchewan we have not too great an amount to complain 

about. I think that our school plant, if I may call it that, is comparatively adequate. We have caught up, to 

a great extent, with the backlog of new building that was built up during the 'thirties', but if satisfactory 

finances were made available it is possible at this time that we could increase, in our school buildings, 

the auditorium facilities, the number of technical laboratories, gyms and staff rooms, etc, These things 

are quite necessary, but, because of our lack of finance they, have been left out in a good many cases 

where there have been school building programs. Last year, the cost of schools in Saskatchewan, that is, 

schools and teacherages — there were 407 classrooms added, plus some facilities for laboratory work, 

libraries, auditoriums, etc., and 59 teacherages was at an approximate cost of $9,300,000, but we all 

know of the effect, over the years, that this building of schools coupled with other current expenses in 

regard to our schools, on our tax mill rate. That I will go into in more detail later on this morning. 

 

The next thing I would like to draw your attention to is the matter of hospitals. In a book that has just 

been put out, called 'Housing and Social Capital'; under the auspices of the Royal Commission on 

Canada's Economic Prospects, we are shown very clearly the conditions, today, of the available hospital 

space in regard to active treatment beds in Canada. In Quebec, there are 4.7 per 1,000 population; in 

Newfoundland, 4.1 per 1,000; in Prince Edward Island, 5.9 per 1,000; in Nova Scotia, 4.8; in New 

Brunswick, 4.3; Ontario, 5; Manitoba, 5.5; Alberta, 6.5; British Columbia, 5.4; while in Saskatchewan 

there are 7 active hospital treatment beds per 1,000 population, which puts Saskatchewan well in the 

lead in the Federal overall picture in the amount of hospital bed space that we have available. Over the 

past years, between December 31, 1949, and December 31, 1954, this has cost the province some $21 

million, of which the province paid $12.l million and the Federal Government paid $2.1 million and the 

hospital districts $7.2 million. We are proud of what we have achieved here in Saskatchewan in that 

way; but in looking at the need of social capital in Saskatchewan, this morning, we must realize that we 

cannot rest on our laurels in regard to what we have been able to do in the hospitalization and hospital 

building program. If we are to keep our province at a high standard of service to the people we must be 

prepared to continue to spend the amounts of money that we have done over the past few years in order 

to achieve what we have along this line. We know of different places in the province, today, where there 

is a necessity for 



 

March 25, 1958 

 

4 

 

rebuilding the present hospitals that we have, and, at today's prices this is going to run up into a good 

many millions of dollars. 

 

We might look for a few minutes at our roads and streets. Throughout Canada and the United States this 

is one of the big problems which has been brought about over the last half century by the mechanization 

of transportation; and the factors which have caused the pressure on the public purse for the building of 

roads and streets is being increased by the increase in population throughout Canada and the United 

States. This increase in population is augmented by the increase in cars, or motor vehicles, that we have 

per 1,000 of the population throughout Canada and the United States. 

 

In Canada as a whole — to put it another way — in 1930 there were 8.3 people per motor vehicle; in 

1939 there were 7.8 people per motor vehicle; and in 1952 there were 4.2 (I don't know where you get 

that fraction of a person sitting in a car; I think possibly he is behind the wheel); so that actually there are 

twice as many vehicles per 1,000 population in Canada, today, than there were in 1930. In Saskatchewan 

itself, the ratio has dropped from 5.1, in 1948 to 3.3 in 1953; so added to the increase in population we 

have the increase in the number of cars in relation to the population; and besides this is a hard thing to 

assess, but in Ontario they have made some study on it and, in 1931, it was estimated that the average 

motor vehicle travelled 6,600 miles, while, in 1954, it was estimated to be 8,600 miles; so we have a 

large increase, as well, in the number of miles travelled per motor vehicle. 

 

So throughout the North American continent we have an increased problem, today, in the matter of roads 

and streets; and I think this problem should be assessed in the amount that poor roads or inadequate 

roads cost the travelling public. There has been a study along this line made a few years ago in the state 

of Iowa, in the United States, and they came to the conclusion that it costs 8 cents per mile to drive a 

passenger car on an earth road; it costs 5 cents per mile on a gravelled road; and 3 cents per mile on a 

paved road. You can see what it is costing the public to drive on earth roads, rather than on a better type 

of road; and I think that when they were making up this tabulation in the States they weren't taking into 

consideration the snowdrifts that, in the average winter, we have to buck here out on the country roads of 

Saskatchewan. If you add that to the cost of driving on a dirt road in the States, I think you would find 

that the cost of driving on our country roads is indeed an expensive proposition, as a good many of us 

here know very well indeed. 

 

This problem concerning roads that we have in other parts of the country is intensified in Saskatchewan, 

as we all know, because of our traditionally small population and industrial development in comparison 

to other parts of the country. This places a 



 

March 25, 1958 

 

5 

 

burden of road mileage per taxpayer in Saskatchewan which is unique in the Dominion of Canada, in 

spite of what this Government has been able to achieve along the line of bringing industry to the 

province. Here again we find practically the came effect of urbanization that we had, as I mentioned a 

few minutes ago, in regard to schools. The fact that thousands of people are leaving the country and 

moving to the city increases the pressure upon the city taxpayers budget for the need of streets in the 

cities, while at the same time it does practically nothing to eliminate the need for roads in the country. 

You need practically the same amount of roads in the country to serve the population as what you had 

years ago when you had a good many more people living in the community. 

 

I would like now to look at the situation in Canada and in Saskatchewan in particular with regard to the 

sewage and water utilities. On the farms we find a good sewage and water system to be a very good and 

useful thing, but the necessity for water and sewage installation is much increased when you leave the 

farm and go into urban centres. When the people begin to congregate in the urban centres, the need and 

desirability, not only the desirability but also the actual need, for proper facilities along this line becomes 

a great deal more urgent. We have a sanitation problem there and also the matter of keeping 

contamination from our water supply. Added to this there is the necessitation for a good supply of water 

for fire fighting purposes in the urban centres. There is a little by-product there of the desirability of 

water services in that these would cut down the insurance rates in the towns where they have a 

satisfactory fire fighting establishment. 

 

In our cities we find that the movement of the people to the larger centres is having an effect, today, in 

the pressure put upon the taxpayers pocketbooks for the provision of these utilities in the outlying 

portions of the cities, where they are beginning to expand. We all know that tax rates are going up 

because of the necessity of providing these facilities in those portions of the cities. But what I would like 

to draw your attention to mostly, this morning, is the situation as it is in the smaller urban centres of 

Saskatchewan. It is there, it seems to me, that we have a much more striking need in regard to these 

things. In this same book, 'Housing and Social Capital', they point out that, in Saskatchewan, there are 45 

waterworks and sewage systems serving some 260,000 people, or 31.2 per cent of the population. 

 

In another provincial survey I found that, in 1954, in towns of over 800 population there were 35 towns 

with water and sewage facilities; there were 10 with one of these services, but not both, and 14 with 

none. There are between 30 and 40 communities with a 



 

March 25, 1958 

 

6 

 

population of between 400 and 800 with no organized services. I think that is a matter that we have to 

give considerable attention to. I must be fair, at the outset, in admitting that at least a good portion of the 

trouble does not lie entirely with the lack of finance; there is that matter of the lack of water supply, 

especially perhaps in the southwest and the southern part of the province where have a very limited 

supply of water in many cases. I think it is a matter that should be taken up jointly by the Municipal, 

Provincial and Federal governments, that a survey of some kind should be made to establish the present 

facilities and see what can be done to increase the facilities of water supply in our province, for the use 

of these smaller urban centres. 

 

I would like, now, to take a look at the underlying financial position of our province that we have to look 

at in connection with this need for social capital here. It has often been stated by people who are looking 

at this problem of facilities for municipalities and provinces and so on, that it is not fair to any present 

generation to endeavour to pay over a short period of time for those things which will serve the 

community for a great deal longer period of time. But in Saskatchewan, today, we find that there are real 

difficulties in the way of any community attempting to finance these utilities out of other than current 

revenue. In the first place, when they attempt to sell their debentures they find that the main markets for 

debentures are not in Saskatchewan; we have rather poor facilities in Saskatchewan for the purchasing of 

municipal debentures and these local governments who wish to dispose of their debentures must travel 

to eastern Canada where the markets are. When they arrive down there they find that they are unknown; 

financiers in the East, in Toronto and the big cities there, the smaller places in Ontario and Quebec are 

known to them, but, when you go down there trying, to sell debentures from such places as Gull Lake or 

Cabri or some of these other smaller towns, they never heard of them. And then, too, they never heard of 

these things — but they have good memories and they remember what Saskatchewan was like back in 

the 'thirties' and there is always a fear of a return of those conditions. The end result is that when our 

men go to the east in an endeavour to sell their debentures they are up against, first of all, the real 

difficulty of disposing of them at all, and on those that they are able to dispose of, even at high interest 

rates, they also have to take a discount; so that the end result is that money obtainable for municipal 

improvement in Saskatchewan often comes at a very high and expensive price. The result of this has 

been, over a period of years, the fact that a very large percentage of municipal financing for capital is 

that it is done out of current revenue. From 1951 to 1953, in Saskatchewan, of municipalities other than 

cities, 73.18 per cent of capital expenditure was financed out of revenue. I am not going to criticize this 

too unduly because often times it is a good thing that our communities 



 

March 25, 1958 

 

7 

 

are not going into debt; but there is an actual limit to what the taxpayer is able to do along the line of 

financing the necessary things out of current expenditures. 

 

I do not intend, this morning, to take up your time talking about the cost-price squeeze or the state in 

which agriculture now finds itself, but any fair-minded person, I think, must realize that the position of 

the agricultural economy at the present time has a great deal to do with out ability to raise taxes in 

Saskatchewan, not only in the rural municipalities but also in the urban centres as well. The underlying 

lack of finances by our agricultural communities has a definite effect upon the ability of the 

municipalities of our province to finance these things out of current revenues. 

 

There has been brought to our attention the Statutory Limitations that are imposed upon the borrowing 

capabilities of the municipalities. There are some that say if it wasn't for these limitations imposed by the 

Government that there would be more facilities in our communities. But when you look at the facts you 

find that there are comparatively few municipalities who are actually being restricted because of these 

statutory limitations. In 1954, in cities of 15,000 or over in the province of Saskatchewan, there were 25 

per cent who had borrowed their limit. Of the cities under 15,000 there were none who had borrowed 

their limit. In the towns of 2,000 and under there were — pardon me, 2,000 and over, there were 31 per 

cent had borrowed their limit, but in towns of l,000 to l,999 only 15 per cent had borrowed their limit. In 

towns of 500 to 999, none had borrowed their limit; and in the towns up to 500, 13 per cent had 

borrowed their limit, but in the villages and the rural municipalities, there were none that had borrowed 

their limit. So it would appear to us, this morning, that there must be some other reasons why the 

municipalities have not borrowed this money. It is not because of the statutory limit. 

 

I think, in passing, I might say that I am sure that if the taxing base in the municipalities, was 

strengthened, or if the cost of debenture money was less, it is quite possible that out Government might 

be prepared to take another look at these statutory limits because, after all, they are imposed strictly and 

only for the protection of the municipal governments themselves in a field that is very technical and hard 

for the municipal man to get a grasp of, with all that is involved. And these statutory limitations are 

placed there for the benefit and the protection or the municipalities. 

 

I would like to say, this morning, that I believe our Provincial Government has been very sympathetic 

and has endeavoured to do everything within its power for the alleviation of the situation 



 

March 25, 1958 

 

8 

 

in regard to capital financing of social capital in the province of Saskatchewan. In the first place, our 

Government has made outright grants in many situations for capital construction; for such things as 

schools, hospitals, roads, bridges and homes for the aged. Secondly, after it has encouraged the 

municipalities to sell as many of their debentures as possible at the local level, among their own people, 

the Government of Saskatchewan has done its utmost to purchase all of these debentures which it can, in 

some cases as high as 50 per cent of those who were in the most need, who could show they were the 

most deserving, along these lines. As an example, in 1956, provincial funds purchased 28.1 per cent of 

the school debenture. They purchased 10.7 per cent of town debentures and 25.3 per cent of our hospital 

debentures. I think this is a real step in the right direction by our Province. There are those who would 

say that we should go a great deal further, that we should be in a position to guarantee all the debentures 

of the municipalities; but when you look at the situation in Saskatchewan, where it is necessary for the 

Government to go out and purchase money on the money markets for the expansion of its own capital 

expansion, its own capital program, it is very difficult for them at the same time, to underwrite the 

capital expansion of the lesser governments. In fact there is a definite limit to the capital which can be 

borrowed in the province of Saskatchewan, and after all, a guarantee by the province of the debts of the 

municipalities is a strain and an added impost upon the facilities and the ability to borrow of the 

Provincial Government. 

 

We have looked, this morning, at the need for social capital in the province. We have looked, for a 

while, at the financial situation underlying this need. I would like to look, for a few minutes, into the 

future. 

 

It is very difficult to assess with any degree of accuracy our demands over future years, but by looking 

back a few years and catching the trend of what has pone before we can project that into the future and 

get some idea of what may be the result, This has been done by experts and I feel, this morning, that in 

regard to schools it is safe to assume that the present factors of population increase and increased 

urbanization will continue; and added to these there will be increased demands for education of a highly 

technical nature. Where there are more highly technical skills necessary; you will find that there will be a 

further demand upon facilities for education in our province. 

 

A hospital building program will have to be continued at a high level, to maintain that which we have 

already achieved. 

 

Regarding roads and streets, it is rather difficult to lay down any idea of what may come about in the 

following years, that 



 

March 25, 1958 

 

9 

 

is for any length of time, because we never know what is going to turn up along the line of 

transportation. But I think it is quite safe to say that we will still, for a good number of years, have to 

face the problems that have to do with increased population, an increased number of cars per 1,000 

population, and increased mileage. In this regard the building and maintaining of roads is going to be a 

large factor in our economy for many years to come. 

 

In the field of public utilities we have the present backlog to contend with, coupled with increased 

urbanization, and with the demands for a higher standard of living. I think that the expenditures along 

this line will have to continue at a very high level. 

 

This matter can be summed up briefly, I think, in the survey that was put out by the Saskatchewan 

Government: 'Prospects for Economic Growth in Saskatchewan' in their submission to the Royal 

Commission on Canada's Economic Prospects, and in it they estimate that in the years from 1956 to 

1961 it is expected that the Province will be requiring some $175,500,000 for these expenditures for 

social capital, whereas, during, the same period, the municipalities will require some $148,500,000. Now 

these figures do not mean too much when they are taken by themselves, but when you take the 

municipalities, in which we are primarily interested this morning, over that time it was estimated that 

they would need to spend some $30 million a year and compare this with something less than $25 

million that was spent in the first year of that period, namely 1956, and it shows you quite clearly that in 

order to measure up to the standards that are set out in this book, we will have to increase — not only 

maintain, but increase quite sharply our expenditure on the municipal level to maintain a satisfactory set 

of municipal facilities and other things that we need for the well-being of our people. And in setting up 

this program the people who did it felt that they were being pretty conservative in the figures that they 

used. So I think in the years to come it is quite safe to assume that we are going to have to quite sharply 

increase our expenditures for social capital in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I think at this time it is only right in view of what I have said, this morning, that we should look to the 

Federal Government for assistance in this matter of social capital in the Province. You may easily say 

that that man Wood is just running to the senior government; he is shirking off the responsibility of our 

own provincial government in this regard. But I think that, in looking the questions squarely in the face 

we have to ask ourselves, if it is right and reasonable to expect the Province of Saskatchewan to carry 

this burden, along with what the municipalities are carrying; if it is right and fair that we should continue 

to carry this thing without going to the Federal Government. 



 

March 25, 1958 

 

10 

 

In the first place there is the matter of the distribution of the national tax dollar, which we have often 

heard of before and which I will review for you again this morning. In 1939, the Federal Government 

received 48 cents of the tax dollar; the provinces received 23.3 cents and the municipalities received 

29.7 cents. But in 1956, the Federal Government received 77 cents, the provinces 12 cents and the 

municipalities 11 cents, which is a sharp reduction in the amount of the tax dollar received by the lesser 

governments. Now if you will compare this, at the same time, with the fact, as pointed out by our 

Premier at the Federal-Provincial Conference, of October, 1955, that in the years between 1930 and 1955 

new capital expenditures by the Federal Government increased by slightly over three times, while during 

the same period they increased for the municipalities by over five times, and by the provinces by six 

times; while our share of the tax dollar was dwindling, at the same time our responsibilities in regard to 

capital expenditures were increasing. 

 

Not only has the Province a lack in the actual fiscal finance to supply the needs of the municipalities in 

this regard, but also it lacks the financial power. We have no power here whatsoever over the financing 

of our country, the financial methods that are used, whereas in the Federal field they have direct power 

over the fiscal monetary and economic policies of the country. Just by way of a little illustration you 

might see just how easily it could be done at a Federal level, to direct finances into the purses of these 

same debentures to which we have been referring, by simply placing some sort of selective taxation upon 

investment. The investment could be steered, quite readily, by the fiscal powers of the Federal 

Government which are entirely lacking here in the Province. Then again there is the overall extent of the 

financing from the Federal field. If you compare the need for capital finance in the provinces compared 

to their overall financial resources and compare that same figure of financial need in the provinces with 

the overall financial resources of the Federal field you will find that there is just no comparison. The 

Federal people have a great deal more at their command, and placing this same problem which we have 

discussed this morning to that amount of money, it appears to be a much smaller problem; and I maintain 

that, relatively, the Federal Government has a great deal more money at their command than that of the 

provinces and the municipalities combined. 

 

Finally, in this regard, I would like to say that the Federal Government has made grants and loans to such 

capital projects as Trans-Canada Highway, hospitals, university buildings, housing and pipelines, and I 

can see little reason why they should not make funds available for such socially necessary projects as 

roads, schools and sewer and water development. 

 

Specifically, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest, this 



 

March 25, 1958 

 

11 

 

morning, that the solution to our problems here could be to a great extent solved by the revising, and 

reactivating, of the Federal-Municipal Improvements Assistance Act of 1938. This Act contemplates the 

granting of loans to the municipalities by the Federal Government at low rates of interest, with 

debentures or other securities given as security. This Act was in operation for a short time after it was 

brought out, and during that time Saskatchewan was able to receive some $850,000 from this fund that 

was set up. Since that time the bulk of this money has been repaid and there is none of it that is in 

default. But the limitations of this Act are such that any project that is to be attempted under the program 

has to be self-liquidating; and as defined in the Act this would include such things as sewage and 

waterworks, but not such things as schools or roads; and while this Act would be very useful to us if it 

was reactivated, today, and that self-liquidating clause was still included. I can see no valid reason why 

assistance from the Federal Government should be given to such things as sewer and water — desirable 

as they are — and schools and roads and other social aid desirable things not be included. It is also 

limited in its scope, in that it was primarily enacted as an unemployment relief scheme; and it says in the 

Act that it must be shown that any project attempted under this Act will be useful in relieving the 

unemployment situation. While that, in itself, is a very good thing; and there is no doubt that, today, 

there are many places where municipal projects could be attempted and built, with a lessening of the 

unemployment situation in those communities, it still seems to me that that should not be necessarily a 

limiting factor in the use of this Act. There are many places where we need these things; they are socially 

desirable and we must have them; but I don't think that we should have to wait until such time as the 

unemployment becomes so serious that we must do these things in order to work out a relief scheme for 

them. 

 

Then, again, the figure mentioned in the Act — the overall amount of money that is available is $30 

million. Individual loans are restricted to not more than $200,000 to any municipality. I think that, today, 

those figures are too small. 

 

I would propose, this morning, Mr. Speaker, that this Act should be revised and so broadened that it 

would include other projects than those which are self-liquidating and projects that are other than those 

which are absolutely necessary for the relief of unemployment; and that funds be made available in this 

Act in a greatly increased amount and that this Act should be brought into effect immediately. 

 

One of the reasons for this is the same unemployment that I mentioned a few minutes ago. Whereas I do 

not feel that it is necessary that unemployment be always present before we are able to 



 

March 25, 1958 

 

12 

 

have the things which are socially desirable, yet, at the same time, today, we do know that through the 

length and breadth of our nation there is a great deal of unemployment and the revising of this Act would 

have a definite effect upon the situation in the country today. The time it is necessary to consume 

between the setting up of the necessary legislation to combat unemployment is so long that we should 

not delay in getting ready to do something about these things. That is one real lack that our Federal 

governments have always had; they start to do their planning after we have unemployment really with us, 

as we have today. Now is no time to be setting up a shelf of works to be used during a time of 

unemployment, not when we already have unemployment in our midst, and above all things they should 

not delay any longer in setting up an Act such as this which will, in times to come, be of use to us in 

combating unemployment. 

 

In speaking of a shelf of public works it is quite possible that some of the projects that we have in mind 

could be set aside; projects that could be taken out in time of national or local need in regard to 

unemployment. But I must say, Mr. Speaker, that I consider that most of these things which we have 

under consideration are not the type that can be shelved. As I say, there may be some, but most of them 

are of such importance to the community, of such importance to us as Canadians, that they should be 

proceeded with immediately, irrespective of any need for special projects to be used in time of 

unemployment. I have maintained that the health and the safety and the education of our people is of 

such importance that it should be proceeded with, today. I have nothing to say, this morning, against the 

program of defence which we have in our country. I feel that it is very imperative that our nation should 

be prepared at all times to defend itself against any emergency; but I do feel — I can't help it — that this 

same health, safety and education and the well being of our people and our children is much more 

important than building up say, for instance, aeroplanes that are obsolete even before they leave the 

drafting board. 

 

Another thing that I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, is that in our society today we have what amounts to 

crass commercialization. It seems as though the large bulk of our capitalization is placed into the 

factories which will produce automobiles, televisions, refrigerators, juke boxes, liquor and so on; and 

from the money that is earned through these projects we attempt to finance our schools and colleges and 

facilities in our communities; it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, the time is approaching when we should, 

somehow, attempt to shift the emphasis from this crass commercialization — where the things that we 

buy are dictated by a high pressure advertising scheme, which sometimes pressures the public into 

buying things that, while perhaps they can use them in some way, and they are not actually harmful; they 

are of dubious advantage to our civilization. I think that we should endeavour to place our investment 

emphasis upon those things which are really 



 

March 25, 1958 

 

13 

 

sociably desirable, such as I mentioned before, these municipal utilities which are a good example; and 

from the wages that are derived from the building and the maintenance of these programs, we can 

proceed to buy the other things such as radios and televisions and so on. It seems to me that our weight 

of emphasis is being placed in the wrong place. 

 

We in the province can do nothing about that, but our Federal Government, through the reactivation of 

this Act, and by putting capital into these places where it is really socially desirable and socially useful, 

can do much to help the situation as it is with us today. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move the above written Resolution, seconded by Mr. Thiessen 

(Shellbrook). 

 

Mr. John Thiessen (Shellbrook): — Mr. Speaker, in seconding this motion of Mr. Wood, I don't think 

he has left very much ground uncovered in speaking to it. He has pretty well covered the entire 

provincial field, in that he spoke of schools, hospitals, roads, streets, water-works. I thought he left out 

one item and that was rural telephones, which could also be covered under this motion. I would like to 

go back just a little bit to 1927 and bring to your attention the cost of money to the ratepayers of the 

municipalities. At that time the village of Aberdeen built a four-room school, costing some $20,000 

which was thought to be a lot of money at that time. 23 or 24 years later, the larger unit paid out the last 

debentures of that school and it had just doubled the price. That meant that to build a $27,000 building 

would cost you $27,000 to finance. We had a lot of schools that have been financed under that; we have 

a lot of municipal road machinery which has been purchased under that debenture system, and I feel it is 

costing away too much money. It costs too much money to liquidate debts which have been created for 

the purchase of doing municipal work. 

 

This resolution says, "self-liquidating works." Rural telephones, streets and roads would not come under 

that, but I would feel that in revitalizing this thing, and broadening it, it should be broadened sufficiently 

to cover those. At one time we had thought we were going to get cheaper money when they created the 

Bank of Canada, but somehow or other this thing did not take place at that time, and municipalities ware 

left at the same mercies as they were before. 



 

March 25, 1958 

 

14 

 

In reading Hansard of last fall I noticed we are not the only ones who have thought there should be 

cheaper money for use for municipalities. There were a number of M.P.'s last fall, in speaking to the 

House, that asked for this very same thing. Same of our C.C.F. boys out there, and also some of the 

others. The Prime Minister of Canada has spoken on this at various times, and so have other people. I 

think that the hon. member from Swift Current (Mr. Wood) has pretty well covered this thing, and I take 

pleasure in seconding this motion. 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to take a moment or two — I don't intend to 

spend 50 minutes like the mover; I'll be more like the seconder. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — You heard a great deal in that motion that will do you good. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — When I was sitting there, I don't remember the quotations, but he spoke of 'cabbages 

and kings' and a good many things. I think he spoke of a good many things that did not have a direct 

bearing on the question at hand at all. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You're out of line. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — He talked about fiscal policy and pressure salesmen, and crash commercialization, 

and all of such things in the economy of the country. He even went into defence. He raised the question 

of whether or not we should spend huge sums of money building aeroplanes that will be obsolete even 

before they are put into use, and many other things of that nature. I want to deal strictly with the 

resolution as set out here. Recognizing the pressing needs of municipalities, schools, hospitals, roads, 

streets, sewer and water — then he speaks of the strained credit resources of municipal-provincial 

government. Well, we know the credit resources of the municipality are strained, indeed, but I didn't 

think that the credit resources of the province of Saskatchewan was in that category. I have listened to 

the Provincial Treasurer (Hon. Mr. Fines) and he has always spoken of the great credit resources of the 

province, and with the great case with which he has been able to borrow money on the sound credit 

financial position of the province. It is rather revealing to think of the province as being in strained credit 

resources. 

 

But apart from that it recognizes also the immediate needs to provide new employment opportunities, 

together with the des- 



 

March 25, 1958 

 

15 

 

irability of shifting investment emphasis to socially useful capital works. Then, it urges the Federal 

Government to make capital funds available at low rates of interest for municipal work projects, and 

specifically by reviving and broadening the Federal-Municipal Improvement Assistance Act of 1938. 

 

I don't think anyone has any quarrel with that objective. I don't think that anyone would say for a 

moment that it is not a field in which the Federal Government can participate. We heard a speech 

delivered in this House, I think a year or two ago by the then Federal Minister of Public Works, in which 

he spoke of the new concept that is developing in Canadian life. The new concept of co-operation 

between the senior governments and that of the province, and he spoke of that concept as having resulted 

in the participation in the construction of the Trans-Canada Highway. Federal grants and assistance for 

the construction of hospitals; federal assistance on the university level; grants to universities, is along the 

same concept of working out a relationship between the provinces and the Dominion Government. The 

Dominion-Provincial Conference and the sharing of the tax dollar is along that same concept of a 

working arrangement between the provinces and the senior government. There is nothing then in that 

new concept that is contrary to the thinking that says the Federal Government should assist 

municipalities in the financing of their projects. It is true that a great many of the municipalities, school 

districts in particular, are financing too much of their capital construction out of current revenue. I think 

that has been one cause of the excessive mill rate in some of these larger units, possibly to a lesser extent 

in the municipalities themselves. 

 

We have been urging that the Provincial Government should take a look at this problem and to set aside 

some funds that would assist the municipalities in establishing sewer-works, water-works and things of 

that nature. I notice that Alberta has taken a forward step in that direction. She purchases debentures for 

the municipalities that wish to go into sewer and water at a long-term, low rate of interest, in order that 

the earnings from the sale of these utilities will pay off the debentures over a period of time, and will not 

become a burden on the taxpayer as such. However, the Provincial Government has always felt that that 

is not in their particular field, and it should be a Federal undertaking. I am glad to see this resolution. I 

would point out that we have been ahead of you in bringing that to the attention of Federal authorities, 

and to the attention of at least one of the great parties that may be the Government after the 31st. If that 

is true, our voice will have been heard, because we were successful, as members from western Canada, 

and particularly from Saskatchewan, in presenting that very problem, and much the same argument as 

used here. 



 

March 25, 1958 

 

16 

 

So I am glad we are in agreement on that, and that you are following the line as suggested by us. We 

asked that we not only broaden the scope of the present Act, but that the Government set up a loan 

development fund on the Federal level, the same as we have been urging, on the provincial level over the 

past number of years. That would make it available on the federal level, additional finances over long-

term period, for major municipal improvements, that could be gotten at immediately, in order to help the 

employment situation, and so forth. 

 

We asked that these funds be made available immediately, under this municipal loan fund, in order that 

they could get a quick start on it. This expansion in the urban and municipal units is urgently needed. No 

one will dispute that question. Funds are scare, and hard to come by. No one will dispute that, but I 

would like to point out to the member from Swift Current (Mr. Wood) that the difficulty which the 

municipalities are experiencing in having people purchase their debentures is not the lack of security, as 

he would indicate, and it is not their fear of the municipalities not being able to meet their commitments. 

It is, in the main, because of a shortage of money for all the projects that are going on, and many of these 

loaning institutions that are prepared to loan money, such as life insurance companies, and so forth, can 

step out and purchase debentures and securities in huge volume; therefore they don't have to 'bother 

around' so to speak, in picking up 20,000; 50,000 or 100,000 of municipal debentures. The market is too 

great and too easily come by, in other quarters, for them to bother with these smaller amounts. I think 

that is the reason why municipalities have found difficulty in getting these firms to purchase their 

debentures, because of the availability of huger amounts and which are more readily accessible to them. 

 

Then, in urban development I don't think anyone will disagree that there is an urgent need. I think it is 

time that the present legislation was amended. I think it should be amended to give far greater 

participation of both the Federal Government in some of these undertakings. They are restricted under 

the present legislation in their field of activity. I think it is time federal aid for slum clearance in the 

urban centres should be raised to 75 per cent of the cost, because it is a social necessity, as the member 

from Swift Current (Mr. Wood) spoke of, and they should carry greater than 50 per cent of the cost. 

 

I think it should provide for federal sharing with the municipalities in regard to water and sewer and 

street services if we carry this new concept all the way down — then it should seep down to even the 

lower levels of local government. There is no reason why 



 

March 25, 1958 

 

17 

 

the Federal Government shouldn't be able to share in these undertakings on a municipal level. I think 

they should ease the restriction under the Act, on re-development for commercial uses in the urban 

centres as well as for housing. We presented that, and I am pleased to say that that is in line with the 

Liberal program set out, and therefore we have no dispute with that. I think it was a step in the right 

direction; I think it is a step we have been urging for some time, and I am glad to see it recognized here. I 

am glad to see that we have unanimity of thinking in this Legislature regarding the field of activity which 

the Federal Government can participate, without in any way infringing upon the rights of the province by 

this new concept of sharing responsibility between the Federal and the Provincial Governments. 

 

For that reason, we believe that a loan development fund should be set up, from which municipalities 

can borrow at a low rate of interest over a long period of time, in order to assist them with their 

problems, to further enlarge the scope of this Act at present to ask the Federal Government to share 75 

per cent of the cost of slum clearance instead of 50 per cent, and to provide for Federal participation 

directly in water and sewerage, street services, or urban municipalities. There is nothing in this 

resolution that we can't go along with right down the line, and for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I am going to 

support the motion. 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, I don't want to take up the time of the 

House, but I would think it would be most unfortunate if some of the remarks made by the hon. member 

who has just taken his seat were allowed to pass. I would particularly like to congratulate the mover of 

this resolution. In the 14 years I have been in the House I have never heard any private member prepare 

their material and present it in a more able manner than the resolution that was presented by the hon. 

member for Swift Current (Mr. Wood). I think it is a real credit to himself that he dealt with this subject 

in such a masterly manner, as he did this morning. 

 

I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that we have recognized this problem over the years. I would like to 

point out that our problem in Saskatchewan has been somewhat the same until recent years. I would like 

to remind hon. members (some seem to forget it) that from 1932 to 1946 this province had no credit 

whatsoever. The province of Saskatchewan was not able to go on the market and borrow a single dollar, 

except for refunding purposes. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): —What a confession! 



 

March 25, 1958 

 

18 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Now, Mr. Speaker, from 1932 to 1946 — and I'm not blaming the previous 

administration alone, because I found the present Government was in the same position for a couple of 

years. Then the situation began to change. At first we were able to borrow a few million dollars. I 

thought we did very well in 1946 when we managed to borrow about $3 million. It is only two years ago, 

in 1956, that we were told that the total amount that the province could expect to borrow on the 

Canadian market in any one year was $20 million. Now, a program such as we have — with the Power 

Corporation, for example, spending about $60 million this year alone on capital expansion, the 

Telephone Corporation spending about $10 million — this taxes us to the limit of our ability. We would 

not be able to borrow for the municipalities. 

 

The hon. member referred to the Alberta plan. He is just a little bit out of date. He should know by this 

time that the Alberta plan has been discontinued. The Alberta plan, Mr. Speaker, has been discontinued 

now for three months — it is no longer. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — It's a re-adjustment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — No, it is not, Mr. Speaker. The Alberta municipalities this year are having to go out 

on the market and do their own borrowing. The plan was discontinued because the Alberta Government 

found they were going to require their own capital for their own needs, because of their revenues falling 

off, and levelling off, they've been unable to continue, and so they have discontinued the Alberta Loan 

Improvement plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one statement which the hon. member from Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) made was: "We 

have been ahead of you; we raised the question with one of the great political parties at our convention 

this year." This is a joke. This question has been raised at every provincial-federal conference since 

1945. In 1955 we approached the Hon. Walter Harris, who sat at this Conference with Prime Minister St. 

Laurent, and made the suggestion to them, in the presence, may I add, Mr. Speaker, of the 

representatives of the municipalities, that this Act should once again be revitalized, and then brought up 

to date. Mr. Harris, at that time, in 1955 and again in 1956, said that he could see no reason for it; that he 

could not get any evidence that the municipalities were not able to borrow all the money that was 

required. That was the Liberal party within the last two years! 

 

I am glad if, out of office and in the valley of humiliation, they have seen fit to be able to do the things 

which we have been recommending. I have here the report of the Conference of 1955, 



 

March 25, 1958 

 

19 

 

and again the Conference of 1957, November 25-26, recommending these in the Saskatchewan brief — 

we ask the Federal Government to do this very thing, and yet my hon. friend gets up and . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — How many briefs have you had that you didn't do over a period of years? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — . . . says, 'We have been ahead of you'. The question was raised by us, with one of 

the great political parties in Canada.' 

 

Opposition Members: — That's right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, that is all I want to say. I think there is nothing can be added to the 

remarks by the hon. member from Swift Current (Mr. Wood). I don't think he left out one single point. I 

think he has an iron-clad case here, which I think is one which I am sure will warrant the support, not 

only of all the members of this House, but of all the municipal governments of Saskatchewan — yes, 

across Canada; and one which will, I am sure, meet with the overwhelming approval of the people of 

this province. 

 

Mr. Weber (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say a few words to associate myself 

with the motion that was presented here this morning by the member from Swift Current (Mr. Wood), 

and I would like to say that in my experience in civic administration on a local level, in urban 

municipalities, I found that there were many times when we required financing on a major scale, and we 

found nowhere we could turn to for this assistance. 

 

I believe the hon. Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Fines) will know some of the facts which I am relating to 

when I say that we found, in the particular town of which I was mayor for four years, we were finally 

able to borrow enough money to enable us to put in a sewer system. We were sort of putting the cart 

before the horse for the simple reason that we have sewer in that particular municipality today but we 

have no water. I believe that a program is under way now where they can almost see where they can 

install a water-works system. But it did require additional assistance from the Provincial Government in 

helping that municipality to carry out this program. 

 

During my experience on municipal councils, I found the necessity for establishing some source of 

financial assistance to municipalities who found themselves in situations similar to ourselves. Last year 

in this Legislature, in my speech in reply to the 



 

March 25, 1958 

 

20 

 

Speech from the Throne, I advocated that the Provincial Government set up a financing corporation 

similar to that which was established in Alberta, and since has been abandoned, as the Provincial 

Treasurer indicated, I believe it was the vast amount of money required by the municipalities to institute 

these services, and the Government in that province found that they were unable to finance, without 

going into debt or borrowing money which they did not deem to be good business methods. They felt 

too, the same as the mover and the seconder of this motion felt, that it is the responsibility of the Federal 

Government to set up such a fund, available to municipalities. 

 

I agree with the member from Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) that there should be more included in this 

motion. However, at this time I would certainly give my support to the motion as it stands. We found 

that previously in our schools, and also in our hospitals, when we enlarged our hospital and also had to 

do some extensive enlargement of school buildings, that to get this money (on a long-term period) was 

practically impossible to do. As the financial critic for the Opposition (Mr. Cameron) mentioned, these 

large financial institutions were not interested in lending money to municipalities that only required 

smaller amounts of loans, which required the same amount of administration as far as they were 

concerned, as was required by larger municipalities who might borrow up to as much as one hundred 

times in one transaction as the smaller municipalities did. 

 

I believe the Federal Government did have low interest-bearing assistance loans some years ago, but they 

were discontinued, and at that time a lot of municipalities availed themselves of this money and found it 

to be of great benefit to them. I would like to see this same assistance given again to these 

municipalities, but I would also like to see included in this motion recommendations that this assistance 

be given to these municipalities at the low interest rates which prevailed at the time this assistance was 

given by the Federal Government. However, I imagine that at the time this deal will be made, these 

things will be taken into consideration. At this time I would like to say that I am in wholehearted support 

of the motion. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 10:00 o'clock p.m. 


