



















































Hansard: March 07, 1958


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

17th Day 

 

Friday, March 7, 1958 

 

The House met at 2.30 o'clock p.m. 

Before the Orders of the Day: 

 

WELCOMING STUDENTS 

 

Mr. J. Walter Erb (Minister of Health): — Before the Orders of the Day, Mr. Speaker, I wish to draw 

to the attention of the House a group of high school students from Milestone, Grade IX class, whom I 

am sure we all welcome here this afternoon. It is my hope that this afternoon will prove both enjoyable 

and educational to them. I must say, Mr. Speaker, that their presence here is entirely coincidental with 

my adjournment of the debate last night. 

 

WELCOMING STUDENTS 

 

Mr. Ross A. McCarthy (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded 

with, I would like to introduce to the House a group of fine pupils in the gallery who come from my 

school accompanied by their principal, Mr. Vickery. He has just come out from England recently to take 

charge of our school, and we are very happy to have him there. On behalf of the House, I am sure 

everyone will join me in welcoming these fine young people to the Assembly, and I hope it will prove 

instructive and educational to them. 

 

PRODUCT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw to the attention of the hon. 

members that I have had, by permission of the Speaker, placed on your desks something that looks like 

yeast cakes, but actually it is a product of Saskatchewan. It is northern poplar that has been processed 

overseas and made into what is called chipboard. The hon. members might be interested to note the fine 

quality material, which doesn't warp or shrink, and which is excellent for the building trade. 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

2 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The House resumed, from Thursday, March 6, 1958, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the 

Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): 

 

That Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair. (The Assembly to go into Committee of Supply). 

 

Mr. J. Walter Erb (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, in my opening remarks yesterday I 

congratulated the Provincial Treasurer on his budget, and expressed the hope that he will remain with us 

for many years to come. I also congratulated the hon. member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron), the 

financial critic of the Opposition. I also dealt briefly on the expansion which has taken place in this 

province since the coming into power of a C.C.F. Government, and it is on this theme, among other 

things, that I now continue the rest of my remarks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when one considers the great development that has occurred with respect to oil and 

uranium which I mentioned yesterday, the developing of the two huge potash plants, one at Saskatoon, 

and the other at Esterhazy, who have until now spent $50 million to bring these two plants into 

production; the smaller industries that have been established, such as the Saskatchewan Cement 

Company as well as the now $3 million pipe steel plant in Regina, the $2 million vitrified products 

plant, producing sewer pipe and sewer line, and at Weyburn a cable and wire factory, and recently a $2 

million factory to produce the first mobile homes in Saskatchewan, a now $3 million fibre board plant at 

Saskatoon, utilizing straw as the basic material — then the proposed building of a plant at the Steelman 

Oil field — a plant to process casinghead gas into commercial fuel, such as propane, butane, natural 

gasoline, sulphur and dry residue gas. Besides these there have been many other smaller industries 

established, among them being the one the Premier mentioned before the Orders of the Day yesterday, 

which are making tremendous contributions to our industrial progress in this province. 

 

I mention these, Mr. Speaker, to show at what pace industrial progress has been taking place in 

Saskatchewan, and this progress I submit, eloquently subjects the confidence and faith that private 

enterprise has in this administration. 

 

Co-operative enterprise since 1944 has grown by leaps and bounds and Saskatchewan has become the 

leading co-operative province in Canada. The C.C.F. Government early recognized the importance of 

co-operative development in a province like Saskatchewan, and by setting up the Department of Co-

operation, early indicated the need for government participation in such a vital function. 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

3 

Mr. Speaker, I submit that, when people are given the opportunity to work and strive collectively 

together, they can move the proverbial mountains. An example of the power of co-operation — look at 

the Saskatchewan Pool elevators, which number some 1,141, whose membership hauls 50 per cent of 

the grains grown in Saskatchewan to those elevators. The sprawling Co-op Refinery that had its 

inception in the midst of depression and adversity, but with resolute purpose and supreme faith in the co-

operative principle, has grown into a veritable giant, with a net capital investment of somewhere in the 

neighbourhood of $10 million, and capable of refining 16 million barrels of oil per day. In addition, the 

Co-op Refineries are adding a $1,300,000 plant for the purpose of manufacturing petroleum coke. That 

plant has begun construction recently. 

 

From the 41 co-operative oil wells, the Co-op Refineries receive now 15 per cent of their oil 

requirements. Consumer Co-operatives have experienced phenomenal growth as well since 1944, and 

today they number 393 associations, with a membership in excess of 176,000 people. And credit, Mr. 

Speaker, is where it rightly belongs, and that is in the hands of the people — being provided increasingly 

through Credit Unions. The number of Credit Unions in Saskatchewan has growth from 163 in 1944 to 

284 in 1957. 

 

Probably the best example of the magnitude of Co-operative enterprise in Saskatchewan is best 

recognized when one considers the fact that co-operative enterprises in Saskatchewan in 1956 transacted 

some $436,201,507 million worth of business. 

 

I come now, Mr. Speaker, to public enterprise. The principal of public ownership has long been 

recognized by every government throughout the world. It is recognized by the Federal Government, and 

has been for many years, and why the Liberal party in Saskatchewan should become so exercised about 

public enterprise in our province presents at once a conundrum and a baffling contradiction. I an 

inclined to think that the attitude of the Opposition to public ownership in Saskatchewan arises out of a 

guilt complex. For 34 years, the Liberal party sat on this side of the House, inert, inept and in sweet 

oblivion. The gentlemen to your left, Mr. Speaker, are very sensitive to the conditions or things which 

widen the gap between their position in this House and to that of becoming the Government of 

Saskatchewan. I suggest that the record of the C.C.F. Government in public enterprise has continued to 

widen that gap. 

 

As the Provincial Treasurer pointed out in his address, the total volume of sales and services of the 

Crown Corporations increased by 11 per cent over last year, rising to more than $63 million, and at the 

end of December, 1957, there were 5,144 men and women employed in the various Crown 

Corporations, and the total payroll for the year amounted to more than $18 million. I suggest. Mr. 

Speaker, that that is a big 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

4 

operation in any language. The net surpluses, after interest, as we know, amounts to some $4 1/2 

million. But, Mr. Speaker, the justification for public ownership lies not solely in the profits that can be 

shown; it lies in the fact that certain services can best be rendered by public ownership, when such 

ownership otherwise could constitute a monopoly to the detriment of society as a whole. 

 

The justification for public ownership lies also in the fact that where private enterprise fails to render the 

services required to the community, or fails to develop a resource, the materials of which are essential to 

industry, then I submit it is the responsibility of the Government to provide such services, and to 

develop such resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with this concept in mind, the C.C.F. Government embarked on a program of public 

ownership soon after its election to office in 1944. I am not going to belabour this House with the 

financial operations of the Crown Corporations, except to refer the hon. members of the Opposition to 

page 11 of the budget address, where they will find a 'Summary of Results of Operations of Crown 

Corporations for the Years ending in 1957'. I would exhort also the hon. gentlemen to diligently attend 

the Crown Corporations where they can secure a wealth of information and facts from the Crown 

Corporations. Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a few observations concerning the effects of public 

ownership: by the setting up of the Timber Board, the ruthless exploitation of our forest resources that 

had threatened to denude our vast timber stand to the extent that, according to experts, would require 

100 years to re-grow, came to an end,. The policy for the orderly cutting of our timber was instituted, as 

well as a program for conservation and reforestation, thereby assuring succeeding generations of their 

timber requirements. 

 

A Liberal Government, Mr. Speaker, sat on this side of the House when this ruthless exploitation was at 

its peak, and what did they do about it? I suggest, Mr. Speaker, they did not do as much as Nero; at least 

he fiddled while Rome burned! The Fish and Fur Marketing Services have had a stabilizing effect on 

those industries, and together with government trading in northern Saskatchewan, have put an end to the 

exploiters of the natives, and the fast-buck operators have put them out of business entirely, or have 

limited their operations. The Saskatchewan Government Airways was set up primarily to service our 

northern area. This Corporation has contributed immeasurably to the opening and the development of 

our northern areas. I suggest that its record of performance and safety has been an enviable one, indeed. 

 

The development of the sodium sulphate industry in Saskatchewan is an interesting one, because it is an 

example of where private enterprise failed to develop a rich resources and a lucrative industry. Over 10 

per cent of all the known sulphate deposits on the 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

5 

continent are found in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it is a matter of great pride and satisfaction that this 

industry not only provided work for Saskatchewan citizens, but has returned gratifying surpluses to the 

treasury, as well. In 1946, the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office was set up under legislation. 

The then Liberal Opposition called it 'the greatest hoax ever perpetrated upon a suspecting people by a 

Government'. Now, Mr. Speaker, this hoax has saved the Saskatchewan motorist, property owner, 

farmer and city dweller alike, millions of dollars in premiums. Moreover, millions of premium dollars 

have remained in Saskatchewan, where otherwise they have been going to the head offices of insurance 

companies in Toronto and Montreal, and elsewhere. 

 

But what is most significant here, Mr. Speaker, is that the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office 

has restored, at least to Saskatchewan, the ancient art of competitions and that accounts for the lowest 

insurance rates anywhere in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

The Saskatchewan Power Corporation was established because here again, private enterprise was either 

not prepared, or was unable to develop a program of rural electrification of such magnitude that it was 

necessary to bring power to all of our farmers, small villages and towns in Saskatchewan. The Liberal 

Government, Mr. Speaker, that sat in office here prior to 1944, apparently was quite content that the 

acme of progress had been reached with the coal oil lamp and lantern! 

 

Like yourself, Mr. Speaker, I am a farmer and I believe you will agree that there is not much vision with 

a lantern on a dark and windy night. Sometimes the lantern goes out, and you stand in darkness. I am 

sure, Mr. Speaker, that neither of us have carried a lantern for a long time, but the experience that it has 

presented presents a nearly perfect analogy to the Liberal Party. Even when rural electrification was 

being undertaken by this Government, the Rt. Hon. J.G. Gardiner discredited it, by saying it was too 

costly, and urged farmers to install windchargers, instead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no one can tell you better than the farmer what electrification has meant to him. For years 

he has carried a lantern, and for years his wife did her evening work by the dim light of a coal oil lamp. 

They will tell you that power has not only lighted up their homes, but their hearts. How the many menial 

tasks have been lightened, and the burdens eased. How life on the farm has taken on real meaning, in 

that the amenities of modem living have been brought to their homes. 

 

The Saskatchewan Power Corporation, as everyone knows, has now hooked up some 47,000 farms and 

all towns and villages in Saskatchewan, as well as bringing power to numerous industries, and 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

6 

the oil fields. I submit that only through public ownership was electrification program of this magnitude 

possible. But in this regard, the Liberal Party, I must say, apparently had a change of heart, for when 

rural electrification really got rolling by 1952, they thought public ownership was a good thing — so 

good, in fact that in the 1952 election they promised the farmers that, if elected, they would install 

power free of charge on the farm. 

 

There are other Crown Corporations that I could mention, and the real contribution that each has made 

to our economy, but the foregoing, which I have briefly reviewed, together with the operations and 

activities of private and co-operative enterprise will indicate, I am sure, that Saskatchewan has come a 

long way indeed, from the time when she was only famous for her wheat. 

 

I would suggest to the hon. members to your left, Mr. Speaker, that they look up and around and try to 

rediscover Saskatchewan. I can assure my hon. friends, Mr. Speaker, that if they make a conscientious 

evaluation of the industrial progress that has taken place in the last 10 years or so, and what it has meant 

to our province. It would provide a real lift to their despondent and jaded spirit. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, 

no one who is sincerely interested in the growth and development of our province can fail to feel pride 

in what has taken place with respect to industrialization and our progress. Nor can they fail to give 

expression to a confident hope of a great future of Saskatchewan. 

 

I should like to briefly comment on some aspects of the Department of Public Health, over which it is 

my privilege and honour to preside. It will be seen from a perusal of the estimates for the year ending 

March 31, 1957, that the Department of Public Health accounts for the largest total for ordinary 

expenditure to be voted of any department of Government — some $27,179,840. This figure does not at 

all suggest that the Provincial Treasurer had some special deference for my department. This figure, 

amounting to almost as much money as the total provincial budget in 1943, reflects the real concern this 

Government has for the health and well-being of the people of this province. It also suggests the 

magnitude of the health programs originated by this administration since 1944. 

 

The modern health department, in a democratic society, no longer confines itself largely to the 

enforcement of regulations, nor does it work in virtual isolation from the community. Our health 

department, Mr. Speaker, seeks to gain its objective of higher standards of individual community and 

health, by working in close co-operation with the public it serves. To achieve this co-operation, the 

Department of Public Health has been most fortunate in engaging men and women highly trained in 

special skills that are required to administer and interpret the many health programs that affect the 

community at large. 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

7 

I submit that the success of any program depends upon the kind of people that carry it out, and I want to 

say here that the outstanding success of our health program in Saskatchewan is due, not only to the high 

degree of training of our doctors, nurses and technicians and health educators, and so on, but to their 

dedication to public health and an inordinate sense of devotion to duty. I want to publicly express my 

appreciation to those fine and devoted people down from my Deputy Minister, Dr. Roth, to the nurses in 

the remotest areas, for the excellent job they have done. May I say, in addition, Mr. Speaker, that they 

constitute the finest health organizations in Canada. 

 

The Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan enjoys the same high endorsation it has received through 

previous years. Like everything else, hospital operations and hospital maintenance has not been immune 

to inflation. Hospital services costs have continued to rise through the removal of price control. For 

example, the average cost per patient day for care of adults or children has risen from $4.65 to $13.13 

per patient day in 1957. However, notwithstanding the depressed financial condition of the rural areas, 

the plan provides protection against hospitalization costs for between 97 and 98 per cent of the 

population eligible to participate in the plan. Since there has been a lot of talk recently about national 

hospital insurance, it might be well to review at this time what the Saskatchewan Hospital Services plan 

has done for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has largely removed the economic barrier to hospital care for most of the residents of this 

province, thereby making it possible for them to obtain hospital care when necessary. Provision of 

hospital care for many persons has changed considerably, in that it is now based on medical necessity 

for such care, rather than on the ability to pay for it. It assures Saskatchewan's public general hospitals 

of regular payments and adequate revenue; thereby making it possible for them to provide essential 

services of high quality. It has been a major factor in stimulating hospital construction in Saskatchewan, 

to a point where the needs of the province, with respect to such accommodation is directly related to the 

accommodation available. During the past 11 years of operation, moreover, the standards of hospital 

services available to the residents of the province have greatly improved. 

 

The plan has also made it possible for municipalities to insure against the cost of hospital care required 

by their indigent residents, in that municipalities are required to pay the hospitalization tax on behalf of 

their indigent residents; and they may also pay on behalf of any of their residents. The advantage to 

municipalities in this regard is explained by the fact that the proceeds from the hospitalization tax 

represents less than one-half of the total hospitalization 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

8 

for the plan. Statistical data obtained from the plan's experience has enabled the province to plan the 

construction of hospital facilities in accordance with the actual needs of the areas involved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it not presumptuous to say that were it not for the fact that we have demonstrated in 

Saskatchewan that hospital insurance was not only possible, but workable, and had we not consistently 

here and at Ottawa constantly carried on a battle — a relentless fight for national health insurance, 

thereby creating public demand, the national hospital insurance plan would not be in the state in the 

Parliament of Canada as it is now. 

 

We view with regret, that national hospital insurance was not brought down at the last Session of 

Parliament. Both the former Federal Liberal Government and the present Government deliberately 

stalled on this issue so that one can only conclude that certain political motives underlie these stalling 

tactics. National Hospital Insurance, as it now stands — we have only the word of the Minister of 

National Health and Welfare for Canada — who says he is prepared at the next Session to recommend 

an amendment to Bill No. 320, and fix the starting date at July 1, after signing an agreement with the 

participating provinces. 

 

We view with regret that mental hospitals and T.B. sanatoria were not included in the cost-sharing 

principal of Bill 320. The present Federal Government, when in Opposition, was loud in its 

condemnation of this unwarranted and inexcusable exclusion. Now that they are in office, they have 

become Liberals in this regard. Mr. Speaker, by excluding mental hospitals and T.B. Sanatoria. The 

C.C.F. members of the House of Commons had consistently asked that mental hospitals and T.B. 

Sanatoria be included in any national Hospital insurance plan. Just as consistently, Mr. Speaker, it has 

been refused. One-half of all the beds - hospital beds in Canada, are comprised of mental hospitals and 

tuberculosis sanatoria, and I suggest to exclude these from the benefits of national hospital insurance, it 

is nothing short of rank discrimination. 

 

Like the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan, the provision of cancer services in Saskatchewan has 

removed the economic barrier of cancer treatment for every resident suffering from cancer. Legislation 

passed by the C.C.F. Government in 1944 made this the first free diagnosis and free treatment program 

on the continent. One of the notable features of our Saskatchewan program is that the services are 

provided by a full-time staff of medical specialists. The Saskatchewan Cancer Commission, which 

reports to me as Minister of Health, operates two full-time clinics. These are the Dr. Allan Blair Clinic 

in Regina, and the clinic located in the University Hospital at Saskatoon. 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

9 

In addition to the full-time staff of medical specialists and nurses at each clinic, the Commission 

employs a consulting physicist, as well as a physicist in each clinic, a consulting diagnostic radiologist 

and a consulting pathologist. The closest collaboration is maintained with the University of 

Saskatchewan. Our consulting physicist, who is a university professor, supervises the operation of the 

emanation plant which produces radon. 

 

In this province we have a unique system of follow-up in all cases at the clinics. The Cancer 

Commission works very closely and cordially with the general practitioner; especially the family doctor, 

who refers his patients to the clinic in the first instance, and as a result we are able to keep in touch with 

patients for many years subsequent to their treatment. Such information is proving of great value, 

especially in cancer diagnosis and treatment. The co-operation of the patient in this regard must not be 

overlooked. Much of their understanding is due, I am sure, to the excellent educational work being done 

by the voluntary organization known as the Saskatchewan Division of the Cancer Society. This Society 

co-operates with the health education division of our Department in lay education, and it also provides 

funds for research. A social worker is attached to each clinic. The operation of two full-time clinics, Mr. 

Speaker, is not cheap, but neither is it expensive in relation to the value or the services provided here. 

The cost is about $250 per patient admitted to the clinics for diagnosis and treatment. The total cost in 

recent years has amounted to somewhat over $1 million. To give hon. members an idea of the number of 

patients in these clinics — new patients appearing at the clinics since January, 1957 were 5,426 and the 

total reviews made of these patients that have been submitted to our clinics number 15,193. This gives 

us an idea of the magnitude of the work that is being carried on by these two clinics. 

 

As the Provincial Treasurer indicated in his address, the budget continues to emphasize the crucial 

importance of public health programs. Indeed, the underlying aim of the Department of Public Health is 

the preservation of life, the prevention of disease, and the promotion of good health. To this end the 

health regions were developed for the purpose of bringing to the smaller communities and rural districts 

the essential public health services which they could not provide for themselves. The basic or essential 

health services cover a wide field of services — communicable disease control, maternal care, infant and 

pre-school services, school health services mental hygiene, psychiatric services, public health nursing, 

sanitation, health education, nutrition and statistics. Once the basic services as I have outlined have been 

established in a health region, the health region board may, subject to the approval of the Minister, 

develop one or more additional programs for additional government-aided services, such as the 

preventative dental health program and the general medical service, such as in the Swift Current health 

region. 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

10 

Up to the present time we have established nine health regions in Saskatchewan. Recently there was a 

merger of the Meadow Lake health region with that of the Battleford health region. As the Provincial 

Treasurer indicated in his address, provision has been made for the establishment of another health 

region in the province this year. The value of these health services to the municipalities within the health 

regions far exceed their cost. I might point out, Mr. Speaker, that only one-third of the cost is born by 

the region; the other two-thirds of the cost being born by the Government, plus any amount in excess of 

the fifty cents tax that the municipalities are authorized to levy on their property holders. 

 

Session in and session out, Mr. Speaker, we have been listening to the Opposition members that this 

Government is not doing enough for the municipality. Mr. Speaker, it is a matter of record that more and 

more municipalities are being relieved of their responsibilities that are theirs by the Government. The 

record has been read to my friends by chapter and by verse. Mr. Speaker, we will continue to give them 

the facts, with the hope that, inasmuch as repetition wears away rock, we will eventually be able to got 

through to them. 

 

Traditionally, Mr. Speaker, health services have been the responsibility of the municipality, and I trust 

my hon. friends to your left, will not try to dispute that fact too much. They well remember that the tens 

of thousands of dollars that the municipalities were required to pay for hospital care rendered to their 

indigent residents during the depression of the 1930's. As I pointed out in reviewing the hospital services 

plan, the municipalities are now able to pay the hospital tax on behalf of those indigent residents, or for 

any resident whose hospital care they wish or may become responsible for. The hospital tax they do pay 

represents less than half the hospitalization cost based on the 1957 per capita cost of $28.92. 

 

It would be impossible to review to any appreciable extent every activity of the department of public 

health this afternoon, but I would like to make a few observations on the work performed by two 

divisions of the Department of Public Health, sanitation and health education. Much of the work of the 

division of sanitation has been devoted to the education of the public in those aspects of our 

environment which are either definitely or potentially harmful to the well-being of the people. The 

sanitation services provided by the Department are designed to control to the greatest extent possible 

those factors that may directly or indirectly lead to the transmission of communicable diseases. For 

example, typhoid fever, that great scourge of mankind is today a rarity due to the application of sanitary 

measures that have been instituted through the years. 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

11 

Sanitary officers of our Department are concerned with the day-to-day problems of food sanitation, 

waste disposal, hotel and restaurant inspection, plumbing, camps, recreational areas, and so on. During 

the year the Department of Public Health employed 46 fully trained and qualified sanitary inspectors, 

who carried out a total of 72,000 inspections in connection with their educational program. The division 

also provides technical consultative service to the rural municipalities and to the health region offices. It 

is also directly concerned with milk processing and milk pasteurization, and employs four milk 

sanatorias, whose work is directed solely to the pasteurization of milk and milk quality. 

 

Probably there is no other food consumed by human beings that constitutes such an excellent media, in 

which harmful and deadly bacteria can thrive on as milk. It is obvious, therefore, why the Department of 

Public Health is so concerned that only pasteurized milk be consumed. It cannot be too strongly urged, 

Mr. Speaker, that those areas who have not access to pasteurized milk ought to pasteurize all raw milk 

that is intended for consumption. Perhaps the major activity of the division — that is, the sanitation 

division, is in the water and sewage work field. In addition to routine supervision of municipal water and 

treatment facilities, the division is responsible for the suitability of design of water works and sewage 

systems. 

 

In recent years there has been much activity in urban modernization as well as in improvements in 

existing utilities. Ten years ago, the division dealt with 55 applications in this connection. Five years 

ago, 80 applications were processed; in 1957 there were 145 applications. Construction value 

represented by these applications increased from $2 million ten years ago to over $14 million in 1957. 

The division also provides free engineering services to the rural municipalities contemplating a 

modernization program. The service includes preliminary surveys, designs, estimates and 

comprehensive report. In the last five years, such work was undertaken by 35 municipalities, and of this 

number, 16 municipalities subsequently proceeded with the installation of water-works and/or sewage 

systems. 

 

Engineers of the divisions provide the interpretation on some 8,000 water analysis conducted annually 

by the provincial laboratories. In addition, they exercise supervision of water supplies provided by the 

rural municipalities operating public water-works systems. This includes fluoridation. Seven 

municipalities are now adding fluorides to their drinking water, and such water is now available to some 

125,000 residents of Saskatchewan. 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

12 

Our health education division, Mr. Speaker, and the health educators who are attached to health regions 

are probably the most active in Canada, and enjoy an international reputation for the breadth of their 

work, and the effectiveness if their method. The health educations are necessarily concerned with every 

activity of the Department and deal with problems from prenatal care to the poor nutritional habits, let us 

say, of their grandparents. However, their concerns go even farther than this, in that they spearhead 

programs and develop public interest in now and unmet problems. 

 

One of these unmet problems about which I want to speak is accidents and their prevention. When one 

considers that in Saskatchewan alone there are an estimated 30,000 accidents yearly, in which people are 

killed or hurt — that accidents are the leading cause of deaths in age groups from 1 to 35; accidents kill 

more than 400 Saskatchewan residents, and put more than 13,000 persons in hospital every year in our 

province alone, one gets some idea of the burden of sorrow, pain and economic waste on Canada as a 

whole. We see the burden of waste on the large sums we pay out through the Hospital Services Plan. So 

far we can only guess at the total load when costs for medical care, loss of income and earning power, 

loss of production and public assistance are taken into consideration. No one can measure the sorrow of 

a child mutilated or disfigured for life, or the unhappiness of a farmer who is forced to give up his land 

not by the cost-price squeeze, but by being disabled in an accident that might have been prevented. In 

1957, 56 farm residents lost their lives in farm work accidents. We know of these 13,662 persons that 

accidents and injuries sent to hospitals in the province last year, 4,000 were hurt in home accidents, and 

2,784 were injured in farm work. These are the two leading categories. 

 

Of course we have been properly concerned with vehicle mishaps, but when it comes to assessing the 

problem as a whole, by numbers involved, we find that our homes and farms are more dangerous than 

our highways. An analysis of the farm accidents which put people in hospitals last year brings out some 

surprising facts. Animals figured in 646 such cases; for all our mechanization on the land, Mr. Speaker, 

horses injured 206. There were 321 people hurt handling machinery, not including tractors, which alone 

accounted for 156 accidents. Tractors, too, killed at least 15 persons, including several young children 

last year. Now, it may be seen then that accidents place a very heavy burden in loss of life, suffering, 

inefficiency and waste on our agricultural economy. 

What have we done about this problem? Our health education division was given the task of changing 

this unhappy 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

13 

picture and it tackled the job with vigour and with imagination. No health department, Mr. Speaker, can 

keep people from sickness or accidents. The best it can do is to hope to make people aware of these 

hazards, and help them to avoid them by bringing about changes in their environment and changes in 

their living and working habits. 

 

The attack on home accidents has been placed on the well-known truism, that to reach people's minds, 

one must go to their hearts first. That, Mr. Speaker, seems to be the difficulty we have on this side of 

getting across to the Opposition. 

 

The chief emphasis, Mr. Speaker, has been given to the tragic number of accidents involving children. 

One of the devices employed by the education division is our annual Child Safety Day. Similarly, in 

developing the farm safety program, we have found our annual farm safety week a valuable media for 

concentrated attacks. I bring these events to attention, not because one day or one week of safer living is 

going to change the situation materially, but because these special events give fresh impetus to year-

round endeavours. The key-note, of course, of this work, is the involvement of the people concerned 

with their own safety promotion. It has been most encouraging to note that in the six years since we 

began our Home and Farm Safety education program there have been year-to-year decreases in the 

number of accidental deaths, with an overall reduction of about 30 per cent. With regard to the non-fatal 

accidents which result in need for hospitalization we try to pinpoint our attack on this type of accident 

with the confidence that we can reduce the volume of hospital care attributable to these preventable 

accidents. 

 

A new and complex problem is developing, and that is the problem of our aging population. As was 

evident from the Saskatchewan Hospital Services report for 1957, the problem is now with us and will 

likely increase. The covered population of age 70 or over increased by 60.5 per cent since 1947; while 

these people comprised only 9.3 per cent of the covered population, they accounted for almost one-third 

of the hospital beds. When one counts the number of this older age group who are in mental hospitals, 

and geriatric centres of social welfare and in private nursing homes, the extent of care required by this 

group is very considerable. The situation is going to increase in magnitude for reasons that more people 

are saved in infancy and young adulthood to reach this age. Medical care for them is becoming better, 

and life is being prolonged, as a result. 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

14 

A concentrated study of the whole problem of age and chronic disease is highly indicated, to bring the 

situation into focus. Our present society knows relatively little about this group of people — their social 

and health habits, and the kind of facilities that we will need to meet this growing problem. It should be 

emphasized, Mr. Speaker, that all over North America governments and interested people of our society 

are just beginning to recognize that there is a problem. The steps that must be taken are many: better 

case finding of early disease; encouragement of older people to seek medical attention; greater attention 

by health personnel, doctors, hospitals, and so on; intensive treatment of chronic disease in the early 

stages; more attention to the prevention of the degenerative diseases, with emphasis on better nutrition, 

more research into the causes of diseases, and the influence of activity on the home life of older people; 

their breakdown whether this be physical or mental. 

 

To successfully meet the complex problem of our aged population, Mr. Speaker, it will call upon our 

financial resources, our best application of medical and scientific knowledge, and above all, our best 

humanitarian instincts. 

 

Another problem coming to the forefront has to do with occupational and environmental health. The 

Department of Public Health is not merely concerned with safe working conditions, but with healthy 

working conditions, as well. With the ever-increasing industrialization of the province it is clear that 

new problems will arise from day to day, affecting the health of those people engaged in mining and 

manufacturing. For example, the growing incidence of lung cancer may not be attributable to cigarettes 

alone. There is a considerable body of opinion that holds that certain fumes, gas, tars and the general 

pollution of the atmosphere is responsible for this disease as well. The interest of the Department of 

Public Health must be educational drawing to the attention of the people the hazards of industry, as well 

as of agriculture, using insecticides and chemicals. To carry out this procedure requires highly-trained 

medical personnel, with specialized skills that will enable them to prevent real and potential hazards, 

and to suggest remedial measures. 

 

The Department of Public Health is becoming more and more concerned about radiation. The public has 

become very concerned and even fearful about radiation from fall-out of nuclear explosions. The 

Federal Government, of course, is keeping a close check on the fallouts, keeping our Department 

informed about it. So far, however, Mr. Speaker, there is no cause for immediate alarm. There is, 

however, cause for concern about the use of X-rays for medical purposes. It is conservatively estimated 

that the population as a whole received a much larger proportion of radiation from X-rays than from any 

man-made source. 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

15 

The Department of Public Health is working with the medical profession to minimize the amount of 

exposure to patients and workers. In order to meet the foregoing problems, the occupational health 

branch was formed, and it is believed that in this area a real contribution to the health and well-being of 

our people can be made. Being a farmer, Mr. Speaker, representing one of the finest agricultural 

constituencies in Saskatchewan. I wish to associate myself with what has been said by members on this 

side of the House concerning the plight of the agricultural economy. 

 

First, I want to say that the hon. members to your left, all of whom represent rural constituencies, 

judging from their speeches in this House, have a dismal appreciation of the agricultural crisis. They 

endeavour to lay the onus of responsibility for the situation of agriculture on the Provincial Government. 

The hon. member for Rosthern (Mr. Elias) in his speech yesterday, said: "increased taxes and ever-

mounting liabilities to municipalities and school districts and private individuals are bringing our 

country to ruin". Well, Mr. Speaker, the Opposition, like the Bourbons, have learned nothing and they 

have forgotten nothing. In the first place, there are two lines of responsibility for agriculture — 

provincial and federal. Recently the Provincial Government has the responsibility for the extension 

services, improvement programs, pest control, regulation of trade of agricultural products within the 

province. It is the responsibility of the Federal Government to find markets for grain, regulate trade in 

agricultural products between the sale of grain, the provinces and for exports, and to provide a general 

economic climate under which agriculture may prosper, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As far as taxes are concerned, Mr. Speaker, which the hon. member for Rosthern contends are ruining 

the farmer, I submit that if all the taxes — school and municipal taxes were wiped out, we would have 

about 10 to 15 cents per bushel for wheat. I wonder, does that suggest, Mr. Speaker, this 10 or 15 cents 

would stabilize the agricultural industry and make the farmer prosperous? 

 

That is why I said our friends to your left have a dismal appreciation for the real cause of the depression 

in agriculture. The position of the C.C.F., Government members of this Legislature, and the C.C.F. 

member of the House of Commons respecting the crisis in agriculture today, has been stated over and 

over, and it is clear and has remained constant. It represents an agricultural policy that would, if 

implemented, immediately begin to solve the problem of the wheat surpluses and the cost-price squeeze 

that, day by day, is bringing the farmer and the small business man closer and closer to complete 

bankruptcy and financial ruin. The former Liberal Government had failed utterly to come to grips with 

the problems facing agriculture; there is no more eloquent evident to support this 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

16 

statement, Mr. Speaker, than to observe what happened to the Liberal Party in western Canada on June 

10 last. Eight members elected west of the Great Lakes! 

 

The fact that more C.C.F. members, Mr. Speaker, west of the Great Lakes were elected to Parliament 

than any other party is a clear indication that the C.C.F. policy for agriculture has the support and 

endorsation of the western farmer. The present Federal Government, Mr. Speaker, like the former one, 

has done literally nothing in formulating a policy that would move more wheat and stabilize the 

agricultural industry. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — We have no Liberal government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — I'm sorry — the present Federal Government. You fellows have been so guilty for so 

many years that I cannot got accustomed that there is another Government in office. The interest-free 

cash advance authorized by the Conservative government though the Wheat Board last fall, while it did 

help to put some needed cash in the farmers' hands, did not even remotely begin to solve the farmers' 

real problem, and that is the cost-price squeeze. The Farm Price Stabilization Bill that sets the floor of 

80 per cent of the 10-year running average price of such commodities as eggs, butter, cheese, cattle, 

hogs, and so on, is as synonymous, Mr. Speaker, with depression, as is the Conservative Party. 

 

Wheat, oats and barley grown in western Canada are excluded from this munificent Tory price 

stabilization. Mr. Speaker, I submit that, unless a policy for agriculture such as advocated by the C.C.F., 

parity price structure for agricultural products, expansion of markets for agricultural production, 

acceptance of foreign currency, barter arrangements, long-term credit arrangements with importing 

countries, encouragement of a freer multilateral trade agreement — unless this is done and implement 

soon, by whatever party that forms the next Government at Ottawa, the complete collapse of western 

agriculture is only a matter of time. 

 

In view of the fact that the budget indicates careful planning and judicious allocation of funds, that it 

assures the continuation of those programmes so vital to the well-being and to the growth of this 

province, and above all, in that it is in keeping with the best traditions of humanitarian government — it 

is with utmost pride, Mr. Speaker, when I say, I shall support the budget. 

 

Mr. Cliff H. Thurston (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate, I first want to 

join with previous speakers in congratulating the Provincial Treasurer (Hon. Mr. Fines) on the Budget 

he presented to this House. 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

17 

Not only do I congratulate him for the able and fluent manner in which he presented the Budget, but also 

for its contents. To me it not only was a flowery speech, but one that contained a great deal of 'meat and 

potatoes'. 

 

Mr. Speaker, representing a rural constituency as I do, it is only natural that I should be interested in 

looking at the budget to see how it affects the farmers. I can say that at a first glance, one sees only 4.24 

per cent out of the total budget for the Department of Agriculture, and this may look somewhat 

alarming; but a further study shows that a considerable amount, or a large percentage, of the budget aids 

the farmer and his family directly. It is true that only $5 1/2 million of the budget is to be spent by the 

Department of Agriculture, but I think it is also true that you cannot spend over $5 million for municipal 

road assistance, $25 million for highways, $26 million for education, $27 million for health, $12 million 

for social welfare, without aiding the farmers. I am sure that if this were figured out on a per capita 

basis, it would show that the farmer has received his fair share of the money to be spent this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have always understood that by our constitution, it was the responsibility of Provincial 

Governments to aid in matters of production, and the responsibility rests with the Federal Government in 

dealing with markets and prices and interprovincial trade. To me, this budget does aid in helping the 

farmer to maintain or increase his production. It emphasizes further extension services, expansion of 

pasture and forage development, extended calf-vaccination program for the control and eradication of 

Bang's disease; they have set up this agricultural administration, the machinery administration. I believe 

that the testing of farm machinery will be of great assistance to the farmer, particularly if it is done by 

experienced and capable personnel. 

 

I am not too concerned, Mr. Speaker, with the existing machine companies, who are putting implements 

out, but I am quite concerned by the fly-by-night companies that can come in and put machines on the 

market without being tested, and I am sure that this commission will be of great assistance to the farmers 

and customers of such machines. 

 

I should also like to congratulate the Minister of Agriculture (Hon. Mr. Nollet) on his grasshopper 

program. The Minister reported to Public Accounts on this program. He stated that by the Department 

buying up large stocks of chemicals, they were able to make a saving on this program. By 1949 it was 

estimated that the cost per acre was $3. This year the municipality can purchase this chemical from the 

Department of Agriculture for less than 20 cents an acre. I suggest that that will be of great assistance to 

the farmers of this province, particularly if we have an extended outbreak of grasshoppers 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

18 

this spring. 

 

As I mentioned before, the budget estimates only $5 1/2 million to be spent by the Department of 

Agriculture, and I suggest if this amount were doubled or even tripled, it would not solve the problems 

of markets and prices. To me, sir, that is the big problem facing us today. 

 

Now, there has been a lot said in and out of this House about taxes. It has been said that this 

Government, by its policies are to blame for the agricultural slump that we find ourselves in. It has been 

suggested that this Government is working a hardship on the farmers by overcharging them for their 

truck licenses and the insurance premiums charged thereof. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald: — You certainly are! 

 

Mr. Thurston: — It has been suggested that our gasoline tax is high and above all, that the land tax is 

what is breaking the farmer. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — That is right. 

 

Mr. Thurston: — Mr. Speaker, in preparing material for my talk today, I thought I would check and get 

some figures to see if this accusation was right. I have a set of figures comparing the truck licence fees 

for the three prairie provinces. The farm-truck registration for 1957 for Alberta, Manitoba and 

Saskatchewan — first, we will turn to Alberta, where maximum gross weight does not exceed 4,000 

pounds, $4; where it exceeds 4,000 pounds but does not exceed 6,000 pounds, $15; where it exceeds 

6,000 pounds but does not exceed 12,000 pounds, $25; and where it exceeds 12,000 pounds, $35. 

Turning to Manitoba for the registration of trucks, according to combined weight and carrying capacity, 

not over three tones or 6,000 pounds, $12.50, with an additional half-ton or portion thereof an additional 

$2.50. A little simple arithmetic will show that the trucks with a carrying capacity of over 12,000 pounds 

will cost $27.50. 

 

Turning to Saskatchewan, for any farm truck up to, and including 1946 — $10; for a year model 1947, 

or later up to 5,000 pounds, $10; 5,000 to 7,500 pounds, $12.50; 7,500 to 10,000 pounds, $15 and 

10,000 to 12,000 pounds, $17.50. I would like to pause here, Mr. Speaker, just to make a little 

comparison. In Manitoba, the 12,000 pound truck, $27.50; Alberta, $25 and $17.50 in Saskatchewan. 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

19 

The scale keeps going on up until we get the costs exceeding 32,000 pounds, $40. I would like at this 

point to suggest to the Provincial Treasurer that he check and see how many farm trucks are affected in 

the latter categories. Personally I do not think the loss would be too much to the province, if they cut out 

the last few categories, because particularly in the 1957 models, I doubt whether there are too many of 

these big trucks. 

 

Now, let us take a look at the insurance rates. I have here a comparison of farm truck insurance rates in 

Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta. Using as an example a 1956 one-ton truck, comparing the 

coverages in the two provinces first, a standard coverage policy in Manitoba or Alberta, compared with 

the Automobile Insurance Act and Package Policy in Saskatchewan — first, the bodily injury. In 

Manitoba or Alberta, $50,000-$100,000; Saskatchewan, $50,000-$120,000, property damage, $10,000 

in both cases; collision $25 deductible, the same in both cases; comprehensive full coverage, except $25 

deductible on glass; with the exception that in Saskatchewan we are covered under Part 2 of the Act 

which is not covered in Alberta or Manitoba. 

 

Let us take a look at the basic rates, that is, not eligible for no-claim discounts. In rural Manitoba, 

$55.40; rural Alberta, $85.40; anywhere in Saskatchewan under the Act, $6. The package policy, $21 — 

a total of $27. Rural Manitoba. $55.40 and rural Alberta, $85.40; Saskatchewan $27. For the three-year 

no-claim rate, Manitoba, $40.80; Alberta, $43; Saskatchewan, under the Act, $6 the package policy $15 

— or a total of $21. 

 

I would just like to say here, Mr. Speaker. I heard the hon. member from Rosthern yesterday speaking of 

dividends, and I thought when I was checking these figures over, we make a pretty fair dividend here. 

 

While I am on the insurance rates it night be interesting to the members to know that the rate for a 

standard policy in Saskatchewan is $57.24 basic and $43 for a three-year-no-claim. 

 

Turning now to the gasoline tax. What is the situation regarding gasoline tax in the three prairie 

provinces? Manitoba, 12 cents per gallon; Saskatchewan, 12 cents per gallon; Alberta 11 cents. To me 

the gas tax does not tell the complete story. I think we must also take a look at the road mileage in the 

three provinces to see what the expenditure load must be, and I find that Manitoba has 3,851 miles of 

first and secondary highways, 16,476 miles of local or municipal roads making a total of 20,328 miles. 

Alberta has 6,546 miles of main roads and secondary roads, and 80,838 miles of district and local roads, 

making a total of 86,384 miles,, while in Saskatchewan we 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

20 

have 8,239 miles of provincial highways, municipal and local roads 152,473 miles and of this amount 

over 90,000 miles are improved, or semi-improved; 2,248 miles of developed road making a total of 

162,969. 

 

Regarding the land tax, I will not weary the House by making going into the other provinces as the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs did that very well the other afternoon. But I will try and show that the land 

tax is now what is breaking the Saskatchewan farmer. Using my own municipality, Sherwood No. 159 

as an example, the tax for municipal purposes for 1957 was nine mills; the school tax was one mill, 

making a total of 10 mills on 5,000 assessed land of $50 per quarter-section. I think that all the members 

will agree that this was not a particularly high tax, nor does it place a very high burden on any of the 

farmers of the Regina district. 

 

Mr. Korchinski (Redberry): — Is that the maximum or minimum? 

 

Mr. Thurston: — I could say that the members of this area are having a hard time due to the lack of 

cash and working capital. I am very greatly concerned, Mr. Speaker, at the number of farmers, 

particularly the young farmers . . . 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — One mill school tax? 

 

Mr. Thurston: — . . . who are finding it necessary to leave the farms to supplement their incomes. I 

suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this is not the fault of the Provincial Government, because as I said a moment 

ago, I do not think that we could hope to ask for any tax less than $50 per quarter-section. So it is easy to 

see, that the root goes much deeper than taxes. 

 

I have shown that the farm truck licences are only about half the cost in Saskatchewan to what they are 

in Manitoba or Alberta. Insurance premiums on farm trucks are less than half that is charged in the two 

provinces. I might say that the rate for cars is just as favourable as I have used for the trucks. I have 

shown that the road mileage is nearly double that of Manitoba and Alberta combined. The gas tax is the 

same as in Manitoba, and only one cent more than in Alberta. I think it only reasonable that, with this 

terrific road mileage that the gas tax is not too high. To me it is a fair tax. Those people who use the 

roads most pay the most, and I think that is a sound principle. 

 

I have shown in my own municipality that the Land Tax is not what is breaking the farmer. I think that 

all the hon. members will agree that the serious conditions facing the farmers today, is due to the lack of 

markets and parity prices. It may be true that 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

21 

some members will say that that is not their problem; their problem is flooding and the lack of crops. 

 

I should also like to say that the time is long overdue when we have a comprehensive crop insurance 

plan set up in Saskatchewan. Looking at the budget, Mr. Speaker, and taking $130 million to be 

presented this year, I suggest we can throw it all into the pot and still we, as farmers, are going to go 

broke if the cost-price squeeze still continues. 

 

Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Thurston: — Now, Mr. Speaker, there are many other things which I would like to have dealt with 

in sharing the radio time this afternoon, but I would just like to, before I sit down, say one thing on the 

grid roads. The Minister dealt very effectively with that the other afternoon, but I would like to 

congratulate the municipalities within Lumsden constituency that have gone ahead with this grid road 

program. I had the opportunity, last fall, in the early winter months, of travelling over many miles that 

were built in this area. I want to say to those responsible, to the councillors and to the contractors, that 

not only have they proved to themselves that it can be done with great benefit to the community, but it is 

a boon to the whole country, and I certainly wish them success in their further development of their 

roads. 

 

In certain areas of this constituency of mine, the grid roads will let people out that never had the 

opportunity of getting to the market centres, except during certain periods of the year. 

 

In closing, because this budget recognizes the problems that are facing the rural people; because it 

recognizes the need to put first things first, giving priority to the human and educational needs; because I 

believe it is a 'humanity first' budget, a budget that will be supported by the majority of the people of this 

province, I take great pleasure in supporting the motion. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, once again this House has been privileged in 

receiving the outline of a Budget from our Provincial Treasurer, which I think we can all say is 

optimistic, positive, and certainly encouraging to the people of this province. The one fact that appears 

to me, and I think to this House, very clearly is that, even though Saskatchewan's agriculture is in a 

collapse, yet the Government can continue with the kind of services that it has been 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

22 

elected to give, and the only reason that I can see how this has been possible is, as has been indicated in 

this House on numerous occasions, through the terrific development we have had industrially and 

otherwise, in this province. Only the wisdom of a Government such as the C.C.F. could have made it 

possible to survive such an economic catastrophe as the agricultural people are experiencing, today. 

 

This is exactly what I want to discuss. I know it has been brought to the attention of this House, but I do 

want to say a few more things in connection with cost-price squeeze. I want to point out to the members 

of this Assembly, and to those who were here before the year 1956 — the fact that I mentioned in this 

House, in 1952-53 that there was a depression setting in among the agricultural people. I recall quite 

clearly, at that time, the hon. member for Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) pointing out that the farmers of 

Saskatchewan were better off than ever before in the history of Canada; they were driving around in 

Cadillac cars. Well, I thought maybe I was wrong, insofar as certain parts of Saskatchewan were 

concerned; there are areas where you have big farms; they have great numbers of cattle and maybe they 

didn't feel the pinch as we were beginning to feel the pinch up in our part of the country. But the 

surprising thing is, that this same argument was presented to this House, that the farmers were getting 

worse off and worse off, over the year, and the hon. members opposite have, on every occasion, replied 

that the farmers were not hard up — that there was nothing to worry about. They were concerned, I 

think, in the main, to sustain the 'laissez faire' party, the Liberal party, in Ottawa, and that was the reason 

I think, for their stand. 

 

I certainly suggest to this Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan that the Opposition were not fair 

to the people of Saskatchewan over these past few years. The worst of all was what we heard in this 

House during the session when the hon. member from Melville (Mr. Gardiner), on making his harangue, 

on one occasion pointed out to this House that . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member must not refer to something which was said in the Throne 

Speech debate. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I am not quoting; I said it has been said in this House that the farmers are 

obtaining fair prices for their products. Now, I would like to ask the farmers of Saskatchewan whether 

they agree with the statement of the hon. member for Melville — whether they are getting fair prices or 

not. How can anybody say that the farmers are getting fair prices when, on the quota basis, an average 

farmer in Saskatchewan, with about three-quarters of land; on the average I suppose he would have 

about 300 acres under cultivation. He can only 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

23 

sell, at the maximum, about $2,000 or $3,000 worth of grain. An ordinary individual, Mr. Speaker, 

requires that much to sustain himself and his family on the farm, before even considering any expenses. 

These farmers, who are only able to sell $2,000 or $3,000 worth of grain, find that when they pay up 

their expenses for farming, which means gasoline, oil, repairs, truck costs, automobile costs, fertilizer 

and other expenses; (I have the facts — I have seen them) and they find that they have spent $1,000 

more than they were able to sell grain for. 

 

I know in my own case, and I keep proper records, my income from the farm was $3,000 last year, and 

my expenses were $4,000 and the hon. members opposite say that the farmers are well off and getting 

fair prices. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Nobody ever said such a thing. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I will let the records of this House decide whether it was said here or not. The hon. 

member for Melville (Mr. Gardiner) made a very clear statement that the farmers are well off and were 

getting fair prices. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, the statement that I made at that particular time 

was that the prices for the products that I was speaking about were higher than the prices quoted in 

either the Stabilization Bill of the present Government, or the Farm Price Support Bill under the past 

Government. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I really think, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member did not want to say what he did 

say; but he was making such a long speech, and I question whether he knew what he was talking about. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — It's obvious that you don't know. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Referring to this present depression in the agricultural industry, we often hear the 

argument through the press, and from the various political parties, particularly the Liberal party and the 

Conservative party, that the whole trouble in Canada is inflation. Now, Mr. Speaker, inflation to me — 

and I think to every member in this House, means too much money in this country. Then, of course, 

being a farmer, and hearing this argument all over the country, every day, from both Mr. Diefenbaker 

and all us cohorts, Mr. Pearson and others, that there is so much inflation in this country. I have tried to 

find some of this inflation to find some of this 'too much' money, and the tragedy of it all is, that I can't 

find where that money is. It certainly isn't in the 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

24 

hands of the working, people and it certainly isn't in the hands of the small businessman. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Look at the Public Accounts! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — The hon. members opposite know quite well where it is. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Look at your Estimates. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — It is in the hands of big monopoly business. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Your Crown Corporations. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — The only reason, Mr. Speaker, why the Government of Canada, today, whether it 

is a Liberal Government or a Conservative Government, is afraid to put more money into circulation, is 

because they know, as has been pointed out by writers in MacLean's and elsewhere, that if the present 

policies of the Government of Canada are followed, Canada will go bankrupt; and that is why they are 

afraid to put more money into circulation. They are afraid because private enterprise, monopoly 

enterprise, today has seized control of all the means of production, excepting the agricultural industry. 

There is where the danger lies. It isn't dangerous to have the necessary amount of money in circulation; 

the big danger to this country is the fact that the wealth, the natural resources, have gone into the hands 

of big business; and I think the hon. members presently recognize that fact. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Crown Corporations! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — That's very silly, I think. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Your whole speech is. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I think the members on this side know who the enemies of the working people and 

the farmers are. They are the people I pointed out, who have seized control of the wealth of this country 

— big business. The unfortunate thing is that many people in this country, and I presume some of the 

members opposite, foster the artificial propaganda of free enterprise also propagated by Diefenbakers 

and Gardeners over this province, and over this country. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Don't you want business to come into the province? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I submit that since the end of the last war, it has been known to the Government at 

Ottawa that there was a recession coning in due course of time; certainly in the 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

25 

agricultural industry. They knew quite well that there were dangerous inflationary tendencies throughout 

the country. I submit further that the Government which superseded the Liberals in June, 1957, was also 

aware of the rapidly changing economy that we are living in; and I further submit that neither the 

Liberals nor the Conservatives did anything about it; and to that extent, Mr. Speaker, they have failed 

the people of Canada. 

 

Some Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — One of the reasons I think, that is so is this: that governments, being what they are 

made up of human beings, as members of a Cabinet; they do not know all the answers and so they have 

advisors, just as we have advisors here — Planning Boards, and so on, but in Ottawa they have the 

greatest bureaucracy you have seen on this continent — the Treasury Board . . . 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Outside Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — This Treasury Board, which is a Committee of the Cabinet in Ottawa, obtains its 

advice from men such as the head of the Bank of Canada, and men of that type, who indicate to the 

Government what the fiscal policy should be; and instead of listening to organizations, such as farm 

organizations and labour unions and other small mercantile organizations, they follow the dictates of 

their advisors, and they have led our country into the position in which it finds itself, today. I say it is an 

indictment against our way of life, in this so-called free enterprise, to see hunger and distress amidst 

plenty. I think that we fail to remember that following the Second World War, production in our 

province mid country, as well as all over the world, made a remarkable recovery from destruction and 

disruption of war. During that time, Mr. Speaker, production of peaceful as well as defence materials 

was higher than ever before; and the development in the field of natural resources, of petroleum and 

hard rock minerals in our country rose beyond the nation's fondest hopes, and this development and 

stimulation has worked towards the building of a higher standard of living and stability of the Canadian 

economy. 

 

Had the Federal Government been wise and continued the controls that we had during the war and 

immediately following the war, this prosperity could have continued to this day, and we would not be in 

the dilemma we find ourselves in, today. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — You're the only one in a dilemma. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, we have heard accusations from the other side of the House from 

time to time that we are just terrible. I thought that, last year, we had heard the last of it, but we heard 

the same charges from the hon. member from 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

26 

Pelly (Mr. Barrie) this year, and from one or two others. I propose, today, to read to you the Manifesto 

of free enterprise, and also the Manifesto of the socialists who sit on this side of the House. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Take it as read! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I would like the hon. members to listen. This quotation is taken from the Idaho 

'Leader', August 26, 1920, printed in the 'Bankers' Magazine', and I quote: Here is what the free 

enterprise and private enterprise says: 

 

"Capital must protect itself in every possible manner through combination and legislation. Debts must 

be collected; bonds and mortgages must be foreclosed as rapidly as possible. When, through a process 

of law, the common people have lost their homes, they will be more tractable, and more easily 

governed through the influence of the strong arm of the government, applied by a central power of 

wealth under the control of leading financiers. A people without homes will not quarrel with their 

leaders . . ." 

 

Mr. McDonald: — The iron fist! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — The quote goes on: 

 

"History repeats it-self in regular cycles. This truth is well-known among our principal men now 

engaged in forming an imperialism of capital to govern the world . . . by thus dividing the voters we 

can get them to expend their energies in fighting over questions of no importance to us except as 

teachers (I would say, traitors) of the common herd. Thus, by discreet action we can secure for 

ourselves what has been generously planned and successfully accomplished." 

 

Fascism, Mr. Speaker, of the highest order! That is free enterprise! This is no accident, it is a rather cold 

and calculating greed-crazed planning to rob the people of their rights, their homes, and their privileges. 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

27 

This is, as I said, a quotation which you will find in the Idaho 'Leader', August 26, 1920, taken from a 

Bankers' Magazine. That is what the bankers say. That is what they consider free enterprise to be. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — What Bankers' magazine? 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Where is Idaho? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — He told you. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Mr. Speaker, he said it was taken from a Bankers' magazine. Give us the date of the 

Bankers' magazine. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — That in the name of it, 'Bankers' Magazine'. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Where is it published? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — He has already told you. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — You can get it from the transcript. Now, I said that I would compare . . . 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is quoting, and we should know from what he is 

quoting. He said the Bankers' magazine, what date, what issue? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Page 61 of — excerpt from 'A War on Poverty', by Partridge, of Sintaluta. The 

quotation is from the I 'Idaho 'Leader', August 26, 1920, which is printed in the Bankers' Magazine. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — One of the C.C.F. prophets! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — If you don't like it, I can't help it. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — It's about as out-dated as you are! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, it is no wonder that men who consider the people with whom they 

live should defend the rights, the dignity and the privileges of their neighbours; the same stand that Keir 

Hardy took. Keir Hardy, as some of the members opposite may know, was originally the leader of the 

labour movement, in the old country, Great Britain. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — What about Peer Gynt? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — He issued a Manifesto in 1888. At that time a Liberal Government was in power in 

the old country, and here is what he said: 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

28 

Mr. McCarthy: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, what does the year 1888 have to do with this 

budget debate? 

 

Premier Douglas: — You've been living in that age for years! He just wants to go back to the years you 

know something about. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — What a ramble - this is good. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I just want to point out to the hon. members how far behind you are — and here it 

is: 

 

"The attitude of the officials Liberals makes it unmistakably clear they care nothing for the interests of 

labour, except insofar as it can be made subservient to those of the class. The Liberals are eager to use 

our political power as a weapon against Tory landlords but they are afraid that in the hands of 

consistent and independent men the same weapon may be turned against the social injustice of which 

labour is the prey. 

 

"We do not intend, any longer, to be merely tools of political tricksters . . . " 

 

That is what Mr. Hardy says; and that is what the C.C.F. says, today. 

 

Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — The Liberals and Conservatives in Canada, today, are no more than political 

tricksters. When they are in office, they will do nothing — 'laissez faire' — when they are out of office, 

they promise everything. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — You must have listened to Tim Buck! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — And we have wakened up. We have been fooled long enough with this political 

trickery. If they are sincere about the welfare of the people of this country, would they have stood for a 

thing like this? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — What's that? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — The 'Telegram', Toronto, Friday, February 21: "$2 1/2 million Trans-Canada probe 

reveals" — that is for Mr. Tanner and associates. And no taxes! If the Government of Canada was 

concerned with the welfare of the people of Canada, would they not at least have seen to it that these 

people 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

29 

who were able to make $2 1/2 million of capital gain — would they not at least have made some effort 

to see that taxes were paid into the treasury of the Federal Government? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That's about the same thing as the cement plant over here. 

 

Mr. Klein: — What about your oil deals? 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — How about the box factory? What about that one? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Having said that, and because listening to an hon. member confess, the other day, 

when he pointed out that after all, he was very proud of the fact that there were industries in 

Saskatchewan and that they were making progress, I do not intend to punish the Opposition any longer. 

 

I will now deal with a few matters that pertain particularly to my constituency. One of these is natural 

resources, and of course these natural resources I am referring to certainly affect other constituencies, as 

well. We have heard in the Budget Speech that there will be about $3,190,000 spent for northern 

development roads. I think this is most commendable. I also commend the Government for spending 

money on the building of winter roads. These access roads, together with the roads that the 

Saskatchewan Timber Board has built and that the operators in the bush have built, are more and more 

opening up the forestry resources in that particular area. I have taken the liberty today, to show you that 

even some of what is considered an inferior species of timber — the ordinary aspen poplar when 

processed properly can make the finest material for building that you can find anywhere. This is what 

we call 'chip board'. I understand that the Research Branch of one of the Crown Corporations has 

shipped out some poplar from northern Saskatchewan and had it processed as an experiment to see the 

type of material it would make. I think there is a tremendous future in it. 

 

These roads are opening up all kinds of timber and evergreens, and of course, deciduous trees can 

produce different materials. Access roads, of course, will permit more exploration. We, of course, have 

no railways as yet; I hope the time will come when railways will be built, but trucks can do quite a good 

job in taking out the resources. 

 

I also wish to commend the Government and its corporations, for carrying on the various programs in 

the north, because as I pointed out, our farming industry has been tremendously hit. Just to indicate 

again to you, Mr. Speaker, recently, when I flew aver a northern area I could see only about one farm 

out of five occupied, where five or six years ago you would see nearly every farm being 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

30 

 

occupied; and the only reason why they are not occupied today is because the farmers have gone broke, 

and they have gone into the woods and they have gone into the lumber camps, and into the mining 

camps for work. The responsibility for the situation, as I pointed out, rests directly on the shoulders of 

the Federal authorities for their fiscal policy, and for lack of consideration of the needs of the 

agricultural people. 

 

I might point out, too, that this summer, when I was up in the north at Lynn Lake, I met with a number 

of people working in the mines and I would say that the majority of these young people were from the 

farms — not only from Saskatchewan, as sometimes said. I met one chap and asked him where he was 

from. He replied that he was from Dauphin, and when I asked him what he did at Dauphin, he said he 

operated a half-section of land. He said it was excellent land, and he had all his machinery and 

everything. "What are you doing down here?" I asked him. He replied that he was going broke farming, 

and he thought he might as well close up the farm; he put his machinery into sheds and was working in 

the mine for $6,000 a year, which he maintained was much better than going broke on his farm. 

 

This is the story right across the north. It is much, much worse than some of our good friends in the 

south — certain friends in the south — try to indicate. It is a very sorry spectacle; I only wish that, as 

members of the Legislature, everyone could go around the province and see what has happened, and 

then maybe we could co-operate just a little better, for the good of the people in this province. 

 

Surveys in the north indicate, as you will see from the Natural Resources Report, that we have about 15 

billion board feet measure of trees, 10 inches in diameter and over, and about 84 million cords of trees 

below this; we have one-quarter billion board feet measure of valuable white spruce, which is excellent 

for the building trade; and about 46 million cords of softwood. Then we have 55 million cords of black 

spruce and pine, which is in high demand for pulp and newsprint. Having referred to our inventory in the 

Annual Report, I would like to say this, that I regret exceedingly, as I do believe that every member of 

this House and every citizen of Saskatchewan regrets, that no immediate decision has been made to 

build a pulp mill, say in Prince Albert, or elsewhere. This Government has had a conservation program 

protecting the forest resources; we have been very fortunate in not having had fires there; we have a 

resource here ready to be processed, and it is very regrettable that the situation has arisen in Canada 

again which has not been encouraging industry to open up new businesses, and particularly we are 

disappointed in the fact that we may have to wait some time for a pulp mill. 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

31 

Mr. Loptson: — They have a new pulp mill in Nova Scotia. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — That may be so. These comparisons are sometimes not very proper, because 

different conditions persist; for example, Nova Scotia has ships from Europe sail right up close to the 

source of the resource, while down here the hon. member must remember we would have to ship the 

same material thousands of miles. For example, I recall quite well the argument that we had when the 

Anglo Pulp Mill pulled out of the province. I don't blame the Anglo-Canadian people at all. Sure they 

paid more dues in Ontario than they had to pay here; I think the Government here was very generous 

with the company insofar as the dues were concerned; and the Company was very pleased. But when 

they took the freight rates into consideration, and even at the cost of the higher wages, they had to pay in 

Ontario, they still found they could probably save $3 per ton of sulphate pulp; they could produce a ton 

of sulphate pulp cheaper in Ontario to the extent of about $3 than they could here. Even if it was $1 a 

ton, would you blame a company producing a million cords a year from establishing its plant where they 

could make an extra million dollars? We are very fortunate, being in the central part of Canada as we 

are, that we have no freight concessions in connection with these resources. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — They've got a mill in Alberta. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Of course, there again I can give you an argument, but I don't intend to spend my 

time doing just that. There again the conditions are different than they are here; but I do say this, Mr. 

Speaker, that we have the resources, and I do say this, that in studying certain reports such as the 

Stanford Research Institute report, the scientists tell us, and all the people know pretty well, who are 

informed on these matters, that within the next 20 or 25 years, the demand for sulphate pulp and for 

newsprint will double; and we know that a pulp mill will come to us in a very short time. 

 

But I will say this, that if for some reason we have to wait, I can say what I said before, that the 

Government of this province should make some extra effort to try and find markets; because I believe, 

very sincerely that the only reason why the Government of Saskatchewan, through its Crown 

Corporations, hasn't found it desirable to start a pulp mill is because of the fact that it is difficult to find 

markets. I recognize this — markets have disappeared at the present time because of surpluses to the 

extent of 15 per cent, but within a year's time, the market will come back. If news reports are correct, I 

think the Government should continue to investigate, and if necessary, (I have said this before) I think 

they should assist either 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

32 

co-operatives or private industry with say borrowing of money as we have done with the Cement Plant, 

or some other way, to see this plant established. 

 

The reason I say this is that we have the resource; we have protected that resource; it belongs to the 

people of Saskatchewan, and we as a Government have a responsibility to see that that resource is 

wisely utilized. I would hate to see the day when it might either rot or burn, after all, we had put into 

protecting and looking after it. I think that something should be done. Probably a start could be made by 

establishing say, a small Chip Board plant. I don't know too much about these industries, but I do know 

that in making chip board, I have been told that you use just about every part of the tree except the leaf 

— it may be a good start; we could find out the market conditions for it, and see how we could operate 

with private industry. 

 

I would just like to add one more thing for the information of the hon. members in connection with the 

pulp industry. The demand is coming back, and I understand the profits in that industry have been good; 

they are not like the Massey-Harris-Ferguson, as somebody indicated, suffering a loss; the pulp industry 

has been making, over the years, an average of 25 to 35 per cent profit, net profit, before paying taxes; 

and that is a considerable amount when you consider that a ton of pulp is worth about $160 f.o.b. 

shipping point. If we only made 10 per cent . . . 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — What about the box plant? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — If that was true, that we were inefficient, as has been said by those opposite, and 

which is not true, because I think it can be proven that we are more efficient than private industry is, as 

has been indicated in the last year or two — but even if we weren't, $16 on a ton of pulp means about 

$10 on a cord of pulpwood, which would remain with the people of Saskatchewan as an earning, if the 

plant belonged to the public. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — What about the box plant, Bill? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I would like to congratulate the Minister of Highways, (Hon. Mr. J.T. Douglas), 

and the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Hon. Mr. McIntosh) for their part in seeing that roads are being 

rig built in the north, and that grants are being made to municipalities. Notwithstanding what hon. 

members to your left may say, the fact remains that under former Liberal administration in the part of 

the province — at least where I live, if we obtained a grant once in four or five years, of say $200 to 

$500, we felt we had really achieved something, and yet this same municipality that 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

33 

was able to got $400 in one particular year, and that was one of the best grants they ever got from the 

Liberals, last year obtained, through the various grants, over $25,000 — a six-township municipality. I 

am very proud of this Government for having assisted them to that extent. 

 

I should also have commended the Minister of Natural Resources (Hon. Mr. Kuziak) because in areas 

such as Cumberland House and other areas of the north, roads are being built even if they are only to 

accommodate the people to travel from one community to the next community three or four miles away. 

In particular, a road has been built from Lac la Ronge — it is not my constituency, with apologies to the 

member from Athabaska (Mr. Harrop) — but I must mention it; a road has been built from Lac la Ronge 

down to English Bay. I was over it last fall, and I wish to say to the Minister of Natural Resources that it 

is going to be an excellent tourist road. It is well built, and I am proud, again, of the Government, for 

having extended No. 2 Highway a little further into the north. 

 

Another thing I wish to commend the Government for — and I see that it is going to be continued under 

the present budget, is bringing power into these little northern villages. Northern people have been, as 

has been mentioned in this House on a number of occasions, left behind. Governments in the past have 

not done too much to help them; they have been paternalistic, but this Government has not only brought 

schools into those areas, but has recently been bringing in power plants. I understand that power plants 

are already underway at Cumberland House, Pelican Narrows, and other places up in the north. I think it 

is my duty to say, on behalf of the people who live in those communities, that we appreciate very much 

what the Power Corporation has done, and I give my thanks and the thanks of the people to the Minister 

of the Branch. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Tell us about the box plant. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — One of the things that you must remember, if we are going to help the people in 

the northern constituencies, is the fact that we must endeavour to do everything possible to bring the best 

returns for the products they produce. We have considerable fishing and trapping, and as has been 

mentioned in this House, the people, particularly this last year, have not been too fortunate insofar as 

trapping is concerned; but I am very proud of the fact that by having the kind of organizations that we 

have — the Fish Marketing Service, and the Fur Marketing Service, we are bringing to the people of the 

north anywhere from say 10, 15 to 100 per cent more than they would get from private enterprise. 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

34 

I would like to refer hon. members to the fact that we obtain about 7,000 pounds of sturgeon on 

Cumberland Lake and that the Fish Marketing Service was able to obtain a price for fishermen of over 

$1.10 a pound for those sturgeon, and believe me, $7,000 or more is very beneficial to the living 

standards of that community; it means considerable to those people. For a few people, $7,000 is very 

meaningful. 

 

At the same time, I noticed in the questions that have been asked by members of the Opposition, that 

down in Turtle Lake, the same Fish Marketing Service was able to obtain for the fishermen in that area 

as high as 52 cents per pound for jumbo whitefish. I would like to see any fish dealer show me that he 

has paid a similar amount in the year 1957. The figures that I have obtained from fishermen in that 

general area that have been paid by private dealers, amounted to 15, 20 or 18 cents — nothing near the 

price that we were able to obtain through the Fish Marketing Service. 

 

I feel as one of the northern representatives, there is one point I would like to present to the Government 

as a recommendation. We have people working in established mines in the north, and yet I am afraid 

that some of the rights that Labour has in the south do not pertain there. For example, I do know that in 

Uranium City men work double shifts, and in this day, when there is so much unemployment, when we 

would desire to see our young men obtain employment so that conditions may correct themselves, I 

think that the Minister of Labour of this Government should see to it; discuss it with the Cabinet, and 

have regulations pertain to those areas. I do not see why any person should be required to work 16 hours 

in a day. I know the Companies will insist that the men want to do that; they want to make that extra 

money; they probably will insist that it is more efficient that way, but I think as a general principle, the 

same laws we have in the rest of the province of Saskatchewan should pertain in places like Uranium 

City. As a matter of fact, they do pertain, I think, in Creighton, where we have mines; and I cannot 

understand why the same regulations do not apply at Uranium City. 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I might mention that 

there was a Bill given Third Reading just a few days ago, which will give the Minister of Labour the 

power to limit the hours of work in any place of employment to 12 hours per day. There is no such 

legislation in effect at the present time; it is pretty much up to the employer and the individual where 

they work these double shifts. Certainly we do not agree with it, and I doubt very much if any of the 

Unions agree with it; but when this Bill is assented to, we will have that power. 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

35 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I am very glad to hear that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I notice that I have spoken longer than I intended to, and I am sure that I shall have further opportunities 

to bring some of the problems of my community to the Legislature — of my constituency, I mean. So, 

adding it all up and taking into consideration what this Government has done, and what this Government 

proposes to do for education, for agriculture, for social welfare and all the things that we are responsible 

for, I certainly feel that I am more than justified in supporting the budget. 

 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, entering the debate at this late date, I am not going to 

extend the usual congratulations that are extended to previous speakers. I agree with them all. 

 

Entering the debate at a late date has some advantages, and it has some disadvantages. Some of the 

things I was going to say a while ago, have already been said, and I am not going to worry you by 

repeating them; and I assure you I am not going to talk very long. 

 

There are, however, one or two matters I felt I would like to place before this House. I could not help but 

be struck by some of the language used in the Budget Speech. I have read the Provincial Treasurer's 

Budget speeches over the years. In fact I checked them over again, last night, and he has been very 

practical. But for some peculiar reason, whether it is the time we are living in or something else, there 

seems to be quite a bit of political propaganda in this one. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown (Provincial Secretary): — Oh, bosh! 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — I suppose it is the times we are in. Everybody is thinking about politics, and he 

couldn't resist taking a little shot at some of the other political parties. I hope that, if he is here with us, 

next year, he will again go back to his original form of giving us the facts of the budget, because I think 

it is more in keeping with his position. 

 

Having taken that little excursion into the realm of politics, Mr. Speaker, I hope to be able to confine the 

balance of my remarks to the province, and to two or three matters of provincial interest. The subject, of 

course, that I am very much interested in is municipal affairs, and I would like, for a few minutes, to 

discuss municipal affairs and roads as they appear now. You would think, to hear some of the chaps on 

the other side talk, that the Government was just throwing money at the municipalities — the best there 

ever was! They remind me of a fellow, a preacher, who went out one day in 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

36 

the early horse-and-buggy days. He went to a place for dinner. The lady of the house didn't have dinner 

quite ready, so he went to look around the pasture; he was very, interested in cows. There was a very 

fine pair of milk cows there, and the preacher said to the farmer: "That is a nice pair of milk cows". The 

farmer said: "Yep, that is the best cow in Saskatchewan; and this is a better one." So that is just about 

the position they take over there. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Hear! Hear'. I have to agree with you, Ross. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — There are several things this Government is doing, and whether they are doing them 

intentionally, or whether they know they are doing them or not, there are a lot of things they are doing 

which could stand a very great amount of correcting at this time. 

 

Of their ever-increasing budget, for instance, percentage-wise they are not giving the municipalities as 

much as they did last year. Since they started the grid road system, of course, they can work up the 

percentages, but I am just going to give you the figures, percentage-wise, that they have been giving to 

the municipalities in the last few years. In 1958, they gave 4.3 percentage-wise, of the budget to the 

municipalities. That was a little higher than this year. I don't know why they dropped it down, but 

apparently they did. When you get into 1956, they gave 3.58 percentage-wise, of their budget to the 

municipalities, of course, that was after the grid road started. But if you look at 1955, percentage-wise, 

they gave .91 per cent of the budget to the municipalities for roads. Now, you would never know that 

when you listen to these gentlemen talk here, Mr. Speaker. You would think it was 91 per cent of the 

budget they were giving. Then, if you go back a year or two before that; if you go back to the year 1954 

and 1953, there was less than one-half of one per cent of the budget given to the municipalities. 

Approximately one-half million dollars is what they gave the municipalities in those years. Those were 

the years when for some reason or the other, they decided the municipalities didn't amount to much, and 

134 of them didn't get anything for three years. 

 

This Government started out with a good program — I think it was in 1947 . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis (Minister of Public Works): —: What about the Public Revenue Tax? 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — I'm not talking about the Public Revenue Tax. In 1947, this Government started out 

with a good policy, and I have said so before, and I say so again. They started out and said: "We are 

going to give the municipalities something so that they will know what they are going to get each year." 

This was 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

37 

similar to your Ottawa agreement — and how would you fellows over there like it if the Dominion 

Government said: "All right, we'll shove you a little bit this year, and we'll take it away next year." How 

would you run your business? Well, how do you expect the municipalities to run their business under 

similar circumstances? That is exactly what you are doing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — That is the way the Liberals treated the municipalities. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — That is exactly what you are doing. In these three years you didn't give anything to 

134 of them, and the rest of them were treated according to your own good judgment, or something like 

that. But the fact remains, Mr. Speaker, that they did have a good formula when they said: "You are 

going to get $500, and then we are going to take a lot of other things into consideration and pay you an 

equalization grant on those factors." That is the first time this province ever had a formula like that. But 

the funny thing about it was that when they carried that program out, they had $1 1/4 million left by 

another Government for another purpose, and when they used that $1 1/4 million up, they ceased to pay 

the equalization grant, and they also ceased to pay the $500 grant. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it is high time that we regarded our money spent on roads as an investment, 

because it is an investment, and the sooner we can get away from regarding it as a political expenditure, 

the better off we will be, both in highways and in municipalities. We have in this province, a Road 

Users' Tax. That is, if I go down that road, I pay half a cent a mile to use that road, in the Users' Tax; and 

why is that Users' Tax there? It doesn't matter — you may not think so; but if you go down a road here, 

today, you do a certain amount of damage to that road. The peculiar thing about it is that the poorer the 

road is, the more damage you do; but you have to pay more taxes, because the gasoline tax from the 

average-sized motor car amounts to about half a cent a mile per mile travelled. If you are in a truck, it 

amounts to about a cent a mile per mile travelled, and that is a Users' Tax, and it is a fair tax. I remember 

being at the municipal convention when that tax was first put on, and it was put on to be used wholly for 

road purposes, with the municipalities getting a fair share. But what are we doing now? The 

municipalities are building the roads and maintaining them, and the Government is collecting the tax; 

they give it back just as they see fit — very often politically. 

 

Our grid road system that has been set up — and I want to say that, since the grid road system was set 

up, your percentage, budget-wise, does show up better on paper; but the fact remains, Mr. Speaker, that 

those grid roads, or so-called grid roads, should never be the responsibility of the municipalities at all — 

only a portion of them. We have had in this province, for a number of years, what was 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

38 

called a highway system built by former governments, and maintained by them. But when this 

Government came in, they dropped off a few here and there. They had some left; but the reason they 

were designated, to start with, as secondary highways was because the traffic that was carried on those 

roads went from one municipality to the other. 

 

In the early days of this province, all the municipality had to do was build their own roads for their own 

people, and possibly an odd one had to go through another municipality; but our travel habits have 

changed, and now the traffic is so mobile that it travels very often miles from the municipality where it 

originates. So these secondary roads were set up, not to highway standards, but they were set up to a 

lower standard. The Government built them and maintained them with the hope that, when 

circumstances changed, they would go into the highway system — and they should still be in the 

highway system, Mr. Speaker. There may be an odd change here and there . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — May I ask the hon. member a question? 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Well, it depends on what it is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I will ask it, and then you can decide whether I may or not. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Well, I don't have to answer it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — No. I know that. I just wondered if the hon. member knew the relationship 

of mileage of the secondary highways to the 12,000 miles of grid road. Does he know that it is 900 

miles, approximately, of secondary highways as against 12,000 miles of grid? 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Well, who is making this speech, you or I? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I wondered if you knew that. The question is, do you know that? 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Yes. I knew it. Certainly I know it and I knew something else, too, and it is that you 

put over 100 miles of what should be marked 'highway' into your grid road system and said it is a rural 

responsibility. Now, take that! Roads that run from the international boundary right up to the bush — 

little pieces left in them, and this Government didn't have the courage or the fortitude to build them; but 

they say, "There, that is yours". These roads are carrying a tremendous amount of traffic; and you are 

sitting there, collecting the Users' Tax from them. 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

39 

Mr. McDonald: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Your grid system — true, the municipalities asked for it; but they didn't think they 

were going to get what you gave them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — They weren't used to getting what they asked for. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Well, that's all right You haven't anything to be proud of in the last ten years, until 

you put this grid road system in. You were more political than any other government ever was in this 

province with both your highways and your municipal; and we had a beautiful example of that here, the 

other day — a beautiful example! A member over there got up and said the Government had rebuilt 

every mile of highway in his constituency since they came into power. He was proud of that. Well, what 

happened to the rest of the constituencies? Down where I live they haven't done nearly as well as that 

and the roads down there were built before this Government's time and they are good roads; and you 

haven't done a thing with half of them, and yet we are still using them now. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, when I entered politics, I got a pretty good start. I went in a by-election and 

they talk about politics and roads. I really was introduced to the political game in a pretty rough way. I 

went in the by-election in 1949, and they came down there. They had a member for every seven polls, 

and they said, "Now, look! You vote C.C.F. and we'll give you $200,000 for roads; if you vote Liberal, 

you don't get any." And that is one promise they kept — we didn't get any! 

 

They even went down there and set the stakes up and down No. 13 Highway along by Manor and 

Redvers and down there; and those stakes rotted, Mr. Speaker, because the people down there didn't vote 

C.C.F. They kept their promise. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Those are Liberal tactics. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — They came along a little later when it got near another election, and they dangled a 

few miles of highway here and there, and said: "Now vote C.C.F. and we will build this little bit of 

highway for you." Well, they didn't do so well, but it got to be so bad that they darned well had to fix 

those highways, because their own people wouldn't stand for it. But today, Mr. Speaker, I estimate that I 

have 300 miles of highway in my own constituency. It is only a rough estimate, and I don't want 

anybody to check me up, but half of them have been rebuilt, and the other half were built in the early 

'twenties. They are thirty years old, and 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

40 

they haven't been rebuilt yet; and there is no appropriation for No. 16 today. They built No. 16 from the 

border to Kipling. They built it from here out. They left a piece there that is just a canal; but next 

election they will come along and dangle a little piece and say, "Well, come on, boys! Vote C.C.F., and 

we'll build that for you." 

 

So you don't need to talk to me about politics and all the rest of it. That is why I said, a while ago, that 

the quicker we look upon our road expenditures as an investment, set up on a business basis, and get 

away from this nonsense of political expenditure of public money, the better it will be for everybody 

including the Government, who are sitting on that side, whoever they may be. If we are going to run this 

province, let's run it on a business-like basis. 

 

Now, that is about all I wanted to say on that at the moment. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas (Minister of Highways): — Before the hon. member leaves that question, I would 

like to inform him that . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Do you want to ask a question, or make a speech? Sit down. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — I just wanted to inform the hon. member . . . 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — You wanted to inform me what? 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — No. 16 highway has not been built to the border. It is three miles north. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Three miles short, yes. That is a darned fool thing, too. I am glad you mentioned it. 

That is one thing I had forgotten. You should be the last one to over mention that. You shouldn't be 

proud of it. Here you go, down to a place three miles from the Manitoba border, and stop there, and the 

people on the other side are stopped, too. They say that they don't know which way to come out because 

they don't know which way you are going. For gracious sakes, if you haven't got the courage to build it, 

tell them where you are going, when you do build it! 

 

There is another matter, Mr. Speaker, which I would like to mention just for a few minutes because it is 

a very serious matter in my district. The member for Kinistino (Mr. Begrand) mentioned it, the other 

day; and some other member mentioned it here. I have just forgotten who it was. It is the matter of snow 

plows. I can quite understand some of you chaps who live in the southwest where you get lots of 

Chinook winds probably aren't too much interested, 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

41 

but on the east side of this province and across the north end of its it is a very, very serious problem. As 

I said before, our mode of travel has changed; our mode of being has changed. More particularly, our 

schools have changed and these snow plows are very important things. In the little town that I live in, we 

have five snow plow clubs. Those clubs are organized on a voluntary basis under the regulations of the 

co-operatives, but it is all voluntary subscription, Mr. Speaker. We get some help from the Larger 

School Unit, but again those are the people who are paying the taxes. You know, a lot of people think, or 

at least some of them think, that that should be a municipal responsibility. I don't think so. I am very 

much opposed to making it a municipal responsibility for this reason. You see, in a municipality we 

have something over 450, 460, or 470 (1 have just forgotten the figure) miles of road. Now, it isn't 

possible to keep all those roads open. It is a physical impossibility. So if you are going to put it on a 

municipal basis, you are going to tax the people for it. There are only certain roads that you can use a 

snow plow on, and it isn't fair, if I happen to live on a road that it is possible to plow, to tax a chap over 

six miles away, who will get no advantage of it. So, it isn't possible economically, or it isn't right or fair, 

to put on a tax. But we have to have these snow plows. I think we have five buses coming into our little 

town, and even this year — I make some donations to it sometimes; I don't belong to the Club, but I got 

a reminder the other day, that they needed a little more money, so they are now out of money. Now, 

what has happened. A lot of the people down there don't have horses. Nearly all of them use their motor 

cars and they need the roads open. The fact of the matter is that, because these snow plows are running, 

and they are necessary, and they are operated by local donations, this Government collects the Users' 

Tax, and every time a car goes down the road they donate almost a cent a mile in the wintertime, and 

that tax money goes to this Government. So I would suggest to this Government that they take a very 

close look at this snow plow deal, as it really is quite important to the people living in the rural areas of 

this province. 

 

Now, I want to go back, just for a minute and say another word or two about our grid roads. As I said 

before, they are a good thing; but the Government has just kind of slipped it over the municipalities a 

little bit. The boys are commencing to realize it now, but they didn't realize it to start with. Here is the 

deal. They lay out a road; they usually pick the best road in the municipality, because that is the one that 

has been built up over the years the market roads and the secondary highways, even the highways that 

are marked; that is where they put the road. Well, they will pay from 40 to 60 per cent of the cost of that 

road, but they don't pay anything towards the maintenance of the road, and what is going to happen is 

that, in ten years' time, the municipality is going to 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

42 

have a half-worn-out road while the Government is going to have all the money they put into it go back 

to them through the Users' Tax, and there you are. So I think the municipalities should get a good share 

of this Users' Tax, and I think this Government should accept its responsibilities. 

 

What they are doing is this. In nearly all instances, the grid roads have been placed on roads that should 

be provincial roads, and the municipality has to maintain them, and I would say that, over the course of 

ten years, this Government, through the gasoline tax, will have all their money back; the municipalities 

will have half-worn-out roads, and still have the responsibility of maintaining them and rebuilding them. 

 

I was rather amused, the other day, at a statement made by my good friend, the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs (Hon. Mr. McIntosh). He was up there talking away, and making a very good job of it, in a vain 

effort to build up the wonderful idea of what the R.M.'s are getting today; but he just overstepped 

himself, in my opinion. He started out by saying, "Well, look at the increase there is in municipal 

assessment. We have given them the railroad tax. We have given them the gas tax. We have given them 

the oil tax" and (what the heck was the other one?) — the pipeline tax. Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister 

of Municipal Affairs didn't have anything to do with any of them. I'll take that back. I believe he did 

have something to do with helping to got the railroad tax, but the other three came there, not because of 

any C.C.F. Government, but in spite of them. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — And the municipalities are glad to have them, and they certainly did raise the 

assessments in a small percentage of the municipalities. But I want to point out that, where the oil wells 

are thick enough to have any affect on the assessment, they also have a similar problem of very heavy 

equipment travelling on roads that weren't built for that purpose. Consequently they have to put most of 

the money back in; but 80 per cent of the rural municipalities in this province have neither pipelines, gas 

or oil, nor railroads. So I think it was a pretty weak proposition he was trying to build up for himself, 

when he got down to the assessment of those few municipalities. 

 

That was one thing. The only other thing I have seen happen over there that was supposed to be helpful 

to the municipalities was stupid comparisons of the grants that were given in the 'thirties, compared with 

what are being given today. 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

43 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — They are stupid — I agree with you. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — The budget at that time was $16 million. Now, it is just absolutely silly to attempt to 

make a comparison of the grants that were made out of a $16 million budget compared with today. I 

don't know who you think you are fooling. You are not fooling me. You are, not fooling anybody of my 

age. Some of the younger people in this province may be foolish enough to fall for it; but again I repeat, 

it is absolutely stupid to make those comparisons. If the gentleman did it here, today — which one of 

them was it? That old record keeps playing over and, for gracious sakes! Look up something better; that 

is worn out. It never was factual, and it isn't today. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about our cattle prices. I was very glad the Provincial 

Treasurer, in his budget report, mentioned cattle. As far as I can find out that is the first time he ever did. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — You used the word 'stupid' a while ago. I would say that is very stupid. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Well, all right; that makes two of us. He mentioned cattle in this report, and I was 

glad to see that he did because our cattle, today, in the eastern part of this province and across the north 

end, is the thing that is keeping our farmers going, and it is a very important industry. I often think that 

the members on the other side of this House probably haven't a clear idea of what goes on in this 

province; and some of them are inclined, I think, to lay down policies for this country of ours on the 

basis of what we have on the plains here, where it is all wheat. But as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, two-

thirds of this Province is mixed farming. It has to be mixed farming. It can't be anything else. Over a 

period of years, the people who practise mixed farming stayed there; the people who didn't practise 

mixed farming aren't there today. So, it is a mixed farming area, and when they make this statement that 

has been made by very many Government members from the other side of the House, that you have to 

have a minimum amount of land in order to farm economically today, they are absolutely wrong. I will 

agree that with certain types of farming it is true; but it is not true across the province. 

 

When our friend from Kelvington (Mr. Howe) the other day said that (quoting from memory) he thought 

that anyone who helped to put young man on the farms, today, were doing a disservice to those young 

men, I was surprised that a man who has lived all his life in this country on a farm, and has enjoyed the 

bounties of this province for that length of time, for political purposes would make a statement like that, 

because it isn't true. That is the C.C.F. propaganda, and he is spreading it. 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

44 

I think, Mr. Speaker, I will tell you a little incident that happened to me, this fall, to show you how 

absolutely wrong these people are, when they go out peddling their propaganda that you have to have a 

certain acreage in order to farm economically in this country. I will admit that, if times are good like 

they have been for this last fifteen years (they have been exceptionally good and we have had 

exceptional rainfall) that the more land you have, the better off you are; but I also point out to you, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think you know it yourself, that in the depression years — the 'thirties that they talk 

about, when it kept us busy to buy clothes and food, etc., the people who went broke first were the 

people who were the big operators. The man who had some stock and farmed as he should do, and grew 

the products he used on his farm, came out much better, and when it was over, he was in better shape. 

So let us get this thing right. Let us not swallow a lot of propaganda just because the Baker Commission, 

or somebody else, said so. Let us look at the thing factually, and look at it over a period of years. After 

all, Mr. Speaker, the best guide to our conduct is past experience. 

 

Now, I want to tell you people about a friend of mine who came from central Europe, I suppose in the 

late 'thirties. He was a man with a wife and family; he came out here, and he couldn't speak a word of 

English. He worked for some bachelors for a few years — not too long; then he picked himself up some 

old horses and equipment, and got started. Then when the banks and the loan companies and everybody 

else lost their nerve, and said: 'the country is no good' they wouldn't pay their taxes or anything also; in 

fact the municipalities sold that land very cheaply, and this man bought one of those half-sections. 

Today he has $10,000 worth of buildings on it; he has good equipment and drives a good car. 

 

Mr. Neibrandt: — How much did he pay for it? 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Very little, but that doesn't matter. He put $10,000 worth of buildings on it — wait 

till I get through. I met him in the fall, just about the time the cash advances were coming along; and I 

asked him if he was going to take a cash advance. He answered, "no" and when I asked him why not, he 

said he didn't like borrowing money. I said, "Well, how are you making out?" He said, "Fine. I sold 

some cattle; I sold my calves for $90 each." Do you know how much land that man has under 

cultivation, Mr. Speaker? Just 100 acres — but he has put $10,000 worth of buildings on his land; he has 

money in the bank; he has equipment; and he came here without any education, without any money. Yet 

these follows over here who try to propagate around that you can't make money unless you have a 

certain number of acres of land — it is just stupid. 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

45 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — How many acres have you got? 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — I've got too danged much. 

 

Now, here is another thing that I would like to talk about for a few minutes, and that is our cattle market. 

I have here, Mr. Speaker, a clipping I cut out of the paper. It is a report from the Dominion Department 

on the Livestock Market. I am not going to read it all, but I would like to quote some of it. You know, 

we are very fortunate in this province of ours, in this Canada of ours, that we have, today, the cattle 

market that we have. We have doubled our cattle in the last ten years, and I think I will read just a little 

of this, to give you an idea about what is happening: 

 

”The cattle market hit a record of $2,664,000 during the year — an increase of 12 per cent over 1956." 

(These are 1957 figures). 

 

"This results from an increase in the livestock production in the traditionally grain-growing provinces 

of Saskatchewan, Alberta and Manitoba." 

 

That is, the greater part of that production took place on the prairie provinces, where we are supposed to 

be wheat growers. It goes on to say that cattle markets were not so good during the early six months of 

the year, but in the following six months, owing to United States demands, our cattle were picked up, 

and there was never a surplus, never a ball-up at Winnipeg like we have seen in previous times. 

 

Mr. Neibrandt: — Would the hon. gentleman permit a question? You are talking about the American 

market. What will we do when they start burning their carcasses over there like they did before? 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Well, my dear man, you had better ask the Good Man above. I don't know, but I 

sincerely hope it never happens. I came through the 'thirties and I sincerely hope it never happens. If it 

does happen, it is something that will be controlled from above, and not man-made laws and some of the 

situations that we are getting into, today. But the thing, that I am trying to talk about are some of the 

man-made laws we have in this country, today, a political party who have come out and said that they 

are going to take 15 per cent of our trade away from the United States. Now, if they had said they were 

going to increase the trade by 15 per cent, I could go along with them; but when they actually come out 

and advertise, and keep repeating it — I heard one of the gentleman say three times over the air that he 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

46 

was going to take 15 per cent of our trade from the United States and put it other places. 

 

Mr. Speaker. those people who are doing that are playing with fire. We grow, in this country, enough 

cattle to do us, and we have just a small surplus, and are very fortunate that, up until now, we have been 

able to sell that surplus in the United States; and in the United States for the last few years the prices 

have been higher than anywhere in the world. These people over here try to tell us we have lost the 

British market. It is all 'baloney'. The British market is there; we can enter it tomorrow, if we want to 

take half the price we are getting today. The dangerous part of this thing is that, if the United States 

decided to ban our cattle and not let us ship that particular number in there; if they decided, tomorrow, to 

restrict our cattle going into the United States, that surplus would have to go to the European market and 

the price of cattle would go down by half, the day that happened. There is a certain agitation in the 

United States by the to their government, and there has been for years, to stop having Canadian cattle 

come in there. So, any party that propagates a thing like that is really playing with fire, because as I said 

before, if that happened, the price of our cattle would immediately go down by half, not only in 

Saskatchewan, but right across the board. I did tell here what the total was — a record of $5 million of 

cattle sales, in the last year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't want to hold up the House, but there is another matter I think I have spoken on 

practically every year that I have spoken in this House. 

 

Mr. Howe (Kelvington): — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the hon. gentleman would answer a question. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — I'll see what the question is. Don't make a speech. 

 

Mr. Howe: — In regard to the question of diverting trade from the United States to Great Britain, you 

complained about that, and I would, too; but isn't it true . . . 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Well, look Mr. Speaker, I think I will carry on. 

 

Mr. Howe: — Is it not true that people . . . 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — It has nothing to do with municipal . . . 

 

Mr. Howe: — Is it not true that the Liberal speakers, today, are saying: "if you can't vote Conservative, 

vote Liberal?" 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

47 

Mr. McCarthy: — No, no, you are getting into — I suppose that is my pay-off for criticizing the 

gentleman. That isn't a question; it's a speech. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — What does Benching say? 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Or Tim Buck? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — "Vote . . . 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Mr. Speaker, ever since I have been in this House I have spoken on the subject of 

Bang's disease. I remember the first time I spoke in this House, as a green member and the boys over 

there poohed "you don't know what you're talking about — you are crazy" — and all the rest of it. But I 

think probably, today, that even the Minister of Agriculture (Hon. Mr. Nollet) will admit that I have 

some slight knowledge of what I am talking about; and I want to say this, and I don't want to say it 

personally, to the Minister of Agriculture, because I have every respect for him; but I want to repeat that 

statement that I made the first time I spoke in this House that you are spending a lot of money doing a 

lot of work, and because you don't go far enough you are not getting any results. I said that before and 

the figures here today prove it. They pooh-poohed me, and said I didn't know what I was talking about; 

they had a set of figures worked out in percentages. This Bang's disease started in the Southeast part of 

the province. We had an incidence down there of 18 to 20 per cent, and they went around doing some 

testing, and the way they cut the percentages down was by going up here where there wasn't any Bang's 

disease, and they tested up there, and that brought the overall percentages down. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have been working at this thing, spending a lot of money, with a lot of good people 

putting a lot of effort into it, and we are getting nowhere. Just this summer three people in my district 

had to clean up their herds on account of Bang's disease. If you read this, you would think there wasn't 

anything to it; that we were getting along fine — but we're not. Now, fortunately, the Dominion 

Government is coming into the scene and they are doing what I said this Government should have done 

— and I still say they should have done it; but they didn't have the fortitude or the backbone to do it. The 

Dominion Government now are doing what this Government should have done when they started this 

program . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — Do you mean in the last eight months? 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

48 

Mr. McCarthy: — . . . and that is that they have now made provision for taking care of these reactors. It 

is true, they haven't got it in working order yet, but I do hope they will take advantage of this and go at it 

in a business-like manner. This disease is a very serious disease. It spreads like wildfire, and it is very 

contagious. It is transferable to humans, and it is a very, very dirty disease. The Provincial Treasurer 

said something about it, and it was all right, too. He said that this disease was costing us $2,500,000 and 

that they were going to put $50,000 into it, in order to work out a program. Wall, I am glad to see it. It 

should be $100,000 and it should have been done five years ago. It is estimated that this disease has cost 

the cattle raisers of Canada . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I am sure the hon. member does not want to mislead the House. We have spent 

about that much money right along, even last year, for Bang's disease. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Last year, yes. That's what I said; but I said it should have been more, and sooner. I 

still say, Mr. Speaker, that they spent the money, but they didn't get the results. After all, the amount of 

money spent is no criterion as to how successful the program is. The criterion or the success of a 

program is the result you get, and I still say that you didn't get any results, or at least not the results that 

were possible. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I say, Mr. Speaker, that is . . . 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Oh, say, Mr. Speaker, I think he can sit down . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! Is the hon. member rising on a point of privilege? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Yes, the hon. member is misleading the House when he says no results were 

obtained. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — He didn't say that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, when I took over the Department, we were testing about 600 cattle a 

year. That has gone up to 100,000 a year: cattle vaccination, 85,000 a year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — You tested them, but that's all you did. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Cattle vaccination. If the hon. member would take the plugs out of his ears, he 

would know what I am saying. 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

49 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Take the marbles out of your mouth. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — I am sorry to see the Minister of Agriculture generating so much heat, because, after 

all, Mr. Speaker, this should be a non-political subject. It is too serious to be kicked around politically. I 

told this House, and I have told the Minister every year exactly what was happening, and the figures, 

this year, bear it out. In 1947, we had positive reactors of 555; today we have 6,241 and that is only a 

fraction of them. Those people down there who shipped out their herds — you have no record of that; 

they just decided that things were getting so bad they had better get rid of their cattle. 

 

Now we have, thanks to the Federal Government, a set-up whereby we can clean this disease up in five 

years, if we put the energy and the know-how into it. The common excuse is that we haven't veterinary 

services. Mr. Speaker, it doesn't need veterinary services to take those tests. Anyone can do it. All you 

have to do to take those tests is got a sterilized bottle, and be sure you don't touch it with your fingers; 

take a sample from the ear of the beast and put it in the bottle; put a cork in it and then you send it to 

Saskatoon. The difference between this and T.B. — a lot of people say it is similar, and it is similar, but 

the difference between this test and the T.B. test is that you inject the serum into an animal for a T.B. 

test, and then the vet. has to come back in a certain number of days and complete the test. With this, the 

vet comes along (it has always been done by vets so far) takes the sample and sends it to Saskatoon. 

When he takes the test, he puts a tag in the ear so he can identify the animal. I, as the owner, get a report, 

and the vet who did it get a report; but there is absolutely nothing done with those reactors. If the man 

has had any experience with them, he gets rid of them fast. I wouldn't have one around my place for five 

minutes. But there are just enough of them left kicking around this country to keep this thing alive, and 

unless this new program is properly administered, we are still going to be in the same shape we were 

before. But with proper administration — and I know vets are scarce; but I don't think they need near the 

number of vets they think they do, because any common layman can take that test equally as well as a 

vet. There is no particular skill needed to do it. The only thing you have to do is watch that you don't 

touch the inside of the bottle or the cork, with your fingers. 

 

If they do that and work at this thing properly, and spend enough money, they can clean up this disease. 

And another thing, they can't pick out a little corner in this part of the province, and another little corner 

in another part. If they are going to do it, they have to start right at the southeast corner of this province 

and 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

50 

put some energy into it, and go right across the province. If they do that, in five years they will be rid of 

the Bang's disease. Their vaccination program is all right; it is a wonderful thing. If we hadn't had 

vaccination today, our cattle population would be away down; but, on the other hand, the vaccination is 

only from 75 to 80 per cent efficient, under very favourable circumstances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a quarter after five; I think probably I had better dry up. I shall not support the motion. 

I say to this Government, get out of the horse-and-buggy days, cease looking backwards — look forward 

and perform your duties as a Government towards the municipalities of this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — I have copies, Mr. Speaker, of the Budget Speeches for the hon. member from 

Cannington, each one of which, ever since I have started making Budget Speeches in this House, refers 

to cattle. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — I already have them all, thank you. 

 

Mr. M.J. Willis (Elrose): — I had not intended to take part in this debate, Mr. Speaker, and when I say 

I am going to be brief, I am not going to be like the member for Cannington and ramble on for a quarter 

of an hour. 

 

First of all, I would like to congratulate the Provincial Treasurer, and I regret very much what I have 

seen in this House, and heard statements that have been said which assassinate his character. I happen to 

have been raised with Mr. Fines in the province of Manitoba, and I know his father, who spent all his 

lifetime as a school-teacher, who was a credit to the teaching profession to which I belong; who raised a 

fine family, spent all the years of his life in the teaching profession, and retired a highly respected citizen 

and person in the community around the vicinity of Balmoral, and I resent very much when people on 

the opposite side make their complaints on personal things. It is all right to criticize the C.C.F. Party, but 

when they go out particularly to assassinate a personal friend of mine, I think it is only right that I 

should stand . . . 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Are you talking to me? 

 

Mr. Willis: — I am talking to all of you over there, and to the disparaging remarks . . . 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, if I have said anything disparaging about the 

Provincial Treasurer, I apologize. 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

51 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — No, I enjoyed what you said. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Well, I hope I didn't say anything disparaging about you. Good show! 

 

Mr. Willis: — Politics were never played in this province prior to 1944, about grants as there is being 

done now. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — On a point of privilege. I said no such thing, I said politics was always mixed up in 

grants — I never said any such thing. 

 

Mr. Willis: — The member for Cannington happened at one time to live in the constituency of Elrose, 

Mr. Speaker, and he knows whereof I speak. For years in our constituency Highway No. 44 had signs up 

and the cattle rubbed them so long, they had fallen over and you couldn't find the highway. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — We have got some of them like that down there right now. 

 

Mr. Willis: — . . . and he said that this Government tried to slip it over the municipalities . . . 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — They did. 

 

Mr. Willis: — That is not true, because municipalities were called in, and the proposition was submitted 

to them by the Government, sitting around the table and agreeing with the municipalities. And my friend 

from Cannington said, "Look what we gave the municipalities before", and I happen to have the record 

of Elrose constituency and in 11 years — the last ten years they were in power — they gave all the 

municipalities of Elrose constituency the great sum of $9,500 — in ten years. In one year, last year, one 

municipality got twice that amount to build roads. 

 

In other words, they put up the roads and if you want to stop and see, I'll take you over them, and they 

are fine roads too. For ten years we didn't get anything of the gasoline tax — It is not true because at the 

present time the municipalities are getting 25 per cent of the total gasoline tax of this province. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Oh, oh! 

 

Mr. Willis: — Well, these statements are made by the member who has lived in the constituency which 

I have the honour to represent. These are the facts and he knows them — who is he trying to kid this 

afternoon? 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

52 

Just in closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister of Telephones for the fine work he 

completed last year and for the fine automatic change which opened in the town of Eston last year, and 

something that is most heartening to see is that the help this Provincial Government is giving for the 

need to build residences for our elderly citizens all over this province. From this fund there will be a 

senior home in the town of Elrose. Next year in the town of Eston, with the adjoining municipalities, 

will be opened a senior home there, with a bed capacity or room for 60 persons. This is a fine thing, and 

I do think I would be remiss in expressing on behalf of those elderly people the gratitude for the 

contribution that has been made by this Government to give those elderly people a place where they can 

live and enjoy life for the few years that are remaining for them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I said I was going to speak briefly, and a school-teacher is always brief — I wish to 

support the Budget. 

 

Hon. G.G. Willis (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

SECOND READING 

 

Bill No. 66 — An Act respecting the School Secretary-Treasurers' Association of Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Bill No. 66 is a Bill that will give to the School Unit Secretaries the 

right too organize somewhat along the same lines as the Municipal Secretary's Association. 

 

This Bill has been perused by the Department of Education and the Minister of Education (Hon. Mr. 

Lloyd) assures me that there is nothing in the bill which they are asking for that is contrary to the School 

Act or the Department; that it is not detrimental in any way. 

 

I think this Bill can be well discussed in Committee when it goes in the committee stage, so I would 

move the second reading of the Bill, and move that it be referred to the Law Amendment Committee. 

 

(Referred to the Select Standing Committee on Law Amendments and Delegates Powers). 



 

March 7, 1958 

 

 

53 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, if I may make an announcement. Within the 

last two weeks a complaint has been made to me regarding the conduct of Michael Edward Somers, 

administrator of estates. As a result of inquiries made by the Attorney General's Department, and the 

R.C.M.P., it has been necessary, this afternoon, to charge him in connection with misappropriation and 

the disposition of trust funds belonging to Peter Romanko, deceased. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5.30 o'clock p.m. 


