




















































Hansard: February 17, 1958


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

3rd Day 

 

Monday, February 17, 1958 

 

The House met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

TRIBUTE TO ESTON CURLING RINK CHAMPIONS 

 

Mr. Maurice J. Willis (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, not 

only is the Elrose constituency noted for the amount of wheat it produces but as you may have noticed 

over the weekend, we have the champion curling rink from the town of Eston. On that curling rink are 

just country fellows who learned their curling at Richley and Eston, and I am sure all the members join 

with me in hoping that they go right through the Briar and bring the tanker back to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

Address in Reply 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to move the Address-in-Reply to the 

Speech from the Throne, I should first of all, like to congratulate you on your recent visit to New Delhi, 

India, during which you represented the Saskatchewan Branch of the Commonwealth Parliamentary 

Association at the biennial conference of the Association. I am sure Sir, that this Assembly was truly 

and most ably represented on this occasion. 

 

May I also say, Mr. Speaker, that I am conscious of, and grateful for the honour which has been 

conferred upon me and upon my constituency by the Premier of Saskatchewan in selecting me to place 

this main motion. I am proud, Mr. Speaker, to be one of the two representatives of the city of Moose Jaw 

in this Legislative Assembly. Moose Jaw, as the members of the Assembly know, had an important and 

significant part to play in the growth and the development of this province. Moose Jaw's sons and 

daughters have certainly distinguished themselves in very many worthy causes throughout the period of 

the existence of this community. The community of Moose Jaw is rather an historic one; one which was 

known 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

2 

certainly very well in the fur-trading days, and which of course was also extremely well-known in the 

days of more recent settlement, the days of the late 19th and the early 20th centuries. Those who have 

followed the account of archaeological investigations in the vicinity of Moose Jaw will know that it was 

once the gathering place for the very many tribes of that area that used the community and district as a 

gathering place some 3,400 years ago. 

 

Moose Jaw has also been known for some time as one of the main industrial centres of this province, 

and consequently therefore as a centre for labour, and especially organized labour. Yet it is also a 

shopping district for thousands of ranching and farming families in the general district. These mingle, I 

believe on an amiable basis with the population of wage and salary earners in the city itself. What I have 

learned personally in the countless conversations that I have had, not only with wage earners, but with 

ranchers and farmers, has reinforced any belief that there is a basic interdependence between the 

interests of farmers and the interests of urban workers. I believe it is this concept which is part and 

parcel of the C.C.F. structure and philosophy. 

 

Moose Jaw, like many other urban centre, especially over the last decade, has encountered a rapid 

growth in population and of course some expansion in industry; really an expansion in practically all 

directions. The problems we have known in providing such things as serviced land, new school 

institutions, in providing more and better recreational facilities for our young people, in doing all those 

things that are required in a burgeoning community, have certainly caused us much concern. I am 

pleased to note that in the Speech from the Throne there is action proposed that will remedy to a 

beneficial extent, a number of the more pressing problems that are encountered, particularly by urban 

municipalities. 

 

I should like to take this opportunity of saying that the City of Moose Jaw is both prepared and anxious 

to give sincere co-operation to all enterprises that wish to locate within the city boundaries. May I 

extend that same invitation to Government enterprises and institutions as well. You may be sure of the 

interest of our citizens in all things that have to do with the sound and orderly development of the 

community. 

 

I noticed, with approval, the announcement in the Speech from the Throne that the group that was 

established in the middle of last year as a Continuing Committee on municipal questions is to proceed 

with its work this year. I feel confident that the Committee will be able to make that type of proposal 

which will go towards the assistance of the municipalities in this province. I am sure the Committee will 

help to solve those questions which bedevil local governments, and will generally assist municipalities 

in discharging their obligations. 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

3 

No doubt, Mr. Speaker, one of the questions this Committee will need to examine is that of the local tax 

structure. I have, personally, long felt that the method now used (and I speak now, of course, from 

experience, particularly in urban areas), basing itself on land and improvements is not one that reflects 

the genuine ability to pay, and, in my opinion, the present taxation method should undergo a searching 

study with a view to effecting those measures which would go closer to that generally accepted basis — 

that is, ability to pay taxation. 

 

It seems to me, too, that this Committee will inevitably be studying those questions which have to do 

with the capacity of municipalities to borrow. I believe a solution to this problem may eventually be 

found in the creation of a Federal-Provincial loan fund from which municipalities may borrow for all 

worthwhile purposes concerned in community development. 

 

The Speech from the Throne mentioned, in some detail, the decline both in the farm and urban economy 

throughout this country. I think we have all been familiar both from speeches within this Legislature, 

and elsewhere, of the position of agriculture in the general economy. Certainly, over the last five or six 

years, in particular, there has been a very marked decline for our basic producers. We are meeting now 

at a time when there is a corresponding decline in the economy at the urban level. We have all read of 

the recent figures on unemployment. The fact is that there are, at the National Employment Service 

offices across Canada, somewhere between 800,000 and 900,000 unplaced applicants. I remind the 

members of the House that this figure actually exceeds the total number of persons engaged in 

agriculture in Canada, which, I thinks reveals something of the depth of present unemployment. 

 

While I am speaking about this matter I should make some reference to the disagreement that has 

currently been going on as to which set of unemployment figures should be accepted. I want to point out 

that there are two sets of figures — one used and created by the Dominion Bureau of Statistics; and the 

other, from the figures on unplaced applicants registered for employment at the Unemployment 

Insurance offices across the Dominion. Everyone is aware that there is a considerable difference 

between the two sets of figures. However, I think it should be known that no matter which set of figures 

one takes, between December of 1956 and December of 1957, if you take only D.B.S. figures on 

unemployment, there, is an increase of 117.5% in the number of jobless; and. if you take the figures of 

the National Employment Service, (the ones to which I made reference in the first instance), there is an 

increase of 81.92% in unemployment. 

 

Of course, it should also be realized by members of the Assembly that the figures on unemployment 

from D.B.S. are arrived 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

4 

at, not by taking a head-to-head count, but from what is called a "spot survey", or a sample survey, 

check in each locality. So it is extremely likely that the figures of D.B.S. are more inaccurate than the 

figures of actual persons registered for employment at the N.E.S. offices. 

 

I was pleased to see in the Speech from the Throne, that the Saskatchewan Government will follow a 

program of maintaining construction employment wherever this is possible, and will attempt to time all 

purchases, and all procurement policies and activities, so as to encourage to the maximum degree, 

employment of persons during this winter season. 

 

I note also that the Government has accepted every offer of the Government of Canada for shareable 

work-creating projects. I think this will certainly be endorsed by those persons who unfortunately find 

themselves to be unemployed. 

 

As I said a few moments ago, the Speech from the Throne states that the national economy is slowing 

down. This is not only a seasonal spurt of unemployment such as may have been true in more recent 

years. I would like to draw the attention of the Assembly to the absence of production from those 

persons that are today idle across this country. I don't think anyone has made an estimate of how much 

in money value is lost in goods and services because of the jobless problem we know today, but it must 

be a very high figure. However, I think some type of estimate may be made with respect to the actual 

dollars that are being lost by those who are unemployed. If we take the figure of 800,000 persons jobless 

which the N.E.S. office has provided us with, and if we determine an average level of unemployed 

benefits, we will find that the average person receiving benefits today gets about $20 a week. If we 

assume a former weekly wage of these unemployed persons (a weekly wage that they would have 

received if they had been working) of $50 week, it will be seen that there would be a loss of about $30 

each for each of the workers that comprise this total of 800,000 persons. If you do a little simple 

arithmetic you will fine that the loss in buying power of this large number of idle citizens will reach over 

$100 million a month. I think anyone would agree that that sort of situation could not go on for very 

long without adversely hurting not only the people who are idle, but all other sections of the community. 

 

I would like to point out that certainly other sections of the economy have suffered because of this 

continuing recession in farm prices. Now, equally here, I think we can draw a parallel to show that the 

farmer himself is being affected by the urban idleness evident today. Remember that the situation now 

encountered by the farmer with respect to poor prices is largely a condition of foreign markets. If the 

situation were to deteriorate domestically, 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

5 

and if there were to be a marked fall-off in domestic buying power, I think all will concede that the 

problem would be much worse than we know today. As an example of this I point out that, in the year 

1936, all Canadians consumed food that amounted to a total food bill of about $850 million. In the year 

1945 this figure had risen to $1,885 million, or double the 1936 figure. But by 1956, the figure spent on 

food by Canadians had reached to $4,326 million. 

 

It will be seen that the lowering of salaries — the lowering of purchasing power for unemployed persons 

— could only harm further the national economy and actually endanger the situation insofar as the 

whole population is concerned. 

 

I think I should make some reference to the rather mischievous propaganda and false information which 

has, over recent years, blamed the worker for farmers' troubles — for the high prices the farmer is 

paying; and, of course, indirectly, for the position in which the farmer finds himself. I note a prominent 

management spokesman has, last week, in several meetings, made reference to just this same sort of 

thing. He has quoted statistics which would endeavour to prove that output per worker in 1946 to 1956 

was actually less than the wage increases which were granted in that period. I should like to take the 

opportunity of correcting those figures by saying that, in the one case, the figures on productivity are 

those of constant dollars, deflated dollars, while the figure that the management representative used for 

wages is that of inflated dollars. It is almost like comparing, you might say, elephants to mice. 

 

Also, if you look at the actual situation of productivity and wages for the period 1947 to 1956 — that 

was the period I got figures for — it is found that the 1956 figure for total wages and salaries showed 

that wages had increased by $8,063 million in Canada over the figure for 1947; but in terms of gross 

national product the value of output in 1957 had exceeded that in 1947 by $16,098 million. It is very 

difficult to make a precise comparison as between wages and productivity, especially in relation to that 

kind of comparison which was made not so long ago. I suppose if any proof is required from a more 

reliable statistical source than the figures that were used by the business speaker of last week, one could 

go directly to the Gordon Commission. The Gordon Commission predictions on productivity are that, by 

the year 1980, real productivity (laying aside all inflation) will have advanced two-thirds greater for 

every man, woman and child in the country. Some may say I am going rather far afield, and that we 

should have some comparisons that relate to Saskatchewan; and I am prepared to concede that we 

should have some comparisons within the province. 

 

I would like to point out that taking the 20-year period from 1935 to 1955, and using again the deflated 

dollar or the constant dollar terms that I have been talking about, it will be 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

6 

found that, per workman in Saskatchewan manufacturing industry, output rose by 116.5% — the output 

rose for each worker by 116.5%. Wages in these constant terms rose by only 56%. 

 

In looking at the question of purchasing power from perhaps another angle, we are familiar with the fact 

that when we talk about weekly wages in Canada, the figure most often used is that of the wages and 

salaries of manufacturing workers, which is a relatively higher figure than many other groups in the 

community. I don't think it is realized that, even going back to 1954, there 2,975,000 wage and salary 

earners in Canada — 49.6% or 50% of all the persons in the non-farm group that earned less than $2,000 

in that year. I think if you take the year 1955, about which I was able to make some comparison, you 

will find just what kind of an effect this has on the food-buying habits of Canadians. Individuals, for 

example, who earned under $2,500 a year back in 1953 consumed an average of $744 on food. 

Individuals earning from $2,500 to $2,999 spent an average of $916 that year on food. Those in the 

$3,000 to $3,400 income bracket spent $1,078 on food. So, dollar-wise it will be seen there is a marked 

increase in expenditure on food as income increases. 

 

From these figures, Mr. Speaker, it will be plain that poor earnings, low earnings, for salary and wage 

earners harm the basic producer as much as they do the wage and salary earner; just as low incomes for 

farmers endanger the position and the jobs of urban wage and salary earners. I think we may look for the 

inflation that we are currently experiencing to other factors in the economy than to farmers and workers. 

I think we may look to manipulated prices and the high profits of corporations to discover the reason for 

high prices. 

 

Mr. Speaker, turning again to the matter of the Dominion-Provincial fiscal relationship which is 

discussed in the Speech from the Throne, I was gratified to learn that all of the monetary gains that may 

have been secured from recent negotiations between the Saskatchewan and the Federal Governments 

will be passed on to municipalities and school districts. I think that this assurance, this pledge will be 

well received by all local authorities who, as we know, are confronted with ever-increasing burdens 

which must be met either by higher local taxation or more assistance from senior governments. 

 

The announcement of changes in Holidays-with-Pay legislation will also, I think, be greeted not only by 

the wage and salary earners of this province, but by workers elsewhere who have actually profited 

indirectly from the good legislation of this Government. The three-week holiday period after five years 

certainly 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

7 

seems to be a reasonable thing. I think it is a reasonable step, first of all, because in manufacturing 

industry across Canada (if you wish to take that comparison), presently, there are 99% of all the office 

employees and 92% of all the non-office employees who are enjoying a two-week vacation; and there 

are 72% of the office employees and 63% of the non-office employees in manufacturing industries who 

presently qualify for a three-week vacation. So actually, what we will do in giving to workers a 

three-week vacation after five years, is simply to confirm what has become a marked trend in Canadian 

industry. Of course, I would frankly like to see a situation where a three-week vacation was granted after 

one year of employment; but I am most certainly willing to concede that the present proposal is an 

important step in the right direction. 

 

I should also have liked to see some consideration given to the problem of construction workers, 

seasonal workers, who, because of the 30-day limitation In the Annual Holidays Act, are sometimes not 

able to enjoy quite the same benefits as those workers with more permanent employment. This may be 

something that can be corrected later; but I point it out to the Assembly as a problem which certainly 

should be given some attention before too much time goes by. 

 

In referring to the Holidays legislation in Saskatchewan, I think it is well to go back a few years when 

the Act received the approval of this Legislature. I can recall a discussion at the time to the effect that it 

was a rather radical step to give working people two-weeks' holiday after one year. When the legislation 

was implemented, it became the only legislation in Canada that gave holidays of this duration; and, 

indeed, I believe it was the only legislation in Canada that guaranteed to workers any holidays at all, 

other than the Orders-in-Council that it gave it to certain parts of the economy — Orders-in-Council by 

the Federal Government. But today the situation is that seven out of the 10 provinces have some sort of 

paid Holiday Legislation. Some of the provinces have two-week holiday legislation after a somewhat 

longer period of time than we know in this province. Our holiday-with-pay legislation remains (and this 

is generally acknowledged) the best in Canada; but I think the significant thing here is that legislation 

which a few years ago was considered to be pretty extreme is now generally accepted by everyone. I 

think we should take note that this Legislature, this government, has given leadership to the rest of 

Canada in something that has helped not only the workers of this Province, but the workers of all other 

provinces, in setting the tone and giving a sense of direction. 

 

One of the difficulties in the relationship between Provinces is that there is always the suggestion the 

other provinces should go first in any worthwhile or forward-looking suggestion. Leadership has been 

given in Saskatchewan during the last 10 to 12 years to legislation of other types; such as laws for 

statutory 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

8 

holidays with pay, a higher minimum wage, Hours of Work, pay for time spent in the negotiation of 

grievances, equal pay for equal work for women — just to name a few of the pieces of legislation where 

there has been leadership given by this Saskatchewan Government. 

 

Speaking about Workmen's Compensation, when Workmen's Compensation at the 75 per cent level was 

instituted in Saskatchewan, all other provinces in Canada were on a lower scale. Today, there are eight 

out of the 10 provinces that have the 75 per cent scale, and the remaining two are on a 70 per cent scale. 

Here again the initiative of the Saskatchewan Government has played an important part in creating 

better conditions for workmen elsewhere in Canada. 

 

I don't think I should discuss the question of labour legislation without talking about the Saskatchewan 

Trade Union Act, about which, in my opinion, there has been very much unfair criticism — in the past 

few years particularly. I would like to point out that this Legislation is considered by the organized 

labour groups in Canada to be model legislation. I reiterate that nowhere else in Canada is there such 

good legislation, but it does not only benefit Labour and it does not discriminate against the rights of 

anyone. I should say (and I speak as a one-time member of the Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board, a 

member of the Board for 12 years, and a member of the Federal War Labour Relations Board for three 

years previous to that time) that there is nothing whatsoever in the Saskatchewan Trade Union Act 

which any reasonable, or any fair-minded, employer may fear, except those types, (which I think are still 

prevalent), who use intimidation and who use coercion to prevent employees from exercising their 

legitimate rights to organize and to bargain collectively. 

 

The Trade Union Act has been unfairly attacked, to the effect that it is "causing labour unrest", as I think 

the phrase is put. This is again far from the truth. The fact of the matter is that since The Saskatchewan 

Trade Union Act has been passed, the percentage of time lost due to strikes in this Province has been 

less than that of any other Province in this country. I suggest that this is due to the voluntary conciliation 

processes which are embodied in the Act, and, of course, to the informal conciliation methods which are 

generated by the Department of Labour; also the fact that the Act itself provides some safeguards to 

workers in their right to organize, and to bargain collectively. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in acknowledging; the very excellent work that has been done by this Government since 

1945 in the field of labour law, I should nevertheless like respectfully to suggest that there is room for 

further improvement — room for improvement on the lines suggested by the labour briefs which have 

been presented from 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

9 

time to time to the Cabinet. I know there has been each year, some change in the right direction; yet I 

believe it is possible to take steps more quickly, and steps which will bring us a little nearer to the 

realization of the proposals that organized labour has made. 

 

I think particularly at this time, that a 40-hour five-day week with maintenance of earnings is legislation 

that would materially assist the whole of society in this Province to counteract the evils of 

unemployment. I would, with deference, commend this subject to the attention of the Government, and 

urge action at the earliest possible moment. 

 

Turning to other aspects of the Speech from the Throne, I personally get very great satisfaction in seeing 

all the progress that has been made in the field of expansion in natural gas, electricity, and of course, last 

but certainly not least, the building of the microwave network during 1957. The satisfaction that I get is 

mainly in knowing that these are well-run public enterprises; and enterprises that are not rich plums for 

the picking of private enterprise, as they are in so many other parts of Canada, today. 

 

I also note there will be an increase in the grants for hospital construction. Only two weeks ago, I had 

occasion to sit down with the Advisory Board of one of my community hospitals when this very 

question was discussed. I know that, while the suggested increases might not be everything that that 

Board is seeking in the way of assistance, the pledge to increase the grants for hospital construction will 

go a moderate distance in meeting their request. 

 

I am also glad to note that Mothers' allowances have been increase. This action was sorely needed, and I 

believe the action to increase Mothers' Allowances will generally find favour with those most directly 

affected and with all groups in the community. I hope that it will be possible, before long, to extend 

more aid to old-age pensioners as well, just as soon as this becomes financially possible. 

 

In the field of housing for the aged, I am glad to learn that there will be a great effort made, this year, in 

assisting both organizations and public bodies in providing housing for our elderly people. The fact that 

we are able to talk about assistance to 26 projects this year, which will house about 1,565 older persons, 

is real progress. 

 

While we are on the subject of housing, I would like to suggest that, before long, we must give attention 

to housing for 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

10 

other sections of the community. In particular I am thinking of younger married people who are raising 

families, who need housing and find present costs very difficult to meet to provide themselves with 

needed homes. 

 

School grants are discussed in the Speech from the Throne, and again I am gratified to see that there will 

be some extra assistance given to school districts. I think school authorities certainly will greet this 

announcement with pleasure, and I am sure it is bound to release some of the worst pressures that school 

districts are now facing. As one who has sat on a city council for eight years and who has talked 

frequently with school board and high school board authorities, I am sure that this additional assistance 

is needed. I am confident that it will help all local tax structures, and relieve the worst burdens. 

 

The decision to examine our high school curriculum is a step that will be met favourably by most of the 

citizens in this Province. I think we need to re-examine the curriculum not just because this seems to be 

necessary, but because of the need to produce more experts, more technicians and more scientists, but 

most of all, because we need to provide our people with the ability to think their way through to 

solutions of the enormous present-day social and political problems. I think that mere additions to man's 

means of annihilation and destruction are by themselves in the end futile and useless. 

 

Also with gratification I have noticed in the Speech from the Throne, that urban road programs will 

receive substantial assistance. I think this is a good move. I know the urban councils throughout the 

province have been asking for this sort of aid over a period of time, and the fact that an urban road 

assistance program will be generated will certainly go far to assist all urban governments. 

 

I notice also that tourist programs will be effected during the coming year. This again is a step forward, 

not only for tourists and visitors to our Province, but for our own people. As leisure time increases, as 

the means of transportation becomes better, I think we are going to have an expanding need for better 

recreational spots in this province. While I am on the subject, it does seem to me that, before long, we 

are going to have to give some attention to the sort of condition where, on the shores of our main lakes, 

most of the land is taken up by private owners and only a very small section, such as the public beach, is 

accessible to the general public. It seems to me that not only in the existing facilities, but in recreation 

facilities of the future, attention will need to be given to 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

11 

this matter. I believe there is a place for private development, but I think that private development must 

be legitimate, that it cannot be of a speculative nature, which would appropriate vacation areas for the 

good only of a few people. 

 

Finally, I would like, Mr. Speaker, to voice my pleasure over the suggestion in the Speech from the 

Throne, that there will be full citizenship granted for our Indian population. I heartily agree with this. I 

also concur in the proposals made to effect this recommendation. That is, the leaders of the Indian bands 

should be called in for consultation and that all steps should be discussed thoroughly with them. 

Changes made alter the fullest discussion with our Indian people are bound to be good and permanent. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, may I say that, to me, the program contemplated in the Speech from the 

Throne is one that takes due cognizance of our present problems while making careful preparation for 

the future. It is a program which recognizes the existing economic situation. It is a program which, when 

implemented, will record a good measure of progress and improvement for the Province. It will make 

the proper provision for the health and welfare for the people of this Province. If, in some respects, the 

program does not go quite as far as I might personally like to see it go, it does chart a path of substantial 

improvement for all sections of the community. Moreover, it goes a distance forward in redeeming the 

election pledges of the C.C.F., made in the year 1956. It has always been satisfying to me to note that 

the principal objectives of this Government are those which are set forward each time the Government 

goes to the people and asks for the endorsation of the electorate. 

 

For all these reasons, Mr. Speaker, the program set forth in the Speech from the Throne is one which 

merits my personal support, and that, I think, of the Members of this Assembly. I would, therefore, like 

to move, seconded by Mr. Meakes: That an humble Address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant-Governor as follows: 

 

TO HIS HONOUR THE HONOURABLE FRANK LINDSAY BASTEDO 

Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of Saskatchewan, 

 

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR: 

 

We, Her Majesty's dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, in Session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious Speech which Your 

Honour has been pleased to address to us at the opening of the present Session. 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

12 

Mr. Frank Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to second the Address in Reply to the 

Speech from the Throne, I would first like to thank those who were responsible for me doing this. This 

brings honour to Touchwood constituency, and it gives me pleasure to speak for the people I represent. 

 

Touchwood is a rural constituency situated mostly in the parkland areas, settled early in the 1900s by 

people from eastern Canada and practically every country of Europe. These people came to Canada for 

more less the same reason: for freedom to worship, freedom to live their own lives, freedom to raise 

families and give those families a good education and a decent standard of living. In short, these people 

wanted to live normal lives in the traditions of their land; to have a little bit of security and normal hopes 

for their families. They settled on this land that was covered with poplar and willow, built houses and 

barns of logs, started to hew farms out of the bush and raise livestock. They worked long hours, long 

days, long years, and went without many of the necessities of life. What is the result of all this work and 

sweat and energy after fifty years? 

 

Mr. Speaker, these people not only became good farmers but they became good citizens. They worked 

together for the betterment .of their community as a whole, and it is good to drive through the country 

and see their churches and their community halls, their schools, and to see the second and even the third 

generation working on the land, carrying on the farms their fathers started. It is good, too, to know that 

nearly every family had sons or daughters in the Forces of Canada, when they were needed. I would say 

that Saskatchewan is a better place in which to live because these people settled here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was born and I have lived all my life on the same quarter-section. I was raised in a 

municipal environment. My father was a municipal secretary, for many years, including those 'dirty 

thirties'. I can well remember when the municipalities were practically bankrupt. The tax-sale lists were 

pages long. Our schools were forced to pay low teacher salaries. I can remember going to school, three 

and a half miles an hour early to light the fire, and getting paid fifteen cents a day. Those were the times 

when the boxcars were lined with men hunting for jobs that couldn't be found, and I can well remember 

hearing the question asked, in a municipal council meeting, of the municipal doctor, "How little will we 

give this old man so that he doesn't starve to death?" I can also well remember in early April, 1935 

watching the sheriff and his men evicting an old lady and her seven or eight children out of her house off 

the farm, onto the road allowance, into the snow. Why was this done? It was done to satisfy the profit 

hungers of the mortgage 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

13 

companies. It certainly was not the fault of that woman or her children. Her husband and her older son 

had died three years before. Most of us will remember that farm prices at that time were at an all-time 

low, but off the farm she had to go so that the land could be re-sold. It was scenes like this that were the 

cause of the rise of the C.C.F. more than anything else. And. Mr. Speaker, in 1944 this Government 

came to power with a 'new deal' for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

When one considers the many 'firsts' of this Government, they stack up as an impressive list — a pride 

to the majority of the people of this province. The first 'first' was the Farm Security Act, which gave 

every person protection from eviction from their home quarter. As a farmer in this province of 

Saskatchewan, I was not surprised to see mortgage companies opposing this legislation; but, I was 

surprised to see other political parties endeavouring to strangle this type of protection to the farmers. 

 

The next field of improvement this Government undertook was province-wide hospital insurance. The 

hospital insurance scheme had done so much for the people of Saskatchewan — one might spend hours 

in citing cases. Suffice to say that no longer is anyone in need of care turned away from a hospital door. 

Well, I remember many times, my father being called out of his bed, in the middle of the night, to be 

informed that Mr. or Mrs. So-and-so was at the hospital door, and would the municipality guarantee 

payment. The finances of those hospitals were so bad that very often, if the municipality refused to 

guarantee payment, the patient had to be turned away. Imagine the plight of a man making such a 

decision! How could he go back to bed without worrying, after he had been forced to say "No", because 

the finances of the municipality were the same as those of the hospital — impotent! Again I was 

surprised to see the legislation that set up this hospital scheme, opposed by the opposition in this House. 

 

It pleased me that the Speech from the Throne said that, in accordance with the policy of passing on to 

local government a share of increasing provincial revenue, provision will be made for again increasing 

school grants. This Government has gone a long way in the last twelve years in relieving the burden of 

education off the backs of those people least able to pay. What was the state of our schools in 1944? 

They were rundown, dilapidated, and School Districts were in debt. Compare them with the schools of 

today. Most of these are new or re-built. Look at the records. School grants paid by this Government in 

1944 were around $3 million. In 1957-58 these grants had increased to over $16 million. 

 

When I think back to the time when I went to school and how few rural children got any high school 

education; when I 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

14 

look around and see many rural children getting university as well as high school education, then I say 

that this Government has improved the educational opportunities tremendously. When I think of the 

struggle it was to get what education I have, even with the help of my father who had the education to 

help me, then I realize how impossible it was for those pupils less fortunate than myself. I see new high 

schools and composite schools going up; modern pupil transportation into those schools. I see students 

graduating and going into the fields of commerce and art and such. When I consider that there are a 

thousand more pupils who passed Grade XII in Saskatchewan in 1957 then there were in 1944; when I 

think that this Government has had a share in this venture of education; then I am proud to know that it 

is due to the Party that I represent in this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in no field has this Government made such tremendous strides as in rural electrification. 

Not many years ago, spokesmen of this Government talked of transmitting power from Estevan into the 

eastern and northern parts of this province. I remember hearing, at that time, their opponents laughing 

and saying that it couldn't be done. I am glad that men with vision remained in office since 1944. When 

we consider that about $150 million has been spent in electrification of this province by this 

Government, in the last thirteen years; when we consider that 47,000 farms have been electrified; that all 

the villages and most of the hamlets are now on the power line; then I say that this Government's 

program has been a good one. 

 

It has been said, and I heartily agree, I that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation not only lit up the 

farms in Saskatchewan, but it lit up the hearts and the souls of the farmers and their wives. As one who 

lived with a coal oil lamp for forty years, it is still a thrill for me, after a year and a half of power to walk 

into a dark room and turn on a light. 

 

I am pleased to see in the Speech from the Throne that good progress is being made, in conjunction with 

the municipalities, on the road grid. Roads, I believe, are one of the biggest problems facing 

municipalities today. As a farmer and a rural member, I am glad that this Government is sharing in 

helping to build more important rural roads, and in sharing costs of from 50 to 75 per cent. It is 

heartening to see that 250 of the 296 municipalities joined in this mutual program last year. It is good to 

know that this program has caught on. Some $9,500,000 has already been spent on the main market 

roads, of which $5,500,000 has been contributed by this Government. 

 

I know this program at first hand. I live beside a proposed grid allowance and I realize what this road 

will mean to 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

15 

myself and to my farming operation. Throughout my constituency these new roads are showing up in a 

lot of differences. I can remember being storm-stayed for forty-eight hours in the village of Jedburgh in 

November 1955, and then spending five hours to get out that six miles to No. 52 Highway. Today one 

drives to Jedburgh over a high, wide gravelled road in any kind of weather, with no worry. This road 

was built through difficult terrain at a cost of $49,623.49, of which $33,527.61 was paid by this 

Government, or over 65 per cent. These figures certainly disclaim the charges of those who charged that 

this program would be of no assistance to the municipalities. 

 

It pleases me that Saskatchewan's share of the Trans-Canada Highway is finished, and we draw closer to 

having re-built all the highways in Saskatchewan, since 1944. I suggest that members think back to the 

deplorable conditions of these highways in Saskatchewan after the war. They were practically worn out. 

When we consider that our highway mileage is more than double that of Manitoba or Alberta; when we 

consider that this Government has spent $166 million on the highways of Saskatchewan since 1944, then 

I say that we have a Government that does things for the people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opponents to this Government often say that this Government does nothing for 

agriculture. I'd like to put on the records just what this Government has done for agriculture. Of course, 

under the laws of Canada, we have no control over the fiscal or trade and commerce policies. 

Nevertheless, what has been possible to do, is being done. First and foremost are the things I have 

already mentioned — assistance to education, good roads, hospitalization. These have all helped relieve 

agriculture by relieving the farmer of part of that load. But also they have done many other things. The 

number of persons rendering ag-rep. service is more than doubled — from twenty-one in 1944 to 

forty-five in 1957. I know that the ag-rep. service has been of great assistance to me in the way of advice 

and information. Many times I have wanted information, and I have always received an eager and 

courteous response. Their work in the field of 4H-clubs has been inspiring. This is important because if 

our young folks are going to survive at farming, they have to learn the art of fanning. The ag-rep. 

services have really stimulated their interest. The setting-up of Agricultural District Boards was another 

smart move. I see this as a tie between the two departments of agriculture, the University, agricultural 

committee, municipal councils, the rural communities and the farmer and his family. This is a channel 

through which information on the technical aspects of faming can be passed right on to the farmer. The 

establishment of community pastures, the assistance to grazing co-operatives, have helped the farmer 

diversify his operation. In areas where this is being done farmers are quick to admit that this assistance 

is being extremely helpful. 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

16 

The fodder reserves' set up a forage crop program, pasture demonstrations, advisory council on grain 

crops have all helped to diversify agriculture and are a boon to those people in need of assistance. 

Earned assistance to municipalities for the eradication of persistent perennial weeds has certainly helped 

those farmers unfortunate enough to have any of those weeds on their farms. I am sure that members in 

this House realize how impossible it is for the ordinary individual farmer to control these weeds with his 

own resources. Our Department of Agriculture set up drainage and reclamation areas. Prior to this 

Government, no work had been done in that field. Records show that about a thousand miles of ditch has 

been dug, 40,000 acres had been reclaimed and made available to production, besides 60,000 acres 

sowed to forage crops. 

 

In short, I would say that this Government has done everything in its power to help and assist the farmer 

in the production end of farming, which is the responsibility of this Government. The Federal 

Government's responsibility is to see that agriculture gets a fair price for the product that is being 

produced. 

 

I was pleased to read in the Speech from the Throne: "My Government is desirous of extending full 

citizenship rights to all Indians In Saskatchewan. To this end all Indian bands will be invited to send 

representatives to a conference this year to discuss this question." For too long a time the Indians of our 

province and our country have been segregated and exploited. Much as I deplore instances like little 

Rock, I, for one, cannot say as much as I would like to. We have made third-rate citizens out of our 

Indians; segregated them into reservations that, generally speaking, are the poorest productive land in 

our country. These people have no vote in the affairs of their country, and very little to say in their own 

affairs. I for one will welcome any step that will eventually lead to the provincial enfranchisement of our 

Indian people. This will be a first step to complete integration of these people into our society. Until that 

time comes, I will not be happy. As long as we have in our midst one group of people who have not got 

the same rights and privileges and responsibilities that you and I have, Mr. Speakers, I will continue to 

fight for that objective. 

 

With all the improvements and assistance given to rural people of this province by this Government, we 

still find agriculture in a very depressed condition. Why? Certainly this Government has helped to 

relieve a load off the municipalities and the schools. So why is it? Someone will say too much taxes. I 

say that taxes are not our basic problem. If the Government and the municipality were to cancel all my 

taxes, I could still not be able to make ends meet. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Leader of the Official Opposition): — It would sure help. 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

17 

Mr. Frank Meakes: — No, Mr. Speaker, our problems as farmers today are two simple ones. First is 

that our cost of production has gone up and up until it is costing us more to produce that bushel of grain 

or that pound of meat, or dozen eggs, or whatever we are producing, than we are receiving for it. I feel 

that I have some idea what is facing the farmer today. I say that unless our Federal Government does 

something right now to stop this inflationary trend, then the family farm will vanish from the scene 

within the next five years. Quarter-section farms have practically vanished and the same may be said of 

the half-section farms. In my own neighbourhood 14 family farms have disappeared in the last five 

years. 

 

Our second problem is the do-nothing policies of the Government of Canada over the last 10 years. We 

have lost a large portion of our wheat markets of the world. How can we blame Britain for going to 

other markets when we put up dumping duties and tariff walls against the goods that she would like to 

have traded for our grain? Free-trade, I believe, is a 'must' to save the family farm. Statistics show that 

we are losing our markets to other countries especially the United States. In 1952-53, we had 39.2 per 

cent of the world wheat markets, and by 1956-57 we had less than 25 per cent. I think the time is 

overdue when we should take realistic steps to save those markets, and at the same time dispose of our 

surplus. The United States did this. They embarked on a give-away program, long-term credits, 

authorized purchases in the currency of the country taking the produce. 

 

We cannot condemn these policies. They are realistic to the American people. We have millions of 

people going hungry in this world. To me it only seems reasonable that we should try to stop that hunger 

and at the same time make friends with these people. 

 

Let us not forget, Mr. Speaker, that within the boundaries of this country we have people who are not 

getting food necessary for healthful living. We have so many people who cannot afford to buy the 

products of the farmer because of a lack of purchasing power. Is there any sense or reason that, when a 

farmer gets 20 cents a dozen for his eggs out in the country, they should be 60 cents a dozen in Regina 

or Saskatoon? Is there any reasoning to this — that the farmer should get 14 cents a pound for his beef 

and the consumer has to pay from 50 cents to 85 cents a pound when he buys it? Is there any justifiable 

reason why a loaf of bread which cost 20 cents should return the producer less than three cents for the 

flour that is in it? As soon as the packers realize there will be a few more pigs on the market, down 

comes the price. Last fall, the prices of dressed pork was up to $37.50 per hundred, but just as soon as 

more pigs began appearing on the market, down came the price to $21 per hundred. Was there less food 

value in a pound 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

18 

of pork, or did the consumer get a reduction of nearly 50 per cent? No, Mr. Speaker. To me it is a sin 

against humanity that here should be such profiteering on foodstuffs, a first necessity of life. 

 

I mentioned a few minutes ago the economic squeeze that we farmers are in. I want to tell you that my 

brothers and I bought a combine for $4,365 in 1951. Today a combine of its kind will cost nearly 

$7,200. On a mill-rate basis that is an increase of nearly 300 mills on my home quarter-section which is 

assessed at $1,000. Let us figure it another way. I raise purebred cattle. In 1951, when I could sell my 

bull calves for $225 apiece, 20 bull calves would buy a combine. Today, I am lucky to get $125 apiece. 

Now it takes 60 bull calves to buy a combine. How can we continue to operate upon such a basis? 

 

The farmer is not the only one who is suffering from this recession. Small business men have been 

suffering, too. These businesses are completely dependent on the economic conditions of the agricultural 

economy. One of my friends in the garage business told me, last fall: "My charge accounts are up to 

over $50,000. What am I to do? My cash customers are practically down to nil. These are people who 

have carried my business through the years, and am I now to say 'No Credit?' ". 

 

The labouring force in Saskatchewan and in Canada is fuelling the pinch due to agricultural depression. 

The hon. member from Moose Jaw City (Mr. Davies) mentioned figures which show that unemployment 

is higher than at any time since the end of the war. When the farmers cannot buy, factories close, then 

labour is laid off, depression is here. Mr. Speaker, the trouble lies on the Government of Canada during 

these last 10 years; a government that has been and continues to be controlled by the interests of the 

capitalistic system, a system that operates on the basis of profit — no profit, no work. This kind of a 

system does not believe in economic planning, a plan for the future. Its only plan is to extract that 

traditional pound of flesh from the working man as painlessly as possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the last World War, farmers of western Canada were told that, because of the war, 

they would have to take less for their produce. At that time we had controls that kept all things stable. 

Farmers were agreeable to that. The Prime Minister of that day, the Hon. Mackenzie King, in paying 

tribute to their loyalty, said that after the war they would not be forgotten. That was the understatement 

of that decade. Then came peace, and with it came clamour for better goods and services. Also came the 

clamour for the removal of price controls. Mr. Speaker, the lone voice in the wilderness crying out for 

the retention of those price controls was that of the C.C.F. Mr. Coldwell said that if these controls were 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

19 

taken off, it would start a spiral of inflation that would end in the economic ruin of this country. The 

Prime Minister of that day laughed and said, "Oh no! Very soon prices will level off." Yes, they levelled 

off all right — straight up and down! Mr. Speaker, that C.C.F. prophecy is now coming true. Inflation 

(as it is called) has cut the security out from underneath the feet of both farmer and labourer. 

 

I have been told that inflation is too much money chasing too few goods. That is certainly not the 

problem the people of Saskatchewan have today. Their problem is too little money, and lots of goods. 

There is nothing to stop me from buying 10 combines if I have $72,000. No. The problem is to keep 

one's present machinery going and in repair. The criminal part of all this is that, while the security of the 

working man vanished, the financial status of big business improved. Is there any justice in this? I say 

no. The exploitation of the farmer and the labourer is nothing short of criminal. When I think of all the 

needless worry, misery and suffering brought on these people, it makes my blood boil, especially when I 

think of the promises that elected this last Government. The Agriculture Prices Support Act may be a 

step in the right direction, but definitely only a first step. If we are to have a happy, prosperous people, 

agriculture must be bolstered. We must be satisfied with nothing less than full parity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say on behalf of the farmers of Saskatchewan, we are not asking for something for 

nothing. Nor are we asking for special privileges; nor are we asking for something on a platter. All we 

are asking for is a fair chance to earn a decent standard of living; a fair chance to educate the children of 

this province; and a fair chance to enjoy the comforts of life. At this time we have not got that chance. 

The cards are stacked against us. What chance have we to compete against the treasury of the United 

States or against the tariff walls or the dumping duties or the excise taxes of Canada that bring protection 

to the privileged few, the manufacturer; the financier and the industrialist? No, Mr. Speaker. Family 

farms will vanish; agriculture will turn into a languished industry, and then will grow into a big business 

unless the Government of Canada steps in and takes the necessary steps to impede this trend. 

 

In December, I was privileged to attend the Rural Development Conference which was called by this 

Government. The Royal Commissioners who had studied Rural Life and Agriculture in this province, 

spent three days explaining heir recommendations and answering questions as to their work. The 

important impressions this Conference left me with, were first, that the Commission had done a good, 

job, and, secondly, that this Government of which I 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

20 

have the honour of being a member, intends to carry out those recommendations to the best of their 

ability. 

 

During this past year we have seen across Canada celebrations of the 25th Anniversary of the founding 

of the C.C.F. party. The men who spearheaded this movement were morally indignant at the paradox of 

poverty amidst plenty; men like Woodsworth, Heaps, Williams, Johnston and many others, fought the 

fight of justice. Many have passed on to their reward, but their monument stands in the C.C.F. party. 

Twenty-five years in the history of a political party is a very short time. In that time this party has left a 

distinct mark on the society of this country. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — A blemish! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — I hope that I, as a member of the C.C.F., serve my people as they wish to be served in 

the next 25 years. I think at some future time when the history of Canada is written, we will find that the 

foundation of the C.C.F. party is one of the important steps in the struggle of the common people 

towards equality of opportunity and advancement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because I believe that agriculture is sick; because I believe that the policies of the C.C.F. 

will help to remedy that illness; because I believe that this Government, as the Speech from the Throne 

indicates, has done, and continues to do, everything in its power to help and assist the farmers of 

Saskatchewan, it gives me great pleasure to second the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

21 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Leader of the Official Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, first of all, I should like to 

congratulate the two members who have taken part in the debate this afternoon, and I only wish that I 

were able to say the many complimentary things they have said in regard to the Speech from the Throne. 

When I listened to the Speech being to the members of the Assembly, I wondered if I was hearing well, 

so I took it home and read it. Now I have referred, on several occasions, to the Speech from the Throne 

as a 'skeleton', but this time, we didn't even get the skeleton. This is nothing more or less than a review 

of the happenings, political and otherwise, in the province of Saskatchewan over the past twelve months. 

It reminds me of a news reporter when he is on the radio or TV at the end of a year, when he is summing 

up the happenings of what has happened, in the province or in the country over the year. The Speech 

from the Throne does exactly that. Apparently it is an instrument of political propaganda nowadays to 

endeavour to convey to the electorate of the province of Saskatchewan the wonderful things that the 

present administration has been able to do for this province over a period of twelve months. 

 

Much has been said this afternoon, about agriculture, and no one realizes more than I the problem that 

confronts agriculture in Saskatchewan at the present moment. It is rather amazing the reference that is 

given to agriculture in the Speech from the Throne. They say we face difficulties, and that there is an 

increase in the livestock population in Saskatchewan, so we are going to build some more community 

pastures. I doubt very much if that will go very far toward solving any of the problems confronting the 

agricultural economy of this province at the moment. We, as a provincial government, have some 

responsibilities towards agriculture. Surely to goodness we could do more for agriculture than to suggest 

we build, another community pasture or two! Surely there is something that a provincial government can 

do to offset the high cost of production. I feel that, if this Government is not able to, or up to, facing 

these problems and dealing with them adequately here in the province of Saskatchewan, then they 

should get out of the road, and let some other government sit over there that would be prepared to do 

something. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — I suppose Mr. Pearson! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Surely the Minister of Agriculture, for instance, is not so naive as to think that he 

and his Department could do nothing — 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek): — You do like 'John' did and then we'll have a chance. 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

22 

Mr. McDonald: — Surely, Mr. Minister of Agriculture, you must have bean out of town when the 

Speech from the Throne was prepared. Surely there must be something that you and your Department 

could do for the farmers of this province. 

 

I wish to refer to some of the remarks that were made by the mover and the seconder to the Speech from 

the Throne. I was rather amazed at the mover of the Speech from the Throne, the hon. member from 

Moose Jaw (Mr. Davies), when he referred to the rapid increase in population in the city of Moose Jaw. 

It is very true that the city of Moose Jaw is growing rapidly, but I wondered why he did not also tell us 

that, as far as the province of Saskatchewan is concerned, we have a continuous decrease in our 

population. I was wondering if he hadn't listened to the Provincial Treasurer when he was complaining 

about the amount of money that would come into this province under the Dominion-Provincial Tax 

Agreement. One of the great reasons why the amount of money coming to the province of Saskatchewan 

would be small is because of the fact that this province lost some 2,000 people in the last fiscal year. Not 

only did we lose that 2,000 people, but we lost all of our natural increase — the only province in the 

Dominion of Canada with a decrease in population, in the last year. I wonder why. What is the 

difference between this province and other provinces of Canada? The main difference is, of course, that 

we have a mark on our society here, as mentioned by the seconder of the Speech from the Throne; but 

that mark has turned out to be a blotch, a stigma — Socialism. That is one of the great reasons we have 

lost our population today. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — There is hardly a member in this Legislature today who has not a friend or a 

member of his family, who has been forced to leave this province over the last few years, to seek 

employment elsewhere in Canada, because the employment is not available here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I was also rather amused at the member for Moose Jaw when he said that the Provincial Government 

was aware of the employment conditions in our province today. He said he was pleased that the 

Provincial Government was going ahead with projects that had been started over the last construction 

season, in an effort to create as much employment as possible I think the Government is to be 

complimented because of that attitude, and I think they are to be complimented because of their attitude 

of purchasing now as much equipment and materials for construction throughout the coming 

construction season. But I wonder why the Provincial Government has not carried out the programs that 

were announced in Speeches from the Throne of 1955, 1956 and so on. I wonder why they are not 

building the women's gaol 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

23 

at Prince Albert, as announced in the Speech from the Throne in 1956. What happened to the gaol? 

Wouldn't it be an excellent time to be constructing that gaol? What happened to the Technical Institute 

that we heard so much about? The Minister of Education, last session, had not decided where he was 

going to build it. Well now, somebody told me that he has decided where he is going to build it; so I 

suppose, about 1960, he will start building it; but I think this would be a good time to be building the 

Technical Institute. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — What about the pulp mill? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I an coming to that. What about the power building that we are going to build down 

on the corner of Victoria Avenue and Scarth Street. It would be a good time to be building that. You 

could be employing a considerable number of people. 

 

What about the pulp mill? There were going to be four of them built. Why, it was going to double the 

population of Prince Albert! There are more people unemployed in Prince Albert today than in the 'dirty 

'thirties' that my friend referred to. What has happened to the pulp mills? I will have more to say about 

that tomorrow. 

 

You know, they were going to build a bridge at Prince Albert. The member from Prince Albert 

announced that the next bridge that would be built in that area would be in Prince Albert. The Speech 

from the Throne now tells us that we are going to draw plans for it in the coming year. Well, I am sure 

that will employ quite a few people — drawing the plans; and I imagine they will be about ready to be 

presented to the people of Saskatchewan, in 1960! 

 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington): — Election year! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Then we were going to build the South Saskatchewan Dam. You know, Mr. 

Diefenbaker said that he was going to build it; and the Provincial Government were going to build it. 

Well, I don't know who is going to build it, but we are not getting, there very fast. 

 

Premier Douglas: — It's a sure cinch the Liberals didn't build it. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — And it's a sure cinch that you haven't done anything about building it. Just as soon 

as somebody accepted your offer — pfff! Man, we'll have nothing to do with it. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — A change in the rules! 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

24 

Mr. McDonald: — A changed attitude; they changed the rules. I think the Provincial Treasurer was 

absolutely right when he said that probably we should take another look at the division of expenditure, 

because of the change in policy by the Government of Canada; but I do believe that every effort should 

be made to get to the construction of this dam at as early a date as possible. It is a tremendous 

undertaking, and it is something that would employ a considerable number of people, not only at the 

dam site itself, but throughout different parts of Canada, in making the materials out of which the dam 

would be built. 

 

J 'was rather amazed when the member for Moose Jaw was talking about productivity and wages. You 

know, I am sure that the Premier never wrote that speech. And. I am sure that he never read it before the 

hon. member delivered it, because he shot full of holes the only speech that the Premier has been making 

in the province of Saskatchewan over the past twelve months, when he said that, if you take into 

consideration the constant value of the dollar, then the relationship between output and wages was quite 

a different thing. I will also deal more fully with that, tomorrow. 

 

He also referred to the legislation in Saskatchewan dealing with holidays with pay, and he said it was 

'radical legislation'. I prefer to think of it as 'reform' — I don't like this word “radical”. 

 

Premier Douglas: — That's why the Liberals voted against it. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I prefer to think of it as “reform”, and I think the people who must deserve the credit 

for the reform that is taking place, and has taken place, in the province of Saskatchewan since this 

province was formed, are the people of this province. The people of Saskatchewan have demonstrated 

through the past 50 years that they are an aggressive and a forward-looking people, under all 

governments, whether they be Liberal, Conservative or C.C.F. In many instances the province of 

Saskatchewan has led this country, and in some instances has led the western world in reform; and I 

think that the people of this province are to be congratulated because of that and because of their 

forward approach to these many problems. 

 

I was also pleased, to note in the Speech from the Throne that we had an increase in Mothers' Allowance 

You know it is long overdue, and, as a matter of fact, the opposition has brought this to the attention of 

the Government over the last several years, until finally we do have an increase in the allowances paid to 

our mothers in the province of Saskatchewan. 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

25 

I would also like to refer to some of the things that were mentioned by my hon. friend, the member for 

Touchwood (Mr. Meakes). When he first stood in his place he went back to the 1930s and he referred to 

some individual (I think it was a widow) who had been evicted by some past government. A terrible 

thing! But he indicated to the people of this House, and to the people listening to him over the radio, that 

times had changed; that this could never possibly happen under a C.C.F. Government. They wouldn't do 

such an inhuman thing; no act would ever enter their minds to displace such a person. Well now, I 

wonder where the hon. member was sitting on February 22, 1957 (not quite a year ago), when there was 

a Return tabled in this Legislature, at the request of my hon. friend, Mr. McFarlane, the member of 

Qu'Appelle-Wolseley. He asked, firstly, for the number of foreclosures and cancellations of agreements 

for sale which had been allowed each year, 1944 to 1956 inclusive. Part 2 of the question asked for the 

number of evictions which had been allowed each year from 1944 to 1956 inclusive. In 1944, do you 

know how many evictions there were in Saskatchewan? Obviously he doesn't know, or he never would 

have brought it up! There were 11. How many evictions were there in 1956, under this so-called 

'humanitarian-first' government, under the leadership of a gentleman who said that, if a farmer should 

lose title to his land, he would personally resign. Well he should have resigned 11 times in 1944; 25 

times in 1945; 2, times in 1946; 5, times in 1947; and up to even 14 times in 1956. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Shame! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I wonder why my hon. friend didn't read this Return. Had he read it, I doubt very 

much if he would have even have referred to the matter. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Have you got the figures for 1959? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — He also referred to school grants. Well, if he had looked at the record, I do not think 

he would have done that, because here, in the province of Saskatchewan, we have a provincial 

government — again this humanitarian government! who pay the lowest percentage of total school costs 

of any province in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Some record! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Yes, some record. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You will have to bring in some figures to prove that one! 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

26 

Mr. McDonald: — We can bring in figures by the barrel-full, and they came from your own 

Department of Education. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — From your own Return. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — And I shall bring in the Annual Report from the Department of Education, 

tomorrow, prepared by one of your Ministers, which will substantiate the statement that I have just 

made. 

 

Then he went on to talk about agriculture, and he referred to some of the things that this Government has 

been doing for agriculture. He said: "Why, look at the money we have spent on education!" Well, when 

was education the responsibility of agriculture — or the rural people — or the rural municipalities, Mr. 

Speaker? The Premier of this province stated that education was the responsibility of the Provincial 

Government; and, "you elect me as Premier of this province, and. I will accept that responsibility." He 

made that statement in Chaplin. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — And then passed the buck 

 

Mr. McDonald: — And the record is in existence in the Moose Jaw Times-Herald. 

 

Premier Douglas: — That's a very reliable source! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — But now, many years afterwards, they say: "Well, if we give you some education 

grants, we are taking some of the municipal responsibilities onto our shoulders." 

 

And they talk about grid roads. Well, in the grid roads they have included practically all of the 

secondary highway system of this province. It was always a provincial responsibility up until this 

Government decided to give some of it to the municipalities. They are very generous, in spending 

somebody else's money. 

 

They referred also to hospitals. Since when was hospitalization or hospital care the responsibility of 

municipalities? 

 

Mr. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Always. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Since when? 

 

Premier Douglas: — Always. 



 

February 17, 1958 

 

 

27 

Mr. McDonald: — All right, if all of these things are the responsibilities of municipalities, then what 

are the responsibilities of this Government — a propaganda machine? If you are going to hand all of 

these things over to the municipalities, then I suggest o you that the Provincial Government has no 

responsibilities. 

 

We could go on, as far as agriculture is concerned, and it is quite true that, under the Ag. Rep. Service 

they are rendering a good service to the farmers of this province. I think there is room for improvement. 

I think the program could be extended. The agricultural district forage — the same thing could be said of 

it. The activities of this Government with regard to community pastures is a good program; your 

program with regard to the distribution of forage crop seed at cost is a good program; but they are only a 

drop in the bucket. If this Government and the Minister of Agriculture in this Government — if that is 

the extent of his thinking and his ability, then I have great fear for the farmers of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In conclusion, before I ask leave to adjourn the debate, I would also like to say a word or two with 

regard to the Indian population of this province. I do believe that our Indians should be full citizens; that 

they should have the same rights as all the rest of us. After all, the Red Indian is the senior citizen in this 

province of Saskatchewan, and in Canada. They are the true Canadians. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — When did you find that out? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You know, ignorance is often expressed by words such as yours. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — You're an expert on that, too. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — It is about time, I think, that all Canadians realized this fact, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Red Indian is a true Canadian and surely, if the Indian population of our province, or of our country, 

want full citizenship rights extended to them, then they ought to have them; but I do believe that the 

proper attitude is to consult these people, take them into our confidence; to discuss this problem with 

them, and deal with it according to their wishes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned.) 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 4:20 o'clock p.m. 


