



















































Hansard: February 21, 1958


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

7th Day 

 

Friday, February 21, 1958 

 

The House met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

CORRECTION OF PRESS REPORT 

 

Mr. A.P. Weber (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I 

would like to draw your attention to a report in the 'Leader-Post' of my speech in the Assembly, 

yesterday afternoon. First of all, I would like to recommend to the press that they get acquainted with the 

names of the members of this Assembly, because they did not even get the names correctly. Secondly, 

some of the statements contained in their report are incorrect. I said that on the road from Lac la Ronge 

to Uranium City the estimated cost would be $25 million. The report contained in the press stated that 

the road from Buffalo Narrows would cost approximately $25 million. 

 

Another correction I would like to make is that they refer to the people I was referring to along this 

proposed route as Indians. I did not mention the word Indians in my speech until I spoke on the vote 

proposed to the Indians by this Government in the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Therefore, I would like to have those corrections made. 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

Debate on Address-In-Reply 

 

The House resumed from Thursday, February 20, 1958, the adjourned debate on the proposed Motion of 

Mr. Davies (Moose Jaw City) for the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne, and the proposed 

amendment thereto by Mr. McDonald. 

 

Mr. F.E. Foley (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, in continuing my Address in Reply to the Speech from 

the Throne, I note the fact that the Trans-Canada Microwave System was completed in 1957 making 

modern telephone and television communication facilities available to many Saskatchewan residents. In 

light 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

2 

of this I would be remiss in my duties, I think as a northern member, if I did not call the attention of the 

Government to the fact that many of our residents in the northern part of the province still have no 

telephone communication service at all. 

 

In the Turtleford constituency, as of January 31 1956, there were only 453 circuit miles of rural 

telephone lines and only 323 rural telephones. I approached the Government, last year, on behalf of the 

farmers in the Glaslyn-Fairholme area, for an estimate of the cost of establishing a rural telephone 

circuit. The proposed circuit, covering some 30 miles in length and including 26 rural phones, would 

have cost about $17,000, or about $650 per subscriber, according to an estimate made by the 

Department of Telephones. Now, Mr. Speaker, this amount was completely beyond the reach of many of 

the farmers in that area, and as a result no further action was taken. I would urge the Government to 

come to the aid of the rural people of Saskatchewan who have not as yet received rural telephone 

service. It seems to me that with the policy of this Government in regard to gas and in regard to urban 

electricity, surely something can be done to assist in this urgent matter. 

 

Reviewing just a little of what I said yesterday, concerning this matter of rural electrification, urban 

electrification and gas, I would like to review for just a moment Government policy in this connection. 

In urban electrification, between the years 1946 and 1952, some 233 urban centres were electrified at an 

average cost per community of about $747, or about 2.14 per cent of the actual cost to the Corporation. 

That percentage rose between the years 1952 and 1956 to about 44 per cent of the cost of installation 

paid by the urban communities, the remainder being paid by the Power Corporation. Until March 31, 

1956, the total cost to the Power Corporation of all gas installations was in the neighbourhood of $5 1/2 

million, and, in the same period of time the total amount collected by gas subscribers was about 

$266,790. In other words, the subscribers to the gas operated under the auspices of the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation paid 4.88 per cent of the cost of installation, the Power Corporation paid the other 95 

per cent. 

 

Now what is the story, Mr. Speaker, when we review the policy of the Power Corporation with regard to 

rural electrification? A Return dated March 5, 1957, sent to the hon. member from Gravelbourg (Mr. 

Coderre) gave this information: 

 

"The total cost of rural electrification to the Power Corporation until March 31, 1956, $40,100,000. 

The total cost to the farmers in this period — $20,769,888." 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

3 

In other words, 51.7 per cent of the cost of rural electrification during this period was borne by the 

farmers of Saskatchewan, as opposed to around four to five per cent of the cost of power or gas to urban 

subscribers. 

 

I want to suggest that the farmer has bean severely penalized by the power policies and gas policies of 

this Government; and it is yet another instance where the farmer has been denied his fair and just share 

of the provincial income. And so I say, in this matter of rural telephones, surely some Government 

assistance by the Department of Telephones, can be given directly to the rural people of this province to 

assist in this matter of improving communications in the northern areas of our province. 

 

I note that the Speech from the Throne contains some mention of an accelerated program to attract more 

tourists to our province and that facilities and accommodations within provincial parks will be expanded 

and improved. This is welcomed by all of us, I am sure. The tourist trade, especially in the northern part 

of our province is becoming increasingly important not only from a recreational point of view, but from 

an economic point of view. I am pleased to see that, each year, our tourist trade is expanding; and I want 

to urge this Government to give every assistance, and every consideration they can, to improving tourist 

facilities in northern Saskatchewan, and in particular, to the Lakeside resorts of Loon, Turtle and Chitek 

lakes, and to resorts at Meota and. Cochin Beach. 

 

I was happy to attend a recent conference of Boards of Trade in northwestern Saskatchewan and to note 

that a large area of the northwestern part of the province was agreed on the establishment of a wilderness 

park, occupying some 605 square miles in the Water Hen Lake area. This park would be bounded on the 

north by the Air Weapons Range, on the west by the Saskatchewan-Alberta boundary, on the south by 

the chain of lakes and rivers forming the Water Hen River proper, and on the east by the Beaver River. It 

is a beautiful area of untamed wilderness, clear lakes and excellent game and fishing resources; and it is 

my hope that this area will soon be officially established us the next provincial park in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

There are some other important projects in northwestern Saskatchewan for which I would urge your 

support. The Meadow Lake, Glaslyn and North Battleford Boards of Trade have been very active in the; 

promotion of an all-weather road from Buffalo Narrows to Lake Athabaska. It offers easy access to a 

great field of northern exploration and development. The trail has already bean blazed by enterprising 

businessmen. It is estimated that the road may be built for as little as five or six thousand dollars per 

mile, 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

4 

whereas other routes may cost from ten to twenty thousand dollars per mile. We have, of course, the 

great mineral resources of the area and multiple tourist attractions. 

 

I would also like to press for continued highway development in northwestern Saskatchewan. There is 

urgent need for another Trans-Canada highway to the northern part of our province, and it is my hope 

that the Department of Highways will give this route every consideration. No. 4 Highway north of North 

Battleford — the main artery north to Meadow Lake, from there to Green Lake and into that vast 

northern territory, has bean oil-surfaced as far as the community of Cochin. I would urge the Minister 

that consideration be given to further extending the oil surfacing next year to Glaslyn, with eventual 

completion of the road through to Meadow Lake. 

 

I would urge that No. 24 Highway from Leoville south to Spiritwood should be extended south through 

Hafford to link up with No. 5 Highway at Borden, to give the people in that area reasonable access to the 

city of Saskatoon; and that No. 55 Highway west from Frenchman Butte be built to the meridian and 

south to Lloydminster. I want to draw the attention of the Minister, again, to the fact that between North 

Battleford and the Alberta boundary, a distance of some 110 or 112 miles, we have about seven ferries 

and no bridges, and while I realize that other bridges are receiving priority, I would like to urge that 

future consideration be given to a bridge across the north Saskatchewan river at some point between 

these two spots — between North Battleford and Lloydminster — to serve this area north of the river 

which has no all-weather access across. As you know, for several months of the year, the river crossings 

are difficult and dangerous. 

 

I note also in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, reference to the fact that the high school curriculum will 

be revised in the near future. To those of us engaged in the business of education, to those thousands of 

high school students throughout the province, I am sure that this will be welcome news indeed, because 

conditions are changing the demands being made upon our graduate students, changing conceptions 

concerning the role of the high school in today's society, all must have a bearing on what we teach. 

However, as curricula change, other changes occur as well, and one of those changes, of course, which 

we have heard something of from time to time, are the changes in the text books which go with the 

curriculum. I believe that some tangible form of government assistance should be made available to our 

high school students throughout the province who are at present faced with a bill of anything from $40 

to $70 for high school texts alone. I realize, of course, that considerable amounts are being expended for 

free text books in public schools. Nevertheless, this problem of changing text books is becoming a very 

difficult one for the rural people in Saskatchewan. 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

5 

The other day, some question was raised in the Throne Speech debate regarding the status of teachers' 

salaries in 1944; so much so that the Premier (I am sorry he is not in his seat at the moment) had this to 

say: "In education what a legacy your Liberal government left — dilapidated buildings, thousands of 

dollars in teachers' unpaid bills from the 'thirties." Mr. Speaker, in the same breath he accused the hon. 

Leader of the Opposition of many misstatements. I want to present just a few facts on this matter of 

teachers' arrears in 1944, then I ask you to judge who is guilty of misstatements. 

 

In 1937-38, special legislation was passed by your Liberal government providing for advances to school 

districts for the payment of arrears in teachers' salaries; and in the years between 1937 and 1944, some 

$731,000 was voted by your Liberal provincial government to take care of this urgent matter. Of that 

amount, over $600,000 was actually paid out in arrears of teachers' salaries in this province. In fact, by 

1944, the vote on the estimates for teachers' arrears was down to $3,000. Why? Not because your 

provincial Liberal government was reluctant to pay arrears of teachers' salaries, Mr. Speaker; but 

because no longer could any notes be located to pay. Requests to the Boards and to the teachers had 

failed to uncover any further notes that could be paid under this legislation. 

 

Then what happened when the present Government took office? In spite of the fact that no notes were 

available, for some unknown reason they voted, in 1945-46, for the arrears of teachers' salaries, $50,000. 

Why? I have yet not found any necessity for the largeness of that vote. The following year, 1946-47, the 

vote was down to $5,000. In 1947-48 it was down to $1,000; and in 1948-49 it was $500. In other 

words, this present Government, between the years 1945 and 1949, voted some $56,500 for teachers' 

arrears, and they paid out, in that same length of time, a little over $6,000, or about 11 per cent of the 

note. In the same period under Liberal administration, they voted $731,000 and paid out $600,000 or 32 

per cent of the vote. Who was the most interested in education during those relative periods of time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Whose problem was it? Who created the problem? 

 

Mrs. Batten: — The taxpayers. 

 

Mr. Foley: — The Premier accused the Leader of the Opposition of misstatements. He said the Liberals 

left thousands of dollars in unpaid bills from the 'thirties. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Six thousand dollars! 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

6 

Mr. Foley: — And I want to say that, of the $8,000, some time during 1945 yet outstanding, this is what 

the Journals have to say, dated December 31, 1945, appearing in the Journals of March 18, 1946: "Of 

the $8,592.58, unable to locate information from teachers or districts, $1,338; unable to locate teacher, 

$1,591; promised by school district to pay arrears, $3,279; cases where the Department is still 

corresponding regarding payment, $2,260; amount of arrears in doubt, $122.45." 

 

I am convinced, Mr. Speaker, that this is ample evidence of the sincerity and the efficiency of Liberal 

administration in the realm of education before this present Government took office. 

 

Mr. M.J. Willis (Elrose): — That's a fine statement for a teacher! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Sure it is. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Willis. 

 

Mr. Willis (Elrose): — You weren't teaching in the 'thirties. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Speaking of 'fine statements' by teachers reminds me of something. I have a circular here, 

Mr. Speaker, produced for the Department of Mineral Resources by the Department of Travel and 

Information. I don't think teachers were connected with this one, because this is what is says: 

 

"Yep, it's that doggone mineral tax. Some of them mineral tax arrears go all the way back for 13 years. 

It sure ain't no way to run a business, either yours or the Government's." 

 

It is just a little circular sent out by the Department of Mineral Resources to remind the farmers of their 

three per cent mineral tax arrears which go back for 13 years. 

 

I might even say a little more on this matter — the hon. member urged me to draw it to his attention. 

The farmer is given three months to pay all or part of the arrears; those who fail to make a reasonable 

payment in 90 days will receive a final notice; those who receive the final notice will be granted six 

more months to pay their mineral tax arrears, but $6 will be added to those arrears. It sure ain't no way to 

run a business! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Socialists! 

 

Mr. Foley: — Mr. Speaker, I have one more comment regarding a matter of pressing urgency in one 

portion of my constituency. For several years now, the Community of Frenchman's Butte in the western 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

7 

portion of this area has been attempting to secure a historic cairn to commemorate the 1885 Rebellion. 

Now, since Mr. Herbert left the services of this Government, it is my understanding that no successor 

has been appointed to take his place as Director of Historic Sites, and I would urge that, in the near 

future, the Government give consideration to appointing someone to take over the work of that 

department so that this matter of historic sites in the province can be proceeded with. 

 

In the few short moments left at my disposal, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say one more thing. 

Agriculture is the most important single enterprise or occupation in this province, and as I said 

yesterday, it seems to me that a great deal more could have bean done by this Government since they 

took office, and a great deal more could have appeared in this Speech from the Throne than the 

extension of community pastures and the establishment of a machinery-testing program. It seems to me 

that farm credit is an important matter which the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. McDonald) drew to the 

Government's attention, last Tuesday. 

 

There is crop insurance, the matter of storage, and a great many other things that could have been done 

in the field of agriculture. I have already pointed out that the Power Corporation could have done a great 

deal more for the farmer than has been done, when urban power and gas installations were made at 

about five par cent of the cost to the subscriber, while the farmers were, on the average, asked to pay 

over 50 per cent of the cost of rural power installation; and, I understand, in some cases the percentage 

went much higher. I notice that the cost of gas in this province is excessive; that for 30,000 cubic units 

in Edmonton it costs $9.15; in Calgary, $9.78; and in Regina, $19.26. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — How about Winnipeg? 

 

Mr. Foley: — The average yearly cost to the householder in these three cities is $68 per year in year in 

Edmonton; $74 in Calgary; $145 per year in Regina. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — What about Winnipeg, where the Liberals are? 

 

Mr. Foley: — Our Leader (Mr. McDonald) on Tuesday last, moved an amendment to the Throne 

Address in which, for many reasons, I heartily concur: "That, in the opinion of this Assembly, Your 

Honour's advisors have failed to implement a comprehensive agricultural program for Saskatchewan, or 

an aggressive plan of Industrial Development which would provide full employment." 

 

I will vote against the motion, Mr. Speaker, but I take great pleasure in supporting the amendment. 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

8 

Mr. Douglas T. McFarlane (Qu'Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this 

debate, I first want to congratulate the leader of our Official Opposition for the very sincere and very 

capable manner in which he pointed up the very serious plight facing the people of this province, after 

14 years of a Socialist regime, fourteen years during which the individual freedoms are becoming more 

restricted every day . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — . . . fourteen years in which access to courts is being denied in favour of 

government boards; fourteen years in which some of the greatest economic bungling in the history of 

this province has taken place under a Socialist regime . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Who wrote this for you, Mac? 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — . . . fourteen years in which the farmers of this province have been discriminated 

against until now this Government's only apparent solution is to enlarge community pastures, and turn 

them out to fend for themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are being again asked to endorse a program of Socialism for another year. This Speech 

from the Throne has been aptly referred to by the Leader of the Opposition as a 'skeleton'. As far as 

agriculture is concerned, it is a corpse in neon lights. It died in infancy and is wrapped in a shroud of 

glaring propaganda. 

 

This Government is setting up a new pattern in regard to agriculture in this province. During the last 

nine years the budget expenditure from revenue account on agriculture has steadily declined. In 

1949-50, it was 4.8 per cent; in 1950-51, down to 4.7; 1951-52 down to 4.5; 1952-53 down to 4.1; 

1953-54 down to 4; 1954-55, 4.3. Somehow you got up three points there. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Leader of the Official Opposition): — That was election year, wasn't it? 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Yes, that could have been around election year. In 1955-56, it was down to 3.6 per 

cent; 1956-57, 3.5; 1957-58, 3.5. The last two years we have only had 3.5 per cent of the provincial 

revenue budget earmarked for agriculture; the largest and most important industry in this province now 

and in the future. 

 

When we examine the Speech from the Throne, we find four long pages but we only find 3.5 (the same 

as your budgets) lines devoted to agriculture, and that is the new pattern of agriculture in this province 

— a 3.5 per cent government; in other words, 3.5 lines out of four long pages — an elephant dragging in 

a mouse. 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

9 

What do they list? What is the cure for the agricultural situation in this province at the present time? All 

it states is extension of the community pasture program, and that legislation will be introduced to 

introduce a farm implement act and a Board to supervise the testing of farm machinery. So I ask you, 

Mr. Speaker: Is this going to help the farmer pay his taxes? Is this going to make young farmers today 

stay on the land? Is this going to preserve the family farm in this province? Will this put cash in the 

hands of the small business man in our local towns and villages in this province? Will this help the rural 

municipalities carry out their programs to build grid roads? Will this put buying power into the hands of 

the people in this province to alleviate unemployment? No, Mr. Speaker. It is just further evidence of the 

apparent disregard of this Government for the agricultural economy of this province, which always has 

been and always will be, our main industry. 

 

This Government has no program for agriculture. Where is the Minister of Agriculture (Hon. Mr. Nollet) 

when the Speech from the Throne is being drafted? Where is the Minister of Agriculture when farm 

organizations submit their briefs on the agricultural situation, year after year? Where is the Minister of 

Agriculture when the budgetary expenditures are being set up by this Government? It would appear that 

when the Provincial Treasurer (Hon. Mr. Fines) calls in all the various departments to slice up the 

financial pie, agriculture is left to the last, and he simply sits in Cabinet and says "Toby or not to be. 

That is the question." 

 

The Minister of Agriculture in this House has sat on is haunches for 14 years hollering at a Liberal 

government at Ottawa, or a Conservative government at Ottawa, to do something while he neglected the 

agricultural economy of this province. He has had no time to prepare an aggressive and practical 

program for the people of this province. It is little wonder, then, that the Speech from the Throne, as far 

as agriculture is concerned, has been shot at and missed. 

 

The Premier ignores the plight of the small farmers and businessmen in this province entirely. That is to 

be expected. The Premier is a good entertainer. He is one of the best after-dinner speakers in this 

province; but the Premier is not a business man. He is forever telling what should be done, but when his 

Government should be taking the initiative and setting an example, he backs away. He is the man who 

stated that the leader of the Opposition made more misstatements of fact per minute than he had ever 

listened to. He was going to contradict the figures, and he was going to give the facts. Well, we all know 

how he dealt with the agricultural program we presented. He put on his usual theatrical performance — 

and that was it. When it came to contradicting the facts in population, what did he say? He said 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

10 

that in the years 1936 to 1946 the population had dropped from 931,000 to 833,000. 

 

This is the Premier's favourite period for figures in population, and it was quite interesting to watch him 

while he was making these statements and to see the Provincial Treasurer sitting beside him. While the 

Premier was giving these figures, the Provincial Treasurer was waving his hands, but the damage had 

been done by that time. And why was the Provincial Treasurer quite concerned? Because he knows that 

these figures were taken in war years. In 1938, the year before the war, the population was 914,000. In 

1946, the year after the war, it was the same as in 1945, namely, 833,000, indicating a drop in that 

period of 81,000. Now, Mr. Speaker, in that period 79,222 persons from Saskatchewan enlisted in the 

armed services. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — That's where your population went. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — What I am very proud to announce at this time is that, in this province, 41.5 per 

cent of the male population between the ages of 18 and 45 years enlisted in the services of their country. 

When you subtract the 79,222 persons, who joined the services, from the 81,000 drop, you have a figure 

of 1,778 persons in that length of time. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege. My hon. friend, I am sure, does not want 

to mislead the House. All persons who were in the services were included still in the population; that 

information is secured from their families. My hon. friend will also remember that I quoted 1945, and a 

good number of those were already back; but men in the services were included in the census 

population. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — I have the figures here from the Wartime Information Board, and, as I pointed out, 

the drop in that time was 1,778 persons, or less than the figure of 2,000 people who left this province 

under your C.C.F. Government for the last year. 

 

Let us look at some of the other statements made by the Premier of this province. At the Industrial 

Development Conference held in this city in November, 1956, when he was trying to woo industries 

back after he and his Government had successfully chased them away for the 10 previous years, he had 

this to say: 

 

"In our province we are producing more food per acre and we are farming more acreage than we did 

10 years ago, and yet we are doing it with less people 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

11 

working on the land. That means, of necessity, a declining agricultural population, not only at the 

present time but for several years ahead." 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

"Now that is something not to be deplored. If we require less people on the land to produce the same 

food, or even more food, it simply means that we have those people available to apply their labour and 

ingenuity for other industries." 

 

I ask you, Mr. Speaker, what other industries is he going to send these people to? 

 

Mrs. Batten: — The pulp mill. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — In fact, when we get the information and the Returns, we find out there were 67 less 

people employed in manufacturing last year in this province than there were before the C.C.F. 

Government came to power in Saskatchewan. 

 

During the same period, as you know, we had a survey made in 1953, and it was found that, during that 

time, 40 per cent of the persons engaged in agriculture in this province had left Saskatchewan altogether, 

and I ask you if those agricultural and economic conditions tend to keep people in the province. 

 

The Premier is labouring hard to leave the impression that we had a great industrial boom in this 

province. He is trying to gloss over the fact that-we have had 10 years of industrial stagnation caused by 

the very actions and avowed doctrines of his political philosophy, and that of his planners and 

supporters. 

 

Then, as you will remember, yesterday and the day before there was a little incident which took place in 

this House. It was drawn to the attention of the Government by the member for Turtleford (Mr. Foley) 

that the C.C.F. were publicizing the 25 years of the formation of their party by putting stickers on the 

back of the mails. So we thought we would go back and see what they were celebrating, and what was 

their doctrine 25 years ago. So I happened to get this booklet, which was tabled in this House. It was 

tabled in 1943, on February 27th, 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

12 

and signed by Mr. Fines. It says: 

 

"We hereby certify that this is a true copy of the Handbook for Speakers issued by the Farm-Labour 

Group in 1933 . . ." 

 

Twenty-five years ago, and they are commemorating their 25th anniversary by stamps on the back of 

letters! 

 

I wanted to find out what the policy of the C.C.F. group was at that time, and here it is: 

 

"The social ownership of all resources and machinery of wealth and production to the end that we may 

establish a Cooperative Commonwealth in which the basic principle regulating production, 

distribution and exchanges will be the supplying of human needs instead of making profits." 

 

That was 25 years ago! I want to congratulate them on this, because their whole economic philosophy, 

the biggest part of their endeavours in this province certainly have showed up their true colours because 

they haven't made a profit. In fact, I think half of the Crown Corporations they started have not made a 

profit, and as a result had to be buried under a tombstone of wasted investment. But anyway, they don't 

believe in making a profit. 

 

Then they had the Regina Manifesto, and you all know what was in the Regina Manifesto. Then they 

had dissension in their ranks. A percentage of their popular votes throughout the country has been 

slipping year after year, so they got themselves into a huddle and thought possibly, "We'd better do 

something about that Regina Manifesto". 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker (Attorney General): — Your slip's showing, too! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — "We'd better see if we can't make it more popular to the people of Canada." So they 

got themselves into a huddle and went down to Winnipeg, and came out with what was known as the 

'Winnipeg Declaration'. I suggest that all it was that a bunch of Socialists went down to Winnipeg, got 

into molt like a bunch of old hens and, when their feathers grew in again, they were exactly the same 

colour as before. 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

13 

The Premier at these conferences calls all these industrialists in, and he says, "Don't worry, boys, we're 

not Socialists." So when he gets out in the country, it has to be something different. He has to hold the 

fort out there. So we have one group entertained in one way, and we have another group entertained in 

another way. 

 

As I said before, they are celebrating the 25th anniversary of the founding of Socialism, and they say 

that the 'Winnipeg Declaration' has got away from Socialism: "We're not Socialists any more; we 

believe in free enterprise, or we have public ownership, or private ownership, etc." But then the latest 

issue of 'The Commonwealth' (yes, you'll want to clap hard after I read this) — in the February 19, 1958 

issue, what do we find? We find Mr. Donovan Swailes, C.C.F. M.L.A. for Manitoba getting up and 

saying this: 

 

"The policy of the C.C.F. is the same today as it was 25 years ago." 

 

Tell that to your meetings where you are trying to convince them you haven't changed. That was found 

on the inside pages. What do we find on the back page, on the editorial page of 'The Commonwealth': 

 

"The only way to stop private industry from profiteering is by a system of planning and price control." 

 

Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Just listen to this: 

 

"The catch in this, however, is that private business would to a large extent refuse to produce if such 

an effective ceiling was placed upon their profit." 

 

"So the answer is that where necessary we must move towards public ownership of key industries." 

 

That was on February 19, 1958, and that's your policy commemorating the birth of your party 25 years 

ago; but I challenge you to put that on the back of the correspondence you are sending throughout the 

province! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — We're not even particular who gets the paper, either! 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

14 

Premier Douglas: — We send it to anybody. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Mr. Speaker, we are to look over this very important document, the Speech from 

the Throne. As I have pointed out, and as other members from this side have pointed out, it is absolutely 

bare as far as agriculture is concerned. Apparently they do not want to recognize the cost-price squeeze 

facing the farmer at this time. They don't want to measure up to the conditions formulated by themselves 

by their actions and by their policies, which have lead to this cost-price squeeze. 

 

One of the factors was pointed out by the member for Turtleford (Mr. Foley) this afternoon, when he 

dealt with the way the farmers have been discriminated against in this province in regard to the power 

program. Then the farmers want to know why they have to pay on the average about $500 for power, 

when it has been brought into urban centres at a much reduced rate. In committee, we tried to find out 

why interest figures are so high. When we question the activities of different personnel, and wages paid 

to different personnel, we are told it is not in the public interest. However, on an Order for Return, last 

session, we asked what the salary was of the Manager of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. We 

asked about other expenses in the Power Corporation, and this is what we found out: the manager's 

salary amounted to some $19,600 — in round figures you could quote it at about $20,000. What does 

that $20,000 represent in terms of the farmer, Mr. Speaker? It simply means that, taking the average of 

$500 which every farmer has to pay for power, it would take a block of 40 farmers paying $500 each to 

pay the salary of one man in your Corporation. That is one of the things they must have to consider. 

 

Premier Douglas: — It would take a lot of cream cans to pay Donald Gordon, too! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Another thing is your power rate. Your Minister of Power (Hon. Mr. Brown) is, I 

am sorry, not in his seat this afternoon, but he has stated that we have had five different reductions in 

power rates, and yet it is still adding to our fixed costs as compared to the Manitoba farmer, because our 

rates here are 70 per cent higher than those in Manitoba. Power is just one of the items which is adding 

up to the high fixed costs of the farmer today. 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas (Minister of Highways): — They're a lot lower than the Liberals charged when they 

were in power. 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

15 

Mr. McFarlane: — Then there is the mineral tax concerning which some pamphlet on philosophy, 

written by some of the members probably on the other side, was read to you by the member for 

Turtleford this afternoon. I refer to the mineral tax of 3 cents per acre. I suggest to you. Mr. Speaker, if 

there is one thing that has the farmers of this province riled up today, it is the treatment they have had in 

regard to the mineral taxes on their land over the past 14 years. 

 

There is no province in Canada today that has more confusion in regard to the ownership of the minerals 

than the province of Saskatchewan at this time. The farmers are being continually taxed for something 

that neither they nor this Government know that they own. I suggest to you that there is another place 

which is adding up to the higher fixed costs of farming in Saskatchewan. 

 

Then there is the grid road system, where the farmers through their taxes are helping to pay for the 

secondary highways of this province, which are the responsibility of the Provincial Government in this 

province. Secondary highways, if you accept your rightful share of responsibility, should be born by the 

Government to your right, Mr. Speaker. There again we have a condition adding up to the higher fixed 

costs of farming in this province. 

 

We have rural taxes for school purposes which have increased 175 per cent from 1944 to 1956. 

Municipal taxes have risen to three times as high today as they were when the C.C.F. Government came 

into office. There is a little interesting thing. I think I'll go back to the little book that you had in 1933, 

seeing you are celebrating the 25th anniversary of C.C.F. policy, and I think I should go back and read 

some of the statements there. On page 10: they were talking about taxes — the question-and-answer 

period which was set up by the Provincial Treasurer (Hon. Mr. Fines) for the information of those who 

went around trying to elect the C.C.F. Government at that time. The question was this: "Would there still 

be taxes to pay under this new system?" Here is the answer: "The cost of social services will have to be 

met. The individual would still have to pay taxes but under our general scheme of financings he or she 

would be relieved of taxation as it is at the present time." Quite a relief to have it increased three times 

during the 14 years! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Relieved of it, all right! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Then it says again, on the part in regard to the farmer and his taxes — he's going to 

be relieved of his taxes so he'd have more leisure time. The question is: "Under Socialism will a man 

only work six hours a day and a farmer 14 hours? The answer is: "Under a planned economy it will not 

be necessary for the farmer to work more than six hours a day. There would be no need to; we have the 

leisure now, only it is not divided up properly. This is what they're celebrating the 25th anniversary of! 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

16 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — What's the matter? Don't you like it? 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Are they doing anything to alleviate the situation of the farmer? We have heard the 

Premier of this province speaking to groups and saying that we should buy more Saskatchewan 

products. If we buy more Saskatchewan products, it will help pay the taxes in this province; it will help 

bolster the economy of this province. Oh, it will do wonderful things, if we just put on this 'Buy 

Saskatchewan Products' campaign. As all members know, we had a surplus of butter in this province 

some two or three years ago. The Federal Government offered butter to the institutions of Saskatchewan 

at the rate of three pounds for the price of two. 

 

As you know, the Provincial Government has quite a few institutions, and so we thought we would see if 

they took advantage of this offer by the Dominion Government, and we asked a question to see how 

much butter they had bought for the different institutions in the province for the years 1950 to 1956. We 

asked how much they had bought for the Saskatchewan Hospital at Weyburn, the Saskatchewan 

Hospital at North Battleford, the Training School and the Restoration Centre, and this is going to really 

make the farmers of this province happy. Today in some districts they have been unable to deliver grain; 

some delivery points are at the lowest in the history of this province. When they needed extra cash; 

when they needed income supplemented by the dairy industry, and beef industry, etc, here is what we 

found out: For Saskatchewan Hospital at Weyburn from 1950 to 1956, not one pound of butter was 

bought; not one pound of butter was bought for the Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford; only 31 

pounds were bought in six years for the Saskatchewan Training School, and only 528 pounds were 

bought for the Physical Restoration Centre in Saskatoon. Since 1950, the C.C.F. Government has bought 

for these four institutions a total of only 559 pounds of butter, valued at $341 or one year's production of 

one good cow! Compare that with $365,000 for newspaper and other advertising for your Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation! That is just one of the items. We could go on and list a great many more here this 

afternoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, due to the very unfavourable allotment of radio time by this Government, I want to say at 

this time that the Speech from the Throne, having offered absolutely no security for the farmers of this 

province again, having absolutely no constructive or no rigorous or corrective program to get the 

farmers of this province out of their financial situation, I will not support it. 

 

Mrs. Mary J. Batten (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, along with the rest of the people of Saskatchewan, I 

looked forward very much to this Second Session of the Thirteenth Legislature of Saskatchewan. For, 

like most of the people 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

17 

of Saskatchewan, who continue to live in Saskatchewan in spite of our climate, in spite of our drought, 

in spite of our floods, in spite of our bad roads, in spite of our socialists . . . 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker (Hanley): — Oh, don't run down our . . . 

 

Mrs. Batten: — . . . I am an incurable optimist. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Give the lady a break. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — I had, during the last session, a great deal of difficulty in understanding the reasoning, 

(if I could flatter the people across from me with such a word), of those members of the Government, 

who insisted that we, the Official Opposition in this Provincial House of Saskatchewan, should allot 

them Federal money, should give them Federal policies and programs, in order to restore Saskatchewan 

to some semblance of prosperity. 

 

I also felt at a loss to understand why I, as an elected provincial Member from the Humboldt 

constituency, should be required to apologize for something the Liberal Government in Ottawa did, or 

explain to this Government why they did something that this Government did not particularly 

appreciate. I felt that, in good conscience, I should be here to represent every one of my constituents, 

whether they voted Liberal, C.C.F., or Social Credit (and even in Humboldt we have those who vote 

C.C.F.). I felt that I came here not to tell the Federal Government what to do, but that I was here to see 

to it that there was as little maladministration in this Government in the province of Saskatchewan as I 

could prevent, and to see to it that our laws were as just and equitable as I, by my small effort, could 

make them. I felt that, if I carried out these duties to the best of my abilities, and with a good clear 

conscience, I was performing the duty for which I was elected. 

 

Therefore, in spite of that tragic election last June, I thought, "Well, something good will come out of 

this. At least our C.C.F. Government can now forget about Ottawa and get down to the business of doing 

something for the people of Saskatchewan." 

 

Like the other people who have had the sorrow of listening to the Speech from the Throne, I am very 

sadly disappointed. I think that, instead of hearing a Speech from the Throne, a program of policy, of 

plans, I heard a historical document. In listening to the Government members, and particularly to the 

Premier, I wasn't listening to a Government who had any ideas or plans or hopes of prosperity for 

Saskatchewan. I was listening to an obsolete debating society of historians, who were not well equipped 

by education to be historians or by impartiality to be fair in interpreting that history. 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

18 

I think that the Leader of the Official Opposition (Mr. McDonald) described that speech very well when 

he said it was a "skeleton". But then, I'm still an optimist. (Saskatchewan people do have to be optimists 

to say here), and I said to myself, "Perhaps, when the Premier of this province gets up, he'll put some 

meat on that skeleton; he'll give it some blood, some flesh, some sinew; perhaps we have a Government 

with a few ideas; maybe it isn't dead yet." And then, what happened? Well, Mr. Speaker, this 

Government put on a wonderful show. For showmanship you can't beat the C.C.F. in Saskatchewan. 

But, Mr. Speaker, the people of Humboldt constituency don't send me here to look at a show, and the 

people of Saskatchewan don't pay our salaries so that we can be entertained. And therefore I was again 

downhearted and disappointed even at the fine show that was put on. 

 

First of all, we had the hon. Member from Moose Jaw (Mr. Davies) 'man of the people', a union man, a 

man representing Labour — and all honour to him. Secondly we had the 'man of the soil', again, a man 

of the people. But doesn't that suggest something to you, Mr. Speaker? Look at that C.C.F. picture. They 

can't look at people as people. You are either labour or you are a farmer, or else you are the 

Government, which is everything in this province. So, after the hon. member from Moose Jaw spoke for 

labour (and he wasn't too happy with what even the C.C.F. had done for labour) and the hon. member 

from Touchwood constituency (Mr. Meakes), in which constituency I at one time, had the honour of 

making my own home when I was a very little girl, after he spoke and wept voluminous tears for the 

poor people who lived there during the 'thirties (and I was one of them) and I felt tears in my own eyes 

listening to him, it was so deeply moving. But, Mr. Speaker, he didn't have any tears left over for the 

farmers of the Touchwood constituency today; and there are still farmers in that constituency and in 

every other constituency in the province of Saskatchewan, who are living on a pittance and your own 

Royal Commission tells you that. Those are not my figures. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — Liberal allegiance. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — What are you doing for those farmers? Have you not even any tears for them? And 

then, to top off the show, we had the Premier. Along with everybody else in Saskatchewan, I have a 

great deal of respect for the Premier because of his position, and because of his personality. I regret very 

much that he is not here to hear all these flattering things that I intend to say about him. And the Premier 

stood up as "the idealist", and well he should. He is well-trained to be the idealist of the C.C.F. Party, 

which forms the Government in Saskatchewan. And strangely enough, this Premier of our province, 

who throughout my short stay in this particular House, reminds me very much of that velvet glove 

whose silken personality is being continually moved and molded by the iron fist of the Provincial 

Treasurer (Hon. Mr. Fines) . . . 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

19 

Mr. McCarthy: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Dictator! 

 

Mrs. Batten: — I hate to have them miss this flattery, but if they can't stay in the House, I can't do much 

about it. The Premier told us himself, in the House the other day, that his speech was as dessert. Mr. 

Speaker, we in Saskatchewan have had dessert and nothing but dessert for 14 years; we need some meat 

and potatoes! Fourteen years of dessert have given us nothing but indigestion and flabbiness of 

economy. I think the Premier made an apt comparison when he said that the Leader of the Opposition's 

speech was an "appetizer" — "sour and astringent", and it's time we had a little bit of that life, a little bit 

of that appetizer in our political life in this province. And if this Leader of the Opposition could be the 

Premier, he would put that life and that astringency and that appetite into the lives of our people in 

Saskatchewan so that they could rebuild this sick economy of ours. 

 

Mr. Gardiner (Melville): — That's wonderful. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — The Premier went on, using as his measure barrels of oil and inflated dollars when 

speaking of the manufacturing industry, and he painted a very glowing, prosperous picture. And, Mr. 

Speaker, if I lived as do apparently the Ministers of the Crown in these ivory halls, surrounded by the 

busy hive of activity that the Government offices produce, perhaps I could be deluded into believing that 

we in Saskatchewan really have a fine prosperous economy, booming, full of happy and rich people. But 

I live in a constituency that is being bereft of its young people. We have no room for university students. 

We have no room for skilled labour because we are losing our population. During the winter months, we 

have nothing to supplement the incomes of our young people. During the summer months our farm 

economy is not strong enough to give them full employment. This is not a booming economy, Mr. 

Speaker. This is not the type of thing that any Premier can speak of in the proud terms that our Premier 

uses, and be justified in the eyes of his people. 

 

Then, I thrilled, as I am sure everybody on the air and in this House thrilled to the Premier's magnificent 

voice and his magnificent sentiments, when he ended his speech with that vision of international good 

will, that further vision of a planned economy that would give everybody happiness. Not only, he said, 

not only in Saskatchewan, not even national, let us have a planned internal economy! 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

20 

I have heard similar sentiments from the words of men who, too, had beautiful voices, but who were 

Communists. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — That phoney again. Shame on you! 

 

Mrs. Batten: — It is not phoney, and it is true that that planned economy on an international level has 

always been advocated, strongly advocated, and is still feared because it is advocated by Communists. 

Yet I have never heard any Communist so confused in economics that he spoke of a planned 

international economy in a free trade area. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mrs. Batten: — After listening to that magnificent ending, I was more than slightly deflated by my very 

practical mind, which reminded me of a little story. It has no personal application, but it is about a 

woman politician, who was a very strong and virile politician, and she went out and she electioneered 

day and night, and at the end of one heavy day, she came home and she sat down exhausted. She said to 

her husband, "You know, we've done a wonderful job and we're going to sweep the country." He looked 

at her wearily and said, "Hell, dear, why don't you start with sweeping the kitchen? 

 

It is just about time our Government started worrying about our own problems. Those sentiments of 

international good will are wonderful, but they don't put a cent in our farmers' pockets. It is fine to worry 

about things outside your jurisdiction and outside your ability to do anything about. It does denote your 

good will and your noble character; but what does it do for the people who elect you? What does it do 

for the people who hold you responsible for their economic well-being in this province? And that is 

where this Government is falling short of the hopes and aspirations of their own followers as well as the 

other people of Saskatchewan. 

 

There is quite a contrast between that speech and the speech of the Leader of the Opposition. There was 

no false sentiment in his speech, but there was energy, there was planning, there was a real desire to 

start, not at the top in some wild dream, but to start in the kitchen, to start on the small family farm, to 

start in the small town and in the small city, with people who need help, and see to it that the 

Government does give them some assistance that will enable them to work out their own destiny and 

their own economic salvation. And that is the theory of Liberalism. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Where has that theory been for 20 years? 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

21 

Mrs. Batten: — It is always amusing to hear these little side-comments There is nothing we would like 

better than to put that theory into effect. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You had 20 years in which to put it into effect. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — I was a little young, 20 years ago, to be putting anything into effect of that nature. And 

you, as Members of this Government, after 20 years, have become a little too old to put anything into 

effect. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, I was more than amused at this little aside, that came up in the House, about this 

stamp commemorating "this wonderful, historic event" — to quote the Premier and the C.C.F. party. I 

agree with the C.C.F. in this instance. I think we should commemorate that event, because soon they'll 

be like the dodo bird and the Russian Empire — fallen, gone! They have no reality in the future. This 

C.C.F. party has become barren, before it has become old; it has become senile before it has become 

wise. They have nothing left to give the people of Saskatchewan or the people of Canada. 

 

Like most Socialist and Communist parties, this party was conceived in an age of disillusion and 

inadequacy, when people thought that even wrong ideas were better than no ideas. And I, as a member 

of the Liberal party, will take part of the blame for that conception, because we should have been able to 

give the people something that they wanted, something that we failed to do. 

 

Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mrs. Batten: — And then, therefore, instead of staying and thinking their way out of the difficulty with 

us they accepted blindly these beautiful promises that the C.C.F. party gave them. 

 

The C.C.F. party was born during hard times — during Tory times. Perhaps they expect to have a 

re-birth. There is no event that is more exhilarating or happy than a birth, be it that of a baby or be it that 

of an idea, or be it that of a political party. I can thrill along with this Government and C.C.F. party with 

the birth of the C.C.F. party. It was an exhilarating experience, and because it was an exhilarating 

experience your C.C.F. party was able to attract many people of the fine calibre and great intelligence. 

You have been very fortunate. Even since you formed your Government, even in your (shall I say) 

decadence, you have been able to continue to attract Civil Servants of high calibre and dedicated lives, 

in spite of the frustrations which they must suffer to be working under a Government of your type. And I 

want to congratulate this Government for being able 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

22 

to attract people of that type. I want to congratulate this Government for what it has done in the past; 

what it has done. There are many, many things, Mr. Speaker, that it didn't do. 

 

Premier Douglas: — We have a good record. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — For certain things, such as hospitalization, I give them credit and I feel very great good 

will toward them because they had the vision and courage to implement those policies, which our people 

needed. 

 

Premier Douglas: — A good record. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — But what have they been doing since they have implemented those few reforms? 

Sitting in the seat of complacency — dreaming visions of international plans. Do they not realize the 

state that the people of Saskatchewan are in? When they are asked for loans to help needy farmers, they 

call a conference. That is no answer. To set up a commission is a fine thing and a necessary thing for a 

long-range plan — and I am sure the Liberal Government which will be formed after you people are 

through will be able to use those findings of the Commission — but what are you doing for the people 

now? What does this poor document that calls itself a Speech from the Throne, plan to do for the people 

of Saskatchewan? Have these people on the other side of the House — has this Government, become so 

insulated from the people that those people are no longer individuals who have need, who need the 

Government to help them in the country? Are the people of Saskatchewan merely statistics to this 

Government at this point? Are we merely "things" that a Royal Commission writes about? 

 

There are widows with young children living 40 feet from a power-line and they cannot have power in 

that home because of the policy of the Power Corporation — this tool of the Saskatchewan Government. 

It was rather sad to hear the lawyer for Touchwood say (I think he meant well) that the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation lit not only the homes of country people, but also their hearts and souls. Well, if we 

keep on giving Crown Corporations monopolies, and competing with Crown Corporations against 

private enterprise, we will not only light the souls and hearts of our people, but we will burn them out, 

because they have nothing left in this province but Crown Corporations and state control. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mrs. Batten: — And it is not amusing. The hon. members on the other side laugh when we speak about 

curtailment of freedom, as if there were no such word in the English language, or at least not in the 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

23 

province of Saskatchewan. Last year, as just a simple instance, this Government passed an amendment 

to an Act, which made it possible for the parents of the children to go to the courts to demand what, 

under the law of Saskatchewan, was rightfully theirs, the right to an education for that child, even if they 

had to get transportation money from the school board in order to see that that child got that education. 

That was a curtailment, but there was no great talk about it. Those things are so unimportant. After all, 

what is the freedom of a few hundred people! What does it matter to this Government if those people 

suffer, as long as Crown Corporations are making profits? But it does matter to the people of 

Saskatchewan. It seems very sad to me that the time has come when that proud banner that the C.C.F. 

party used to wave, that banner that said, "Humanity First!" now reads, if the Throne Speech can be 

believed, "Let John Do It!" 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Mr. Speaker, I will support the amendment, and I would just like to read it. It was 

moved by the Leader of the Official Opposition, and it says: 

 

"We respectfully submit that in the opinion of this Assembly, Your Honour's advisors have failed to 

implement a comprehensive agricultural program for Saskatchewan or an aggressive plan of industrial 

development, which would provide full employment." 

 

I will not support the motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker (Attorney General): — In rising to take party in this debate, Mr. Speaker, I do not 

propose to take very long to discuss the comments of other speakers who preceded me, this afternoon. 

Certainly I do not intend to get involved in any argument full of mysticism with the hon. member from 

Humboldt (Mrs. Batten), nor do I intend to try to convince her that her baleful and sorrowful appraisal of 

this province is wrong. Certainly, I think that, when a member rises in this House to describe the 

conditions of this province, it doesn't lie in mouth of any member to complain that this is the province 

that nobody should like to live in; that everybody should like to live somewhere else; that the roads, the 

weather and all the rest of it make this province an undesirable place in which to live. I should like to tell 

the hon. member that my Liberal friends who went to Florida now are convinced that this province is a 

much nicer place to live in than where they went for their holidays. 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

24 

I an not going to try to convince my friend that this is not a sick economy; that there is no program for 

employment and that this is not a happy, prosperous economy. I think that anyone who can live so far 

divorced from reality, little impression would be made upon them by trying to present them with facts in 

this Legislature. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Where would you find them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I want to say, however, that her remarks did have a depressing effect upon me, 

and I am essentially an optimistic soul. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — That's what's wrong with your Government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I recall, shortly after 1956, one of my friends from the Humboldt area, telling me 

that the successful candidate there had succeeded in poisoning the minds of some of the people in the 

isolated parts of the Humboldt constituency about the bogey of Communism, and I assured him that 

there was no up-and-coming member of the legal profession who would be so naive as to think that the 

people of Saskatchewan can still be frightened by veiled allusions to Communism in the C.C.F. 

 

I would like to say something about some of the remarks the hon. member for Qu'Appelle-Wolseley 

(Mr. McFarlane) made in this debate, this afternoon. He purported to convince the House that this 

Speech from the Throne conferred nothing of any value on farm people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — He said that there was nothing in it for the farmer. Well I had read the Speech 

from the Throne before, so I wondered if there was any substance in what he said, or whether this was 

just the rantings and hallucinations of a sick mind. I started turning over the pages of the Speech from 

the Throne, and I find in the second paragraph a reference to the crop and the carry-over and the decline 

in farm income brought about by the reduction in agricultural prices and increases in farm costs. I think 

that is a matter that ought to be drawn to public attention. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Why don't you do something about it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Certainly the Government of this province couldn't fail to note this serious fact. 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

25 

The second paragraph has to do with livestock and the Government program to assist the livestock 

industry. The third program has to do with the purchase of farm implements and the Government 

program to assist farmers in their choice of farm implements. The fourth paragraph has to do with the 

South Saskatchewan dam and suggests that it may be commenced in the very near future, and that 

forecast was borne out by subsequent facts revealed in this House. 

 

The next paragraph refers to the Report of the Royal Commission, and suggests that this conference of 

interested rural organizations was held and that it studied municipal problems and social problems in 

rural areas. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that it doesn't do any good, like the Liberal party, to bury one's head 

in the sand and pretend that these problems do not exist. Other parts of North America are just as 

seriously afflicted by the problems of agricultural technology as is Saskatchewan. This is the only place 

in North America where conscious and deliberate study is being made of this problem and proposals 

being discussed by rural people to solve these rural problems. Other parts of North America, where this 

problem is rampant just as it is here, are adopting a 'wait and see' attitude, sitting back and doing nothing 

deliberate and concrete to cope with this situation. 

 

Then the next paragraph reports on the work of the Continuing Committee studying reorganization and 

reallocation of finances and responsibilities to municipalities. My hon. friends think that that is not a 

matter that is important to farm people. All of the matters which I have referred to are of vital 

importance to our agricultural economy. 

 

The next paragraph has to do with winter employment. I suggest that is important to farm people. It has 

been shown to this House the effect of urban purchasing power on farm markets for food. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — What are you doing about it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — The next paragraph deals with the proposal of the Government to ask for funds to 

provide increases in grants for schools and municipalities. That is a matter about which farm people are 

very concerned. 

 

Then there is the matter, in the next paragraph, about provision for health treatment for mental illness 

and tuberculosis, and the fact that this is being asked of the Federal Governments is, I think, of 

importance to all the people of Saskatchewan and farm 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

26 

people as well. Certainly nothing will be done to provide this equal treatment to all people unless it is 

demanded and pressed for by this province. This province, however, is already providing this treatment 

without charge to the people of Saskatchewan. I suggest that is a matter of importance to the farmers. 

 

Production of oil — 37 million barrels of oil is worth noting and is not altogether unimportant to farm 

people, because a large part of that oil production is earmarked for the farmers' oil industry, the farmers' 

co-operative movement. A large part of it is theirs and is available to farm people at cost. 

 

I don't propose to deal with all the sections of it, but I . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Go ahead. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I suggest that the expansion of generating and transmission facilities of the 

province is a matter of importance to farmers, who are concerned about getting rural power and having 

power on the lines when they turn the switch on in their electrification system. 

 

The telephone and television communication facilities — the microwave line is certainly of importance 

to the farmers. Farmers use telephone services like all people. They have television sets; are concerned 

about communications — that they should be modern, efficient. The distribution of Salk vaccine 

certainly is of interest to farmers. The new health regions in the Yorkton-Melville area and the 

Rosetown-Biggar-Kindersley area, those are practically all farm people who will enjoy the advantages 

and benefits of that particular program. The increase in hospital construction costs — farmers have to 

pay taxes in union hospital districts, and have to bear part of the burden of hospital construction costs. 

And I say that, when the grants for hospital construction of this province go up from a present maximum 

of $1,000 a bed to something like five times that amount, it is of significance to those who pay taxes. 

Increased old-age assistance and disabled persons' allowances are important to farmers. Many of my 

farm constituents are interested in those allowances. The care and treatment of the aged, nursing homes, 

assistance and grants to municipalities to provide homes for elderly peoples certainly concern and affect 

our farm people, and are of interest to them. 

 

Certainly the increase in school grants is of very vital importance to farmers. The new construction at 

the University, the new Animal Husbandry building costing nearly $1/2 million, is of vital importance to 

a sound agriculture in this province. The fact that 247 rural municipalities took advantage of the market 

road certainly helps farmers. 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

27 

Mr. Danielson: — They paid for it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — The provision which this Government has made to fight against increases in 

freight rates is a matter which farmers are very deeply concerned with, and this Government is assisting 

in. 

 

The amendments to the Credit Union and Co-operative legislation, which are going to be proposed, to 

increase the size and strength of the co-operative movements are of primary importance to farm people. 

When someone with the myopic vision of my hon. friend from Qu'Appelle-Wolseley looks at the 

Speech from the Throne and says that there are only three lines, or three words or something that affect 

agriculture, it just shows that the man hasn't got his eyes open yet. I suggest that those of us who can 

read, who know what is in the Speech from the Throne, are impressed by the fact that this Government 

has more in this one Speech from the Throne of interest to farmers and of benefit to farmers than was 

contained in the 10 Speeches from the Throne read by Liberal Governments between 1936 and 1944. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — It doesn't take much to impress a vacant mind. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — My hon. friend tried to pinpoint his arguments that we were discriminating 

against farmers in this province by reference to the distribution of power. Now, it certainly doesn't 

become a member of a political party that said to the farmers that, if you ever expect to have power on 

your farm, you better get a windcharger, to criticize or attack what this Government has done in 

connection with rural electrification. 

 

This province has the proudest record in Canada of electrifying rural homes. There is no other area in 

the North American continent, of comparable size, that has electrified 7,500 homes in one year. My hon. 

friends can laugh and heckle to their heart's content, but they cannot change the facts, and those are the 

facts. I would be ashamed and feel a bit foolish and I would laugh rather giddily if I had such a poor 

record as my hon. friends. The Leader of the Opposition says that records don't matter. To a man who 

has no past and who has no regard for the past and the traditions of his party, he can afford to laugh with 

an empty and giddy laugh as he has been doing. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — If I was half as giddy as the Attorney General, I would take leave. If I had a record 

like you, I would never mention it. 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

28 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — When I talk about rural electrification I would like to tell you some of the facts 

about the assistance which this Government has given in rural electrification. If hon. members opposite 

realized that it takes more to provide electrification than just putting a bulb on the ceiling of the 

living-room — that it requires distribution lines, medium voltage transmission lines and a high voltage 

grid system as well (I am sorry that I can't announce to my radio audience that the hon. member for 

Humboldt and the hon. member for Cannington have withdrawn). 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Fifty per cent of your members are out. Your own members won't stay and listen to 

you, Bob. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I am vary encouraged, Mr. Speaker, by the number who are here, because I 

would have left myself, long before this, if I hadn't had an important engagement here at four o'clock. 

 

In order to produce and provide electricity for rural people it is necessary to have generating plants, high 

voltage grid, medium voltage grid, distribution system and the transformer and the yard pole. Now, my 

hon. friend from Qu'Appelle-Wolseley tried to show that the Government was assisting with subsidizing 

the urban user of power and denying it to the rural user of power. He tried to leave the impression in this 

House that we were discriminating in favour of the urban dweller. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Absolutely! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — And my hon. friend from Arm River, and the one from Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) 

— I am not surprised that they would agree with such an asinine conclusion. The fact is, that when you 

purport to provide electrification it is important that you also provide the capital equipment for 

generation and distribution. And it is important that you provide enough of this equipment to see to it 

that there will always be electricity to flow in the line when the switch is closed. As a result of a survey 

by the Power Corporation, it has been found that the right amount of generating capacity to supply a 

rural home or farm is one kilovolt of power and that the optimum amount to provide for one urban 

resident is 6/l0ths of a kilovolt of power. Now the cost of providing this potential runs at about $150 

KVA average, which means that the Power Corporation must have an investment of $150 for 

generating, for every rural power customer, and correspondingly about $90 of investment for each urban 

power customer. The same proportions should apply to high voltage grids, medium voltage grids, and 

that would mean that a further $150 of capital cost must be attributed for each rural customer of power 

and a total of $90 capital for each urban user of power. Now the actual cost of the distribution system to 

each rural customer is $950 average, and for each urban 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

29 

customer $150 average. That means that the Power Corporation makes an investment of $330 for each 

urban customer and $1,250 for each rural customer. The farmer reimburses $500 of that $1,250, which 

leaves $330 for the urban customer and $750 for the rural customer as representing the investment of the 

Power Corporation in providing that power. Now, that is saying nothing at all about the increased line 

losses that result from distributing electric power in widely scattered rural areas, and over sparsely 

settled rural areas. But as for capital cost alone, more than twice as much has been invested by the 

Power Corporation for every customer in the rural areas than is invested for each customer in the urban 

areas. 

 

My hon. friend's claim simply does not stand up in the light of truth. My hon. friend's claim is one 

which, I can only conclude, is deliberately calculated to leave an impression which is not correct. It is 

deliberately calculated to try to create the impression that this Government is favouring one section of its 

customers as against another. The fact of the matter is that, when you look at the figures, you see there is 

no truth whatever in that contention. 

 

Some complaint was made about the difficulty of organizing rural telephones in this province. I would 

just remind my hon. friend that there are problems in connection with rural telephones, but this province 

of Saskatchewan has the highest percentage of its rural residents with telephone service of any of the 

three prairie provinces. Our record is much better than either Manitoba or Alberta in that regard. 

 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington): — That was true before the C.C.F. came in. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — That is still true, my friend. Something was said about the assistance this 

Government gives to agriculture — 4 per cent, I think it was said, of the budget. Well, if my hon. friends 

choose to wear blinders and close their eyes to the things which benefit agriculture, if they choose to 

close their eyes to the increases in school grants, and all the other things which are of value and use to 

the rural people, then I am sorry, but I am afraid there is nothing we can do for them. But if they want to 

limit their consideration merely to the amount of the budget of the Department of Agriculture, then they 

shouldn't say very much about it, because, presently, it is some 4 per cent of the total budget; but when 

my hon. friends had a chance to divide the pie they gave agriculture less than half a million dollars out 

of a budget of more than $25 million, or less than two per cent of the budget of that time; and I would 

say that in those times, when this province produced the greatest part of its wealth from agriculture, an 

even larger 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

30 

portion of the budget should have been spent by the Department of Agriculture than today. The fact is it 

was less than half as much. 

 

My hon. friend may get some cheap political advantage by going out to some of his constituents, and 

saying that he protested against the payment of a salary of $20,000 to the manager of the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation. I don't know whether my hon. friend's constituents will be taken in by that kind of 

hokum or not, but I say that, if you compare the salary that is presently being paid to the Manager of the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation with the salary of management in any comparable corporation in 

western Canada, either of a public or a private utility, you will find that we are not overpaying the 

manager in this province. You couldn't get a man of the qualifications and capacity of our present 

manager in the ordinary market-place for less than twice that sum. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — A recent C.C.F. candidate . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — And there are some very good people who have been C.C.F. candidates, my 

friend. You compare the salary of management for the Calgary Power Company and you will find it is 

more than twice as much. The B.C. Electric is considerably more than twice as much; and, as a matter of 

fact, we are paying our manager too little for the responsibilities and for his capacity in that job. You 

can't save money for the people of Saskatchewan by employing second-rate or incompetent people to 

manage multi-million dollar enterprises. If the people of Saskatchewan want to have second or third-rate 

people in these positions, they will pay for it mightily through mismanagement and inefficiency. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — They've got that now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Something was said about this grid road program being a burden on the 

ratepayers of rural municipalities and I think the figures are that these rural municipalities will 

contribute, altogether, about $24 million to the building of this grid road system, and the Provincial 

Government will spend some $36 million, if the present estimates are correct. Well, this is a problem 

which the municipalities never had when the Liberals were in power. The municipalities in those days 

didn't have to worry about spending money on a grid road program, because there just weren't any! 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — How do you know? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I was around. As a matter of fact, I probably reached the age of discretion about 

the time my hon. friend passed it. 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

31 

Mr. Gardiner: — I didn't know you'd reached it yet, Bob. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I think most rural municipalities are quite happy about this grid road program. 

They are happy to spend $24 million and get a $60 million program out of it. As a matter of fact you 

don't have to take my word for it; you can take the word of the municipal councils, an overwhelming 

majority of whom have come in and applied for this program. Nobody has told them they have to. They 

have chosen to, and they are happy about it. 

 

My hon. friend from Qu'Appelle (Mr. McFarlane) said something about school taxes going up 175 per 

cent; and with his usual one-eyed objectivity he forgot to look at what the other side of the picture is — 

what the Provincial Government does about education. Oh, 175 per cent increase in school taxes, but a 

900 per cent increase in the contribution of this Government to assist in the administration of local 

education. 

 

He said something about teaching and salaries and so on, back in the 1930's, and I have no idea whether 

he was a teacher or not. Perhaps it was his desk mate who said something about education, and I don't 

know whether he was a teacher at that time or not. I know something about teaching in those days. I 

know something about how difficult it was to get paid your salary. I recall that I used to have to wait 

sometimes from the first of January until August for my salary, because from the previous year's, the 

December 31st, grant still wasn't paid by the Provincial Government to the school districts — not just a 

month or two after the school term or grant term, but eight and nine and ten months. And this 

government in Regina, under the Liberals, was financing itself up to a year on the money which 

belonged to the school teachers of this province. They were not able to pay the grants. They were using 

the money for other things, and the school teachers of this province, out of their meagre earnings of 

$350 to $400 a year — their money was being taken by a compulsory savings process of the most 

vicious kind by the Liberal government, to finance the public affairs of the province. 

 

I know, too, that teachers went without their salary for years and years. I remember one time when my 

school board told me that of my $40-a-month salary they could only pay me $20 in cash and that I could 

take the other $20 in the form of a note; but they said, "It is not quite that bad, because we have made an 

application for you for relief at the municipal office, and they will give you $7.50 a month, and we 

would only owe you $13.50. 

 

Everybody who knows what the facts were in the 'thirties knows those things, and for my hon. friends to 

get up here and try to say that the Provincial Government relieved the school districts of these 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

32 

notes by paying them for the school districts, he is either saying something that he doesn’t know, or he is 

saying something which he knows is untrue, because the Liberal government in this province did not 

relieve the school districts of the cost of those outstanding teachers' notes. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — How could you pay them then? 

 

Mr. Foley (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, the figures I used were from the 

government records, and they show that a Liberal government voted $731,000 for teachers' arrears in 

salary, and paid out $600,000 of that amount; and they paid out no more because they couldn't locate 

any more notes. They not only paid the notes, my hon. friend, but thy paid four per cent interest on those 

notes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Who paid four per cent interest on them? Well, for the information of my hon. 

friend, the fact of the matter is that "an amendment was passed to legislation, in the year 1940, the 

session of 1940, to provide that the Government may lend to the Board of Trustees of any district such 

moneys as are necessary to enable the Board to pay moneys still owing by it in respect of salaries 

payable to teachers before the first day of January, 1935." "And furthermore, you will note that the rate 

of interest with respect to this loan is five per cent per annum," so that the school districts not only had 

to pay the interest on the teachers' notes, but they had to pay five per cent per annum to the Provincial 

Government who lent them the money to pay off the teachers' notes. As a matter of fact if the school 

district could not pay the note, provision was made for the Provincial Government to deduct it from their 

school grant. That's how you helped the school districts in this province in 1940. It is all very well for a 

party which believes that there is no such thing as a record to take something out of context and quote it, 

either through ignorance, not understanding what the provision was, or with an attempted wilful 

deception of the people who are listening. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — That's what you are doing right now! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — To quote something out of context and pretend that something existed . . . 

 

Mr. Foley: — Exactly what you are doing now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — . . . which everybody knows did not exist at that time. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — That's exactly what you are doing at the moment. 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

33 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there isn't any question about what I am doing, because I am 

reading a letter signed by the Deputy Minister of Education to one of the school districts at that time. 

 

Mr. Foley: — What date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — It is March 28, 1940. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Table it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I can table it if my hon. friends want to see it. So there is no question about what 

the facts are, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — They'll say the same old thing next year, anyway. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I do not wish to get involved in any acrimony or discussion with the hon. 

members opposite. I felt, this afternoon, that I would like to take the opportunity, when speaking in the 

Throne Speech debate, to give somewhat of a review or an outline to the House of the policies of the 

Attorney-General's Department during the past years. I must plead provocation for my remarks up to 

this point. I would like to express those policies, also, with a view to indicating to the House how they 

will be projected into the next fiscal year. 

 

First, I would like to say that, in keeping with the indexes of business activity which has been referred to 

from time to time, the volume of work done by the judicial system of Saskatchewan continues to 

increase. Compared with the five-year average for the years 1952 to 1956 inclusive, each category of 

judicial work, except Queen's Bench trials and District Court trials shows some substantial increase. The 

number of trials is down slightly. The total number of writs of summons issued, in 1957, as 12,743 

compared with the five-year average of 11,386. The number of District Court and Queen's Bench trials 

was 794 — down slightly from the five-year average of 829. Miscellaneous applications to the Court 

were 4,517 compared with the five-year average of 4,236. The number of Surrogate Court actions for 

1957 amounted to 3,834 compared with a five-year average of 3,776. 

 

These indicators, I suggest, show a general growth of business and commercial activity in 

Saskatchewan. One might say that the number of Surrogate Court applications merely reflects the 

number of people who have died, but the fact is that it is actually a reflection of the number of deceased 

persons who had estates that were worth probating, during that, year; and the experience is that the 

number falls off sharply in periods of severe depression. Like- 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

34 

wise the number of actions commenced falls off very sharply in periods of general bankruptcy and 

insolvency. 

 

For the purpose of the record, since there is no other way of making this information available to the 

House as our Department does not issue an Annual Report, I would like, with the consent of the 

members, to table the statistics for the last five years, which are merely a duplicate of those reported by 

the Culliton Committee as wall as the statistics for the year 1957, so that hon. members may compare 

the 1957 figures with those of the period, 1952 to 1956. This table sets out all the judicial districts of the 

province. So with your consent, Mr. Speaker, I lay these on the table. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Do you have copies available for all the members? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I can have copies sent to all the members, or it can be put on the records in my 

speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Very well, we will include the tables with the transcript. 

 

Summary of Judicial Activity for each Judicial District for the years 1952-56, inclusive 

 

 

Writ All Trials 

Miscellaneous 

Applications 

S.E. Applications 

Probate or Admin 

Arcola 550 52 213 564 

Assiniboia 489 15 310 358 

Battleford 3991 155 626 1348 

Estevan 971 53 814 740 

Gravelbourg 580 103 970 452 

Humboldt 1297 71 577 784 

Kerrobert 689 31 290 471 

Kindersley 349 16 267 428 

Melfort 2469 111 896 945 

Melville 1422 240 925 541 

Moose Jaw 2839 375 1942 1274 

Moosomin 1017 66 745 990 

Prince Albert 4427 263 2033 1115 

Regina 14274 789 5460 2351 

Saskatoon 12711 873 2022 2302 

Shaunavon 391 47 433 427 

Swift Currant 2305 121 704 1213 

Weyburn 1003 92 664 628 

Wilkie 1199 47 197 502 

Wynyard 748 338 415 588 

Yorkton 3211 288 678 960 

     

 56932 4146 21181 18881 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

35 

Summary of Judicial Activity for each Judicial District for the year 1957 

 

 

Writ All Trials 

Miscellaneous 

Applications 

S.C. Application 

Probate or Admin 

Arcola 139 4 53 97 

Assiniboia 87 3 86 69 

Battleford 618 16 105 288 

Estevan 320 19 286 143 

Gravelbourg 174 37 122 85 

Humboldt 306 27 102 151 

Kerrobert 126 2 41 87 

Kindersley 64 - 28 102 

Melfort 481 23 175 208 

Melville 321 43 132 114 

Moose Jaw 679 69 367 285 

Moosomin 167 5 - 132 

Prince Albert 1098 59 185 222 

Regina 2805 188 1243 500 

Saskatoon 3329 122 1089 470 

Shaunavon 65 9 41 80 

Swift Current 712 42 88 246 

Weyburn 344 14 114 131 

Wilkie 183 11 69 112 

Wynyard 126 57 108 109 

Yorkton 599 44 83 213 

     

 12743 794 4517 3834 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, as hon. members know, a Committee of leading lawyers and judges 

was appointed late in 1956 to study and review the administration of the judicial system of 

Saskatchewan. First of all I would like to say something about the composition of that Committee. We 

felt that since the procedures of the Courts and the laws governing procedure are a highly technical and 

complex subject, it was desirable to have on that Committee those people who make their living from 

dealing with these problems. We hoped, also, to get from the Committee some general advice and 

suggestions affecting the broad relationship of the citizens and the judicial system. For advice on this 

technical problem, we were very grateful for the many suggestions which the Committee made. We also 

obtained advice and suggestions affecting the broader, and the social relationships of the judicial system 

and the people. 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

36 

In October, the Committee presented its report. I want, on behalf of myself and on behalf of the 

Government, to express gratitude for the work which was done by Mr. Justice Culliton and the other 

Members of the Committee for the inspiration and the energy which they brought to this task. They will 

not be rewarded in money or in a financial way; their only reward will be the satisfaction and 

gratification which they derive from knowing that they did a conscientious job, and that their report has 

been the stimulus for a good deal of public interest, and particularly of interest among the legal 

profession on this subject of judicial reform. 

 

I would like to outline briefly some of the recommendations which were contained in this report, 

although every member of the House has received a copy of the report. I do not propose to deal in detail 

with the recommendations or to outline in particular the legislation which will be introduced, later in the 

Session, to implement some of those recommendations. But I would like to deal with some of the 

general recommendations of the Committee. 

 

The Report emphasized that the concept that the administration of justice should be kept near the local 

level, and I quote: 

 

"Economy cannot be the dominant motive for circumscribing the scope of judicial agencies which 

most intimately serve local areas", said the Committee. 

 

The Government concurs in that statement, and I quote it to emphasize the policies of the Government, 

which we will propose at this Session, will take fully into account this principle; but the inference must 

not be taken, and it was not so taken by the Committee to mean that no modification in the establishment 

or structure of the judicial system should be made. In fact, the Committee said this: 

 

"It urged that economies in the operation of the Districts may be effected within the policy now being 

pursued by the Attorney General, without detrimentally affecting services being rendered." 

 

I would like to give the House some particulars of these policies now being pursued. There is the policy, 

first, of assigning one sheriff to more than one judicial district; and secondly, there is the policy of 

getting the work of the judicial district done by part-time employees in rented quarters. 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

37 

First let us look at the sharing of sheriffs. The Melville Judicial District, which does about five per cent 

of the judicial work of the province and the Yorkton Judicial District which does practically the same 

percentage, will get along, now, with one sheriff. He handles both districts — roughly 10 per cent of the 

sheriffs' work in the province of Saskatchewan. Kerrobert, Kindersley and Wilkie, which, between them, 

account for about three per cent of the judicial work in the province, now get along with one sheriff. 

Gravelbourg and Assiniboia, which have a combined percentage of about five per cent of the judicial 

work in the province, have one sheriff between them. Swift Current and Shaunavon with a combined 

percentage of around seven per cent, are now handled by one sheriff. Wynyard and Humboldt, which, 

between them, have about 11 per cent of the judicial work, are both managed by the same sheriff. There 

are several other judicial districts in the province where the amount of work is so small that 

combinations could, and will, eventually be effected. It is the policy of the Department, however, to take 

advantage of retirements to effect these reductions; and it has not been our policy to let out, or lay off, 

surplus staff without knowing we are going to be able to use them some place else. 

 

Several of the other districts which have a very small amount of work and to which we will be looking 

in the future are; Arcola, with half of one per cent of the judicial work in the province; Estevan, with 2.4 

per cent; Melfort, with 2.9 per cent; and Weyburn with 1.7 per cent. I want to make it abundantly clear 

that by referring to these figures neither the Department, nor the government has any intention of 

depriving the people of those communities of their judicial services. The point I am trying to make is 

that we will do what we have done other places, and that is, we will provide the services that are 

presently provided at much greater economy to the treasury of Saskatchewan. 

 

There are two objections to this business of simply combining judicial districts and giving two districts, 

or three districts, to one sheriff. In the first place, whole districts must be assigned. You cannot have a 

district assigned to two sheriffs, or three sheriffs, or divided, as the Act presently stands. There is no 

other alternative but to assign entire districts. This means that it is impossible to make the most effective 

combination of work and personnel. It also means that it is often, then, difficult to locate the sheriff at 

the centre of the district which he actually serves, since, when you combine two districts, you have to 

decide in which one you are going to station the resident sheriff. 

 

The result is that if you look at the map of the judicial districts of this province, you will see that the 

sheriff 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

38 

at Yorkton, for example, has to serve an area 80 miles north of Yorkton and some 90 miles 

southwesterly towards Regina. In fact, he has to come to a point within 20 miles of the city of Regina 

because the Melville district ends up here just east of No. 6 Highway, only 20 miles from Regina. In the 

case of Kindersley, Kerrobert and Wilkie, the combined judicial district served by one sheriff, you get 

this situation. He must travel 120 miles to serve the villages of Tuberose and White Bear in the southeast 

corner of his territory, and that is only 40 miles, or only one-third as far, from the city of Swift Current, 

where there is also a sheriff. He must also serve Red Pheasant, which is 80 miles from Kerrobert and 

only 15 miles from Battleford, where there is also a resident sheriff. These extra mileages make it 

necessary to retain additional sheriffs — more than we would need. It also adds to the cost of litigants in 

their judicial work; it increases the cost to the public as well as to the treasury of the province. 

 

You might ask, Mr. Speaker, why we can't just chop up the Melville district and put part of it in the 

Regina sheriff's district and part in the Yorkton district, for instance. Well, if you do that it has very 

important side effects. If you chop up the district, say, of Melville, and put part of it in Regina and part 

of it in Yorkton, it means two or three things. First of all, you cannot do this just for the convenience of 

sheriffs. It would mean that the public would have to change the place in which they do their judicial 

work, if the boundary was altered. It would mean that the amount of work that would be done in some of 

the districts would become so small that it would be impossible to justify maintenance of those judicial 

centres on any rational or sane basis of public expenditures of money. So, by combining judicial 

districts, we have now affected a saving of some $20,000 or $25,000 to the taxpayers of the province. 

 

It is hoped to introduce amendments to The Court Officials Act which will make possible further 

savings. We have gone about as far as we can go without changing the Act and giving the sheriffs a 

different kind of jurisdiction. 

 

The second economy which the Committee referred to, undoubtedly was the experiment which was 

conducted at Kindersley, last year. Kindersley, in 1957, did half of one per cent, approximately, of the 

litigious judicial business of the province. We were renting a building for which we were paying $3,000 

a year in rent and we have two employees — a sheriff and one other. The total annual cost of the judicial 

centre was something in the vicinity of $12,000 a year. A new arrangement was made whereby the 

Secretary of the Credit Union does all the work of the judicial centre and provides the office space (and 

a very fine space it is) for a total 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

39 

remuneration of less than $2,000 a year. This has resulted in a saving of some $10,000 a year, and I have 

no doubt that this saving can be duplicated in half a dozen other places in the province, if we get a 

change in legislation, which we will be submitting to you in due course. 

 

This also provides one other advantage. It makes it possible now, for the Government to give serious 

consideration to the establishment of judicial services in some communities where they are not presently 

being provided. It was simply impossible to justify the expenditure of $10,000 or $12,000 a year in some 

of these smaller cities and towns of the province, when you can provide the service adequately and well 

for one-tenth of that amount. We are now able to give serious thought to extension of services wherever 

it would appear to be justified. I should say, however, that nothing will be able to be done effectively 

along these lines until the new legislation has had a chance to work out and we can get our staff adjusted 

to the new situation, and all the "bugs" are taken out of the changes. 

 

I want to say that I don't think the Government could continue to justify an expenditure of $10,000 or 

$12,000 a year in some of these smaller, less busy, judicial centres unless some reform is made in the 

manner of providing services. 

 

Another point which the Culliton Committee drew to the attention of the Government was the severe 

maldistribution of work among the District Court judges, and among the various District Courts through 

the province. For example, in 1957, the present Queen's Bench judges in this province presided over 351 

trials, or an average of 50 trials each. The eighteen District Court judges presided over 443 trials, or an 

average of 24, or half as many, each. Notwithstanding this low average by the District Court judges, 

those District Court judges in Regina and Saskatoon presided over, between them, 122 cases, or almost 

30 per cent of the total in the province. The remaining fifteen District Court judges held an average of 15 

trials each. Indeed, there were several District Court judges who had less than half a dozen during the 

year. So that there will be no misunderstanding, Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear that I am not of the 

impression that trials are the only work which judges do. That comprises a small part of the judges' 

work, but the other work which they do is, roughly, proportional to the number of trials which they 

conduct. 

 

The first major recommendation of the Committee was that we should deal with this problem. They 

suggested that, first of all, there were three measures which should be undertaken to cope with this 

problem. First, it recommended that additional District 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

40 

Court judges be appointed in the cities o£ Regina and Saskatoon. This has already been done. The 

Committee also urged that we have a greater flexibility in assigning District Court judges to their 

districts. They recommended, for example, that two or three districts could be presided over by each 

judge. If we take the Saskatoon judicial centre as the norm, we find that the two District Court judges 

there, in 1957, each conducted 35 trials. To achieve this average, it would be necessary to combine, for 

example, in the southeast part of the province, the judicial districts of Moosomin, Arcola, Weyburn and 

Estevan, and then you would only have half as much work being done by that judge as each of the 

judges presently are doing, say in Saskatoon. Or if you combined Battleford, Wilkie, Kerrobert and 

Kindersley — an area extending from the South Saskatchewan River to Uranium City, and almost a 

third of the width of the province — you would still get less than the optimum work load for a District 

Court judge. There is just no way, unfortunately — we thought this was the solution to this problem 

until we got into it; but, unfortunately there is just no way of equalizing, or even approximately 

equalizing, the work of the District Court judges by that method. 

 

It is, therefore, proposed to bring down legislation at a later date, permitting the District Court judges to 

have a province-wide jurisdiction. This is the only way that you can equalize the work load. You get a 

situation, then, something similar to that existing in the Queen's Bench Court. This has been done for 

many years in the province of Alberta, where the province is divided into two districts, and all the 

District Court judges for the northern district have jurisdiction throughout that district; and likewise for 

the southern district. However, in this province it would be feasible at this time to make just one district 

of the whole province. That will mean that those District Court judges resident in the smaller 

communities will be able periodically, to come in and relieve the judges in the busier cities, without 

actually leaving their home communities. 

 

However, in Saskatchewan, we would not encourage what happened in Alberta. In Alberta, the District 

Court judges all tended to reside and congregate in the cities of Edmonton and Calgary. We think that 

here we can prevent that happening, and we intend to encourage by every way possible and by 

legislation, if necessary, the District Court judges to continue to reside in the scattered judicial centres of 

the province. 

 

The Culliton Committee, thirdly, proposed that this work load maldistribution could be partly solved by 

increasing the jurisdiction of the District Court judges. This proposal, they argued, and rightly so, would 

equalize the work load, and it would also permit litigants in the smaller judicial centres to get more 

frequent 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

41 

opportunities to appear before the judge — better service. I think both of those contentions are valid. It 

is proposed, therefore, to submit legislation to provide this, to meet this end. In the event that there is 

still insufficient work for the District Court judges, we must face the fact that some reduction in the 

number is inevitable. We will, therefore be proposing legislation, later in the Session, to effect such a 

reduction. 

 

The Committee recognized that there are serious anomalies and discrepancies appearing in the law from 

time to time on highly technical matters — matters which do not come in for very much public attention 

but which, nevertheless, are of serious and vital importance to the people concerned. These things are 

sometimes brought to the attention of the Government by the Law Society or by individual lawyers or 

judges writing to the Government, and for many years lawyers in this province and in other provinces 

have bean asking for some kind of formal machinery to be established to facilitate the transfer of this 

information to the department of Government concerned. They recommended, therefore, that a Law 

Reform Committee be established in this province. 

 

We do not propose, at this time, to involve the Treasury in any additional expense in the functioning of 

such a committee, but we would be very happy if the lawyers and the judges would designate a list of 

nominees who would be willing to serve on such a committee, if they were appointed. And, if such a 

group of voluntary members can be got together, we are prepared to designate one of the law officers of 

the Department to act in a part-time capacity as secretary of such a committee. I am convinced that such 

a committee could perform a useful service, although it would not be an onerous duty to serve on the 

committee — a matter of meeting once or twice a year to consider proposals or to consider complaints 

that have been sent in to the committee, direct the secretary to do some research, some study on the 

problems and then the committee, either through the Law Society or directly to the Government or to the 

department would make its recommendations for the consideration of the Government. 

 

Saskatchewan will be the first province in Canada to take this step which has been so long advocated by 

lawyers all across the country. 

 

Some of the other recommendations of the Committee were directed to the judges and to the Federal 

Government, and copies of the reports have gone forward to the Federal Government and to the judges. 

Of the proposals directed to the Government of Saskatchewan, 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

42 

I have already indicated some of the principal ones, and I have already suggested that many of them will 

be implemented. Several others will be implemented, which I will make reference to on second reading 

of the Bill. 

 

About half of the specific recommendations directed to this Government will find their way into 

legislation at the current Session of the Legislature. The others will be the subject of continuing study. 

 

I would like now, Mr. Speaker, to turn my attention to the work of enforcing the Criminal Law, the work 

of the Magistrates and the justices of the peace. 

 

The House may be interested to know that, in 1956-57, of all the criminal prosecutions and prosecutions 

under Provincial Statutes and municipal by-laws, the case-load was divided as follows: The Court of 

Queen's Bench heard 46 cases; the District Court Judges' Criminal Court had 64 cases; Provincial 

magistrates disposed of 14,232 cases; and Justices of the Peace disposed of 26,625 cases. 

 

You will note from that, that the Justices of the peace disposed of almost twice as many as the other 

tribunals taken together. And so that the House will have detailed statistics, Mr. Speaker, on the work, 

on the distribution of these cases, itemizing the principal sections of the Criminal Code and Provincial 

Statutes under which these prosecutions were made, I would be happy to place this table on the record, 

so that it may be printed with Hansard, if there is unanimous consent. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is consent of the House granted? 

 

(Agreed) 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

43 

CRIMINAL STATISTICS 

for the period April 1, 1956 to March 31, 1957 

 

 J.Ps's Magistrates D.C. Judges Q.B. Judges 

 Cases Conv. Cases Conv. Cases Conv. Cases Conv. 

Offences Under         

         

Sec. 221 C.C.C. 33 33 27 25 3 2 - - 

Sec. 222 C.C.C. 18 17 23 19 - - - - 

Sec. 223 C.C.C. 487 485 393 372 4 1 2 1 

All other C.C.C. 

cases 

1210 1182 3703 3432 30 24 31 17 

Other Fed. 

Offences 

1233 1231 879 855 20 11 11 9 

Total Fed. 

Offences 

2981 2948 5025 4703 57 38 44 27 

         

Liquor Act 4093 4066 1683 1590 1 1 2 1 

Vehicles Act 

(Speeding) 

2394 2394 530 516 1 1 - - 

Vehicles Act (All 

others) 

9876 9862 2695 2555 2 - - - 

Highways Trans. 

Act 

389 389 19 14 2 2 - - 

Ed. & Hospital 

Tax 

64 64 54 50 - - - - 

Sask. Hos. Act 180 180 47 47 - - - - 

Fuel Petroleum 

Products Act 

458 458 43 42 - - - - 

Stray Animals 

Act 

6 6 1 - - - - - 

Recovery of 

Wages Act 

5 5 18 16 - - - - 

Game Act 280 280 34 32 - - - - 

All other Prov. 

Statutes 

235 230 364 282 1 1 - - 

Total Prov. 

Offences 

17,980 17,934 5,488 5,144 7 5 2 1 

         

Municipal 

By-Laws 

5,664 

 

5,659 3,719 3,593 - - - - 

 

Grand Total 26,625 26,541 14,232 13,340 64 43 46 28 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

44 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — The large number of cases handled by the justices of the peace cannot help but 

impress us with the importance of the work which justices of the peace do in this province. 

Saskatchewan has been very fortunate in the high quality and calibre, in the high standard of fairness 

and competence, of the justices of the peace, which we have had. In a widely-scattered population, 

living under frontier conditions as we have in this province, the justice of the peace is a very vital pillar 

in the community. Even today, with better transportation facilities, we look forward to continuing to 

have capable and competent men of integrity to offer themselves for this position in each community. 

However, as the province progresses and becomes better off, we always hope to try and improve the 

quality of services to our citizens. In frontier days, I suppose, the man who could read and write became 

the local schoolmaster and now we hope to provide for school teachers, people who have specialized 

qualifications and university educations. Likewise, we require advanced training for our agricultural 

representatives, our social workers, and so on. 

 

Where freedom and liberty of the people is concerned, our people demand, and have a right to expect, 

that the very best skill and training shall be available to them in their justices. For this reason, we have 

added to the number of trained and salaried magistrates in the province during the past year. On April 

1st last, we have eight full-time provincial police magistrates paid out of the provincial treasury. In 

addition, there were two magistrates paid by the city and in addition to that there were also two more 

whose salaries were shared by the province and the municipalities — or making a total of twelve. In 

addition to these twelve, there were four part-time magistrates. 

 

During the current year, the Province has assumed responsibility for paying the salary of all magistrates 

in the province. This will cost some $30,000 extra, each year, and it will relieve the cities of Regina, 

Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Swift Current and Weyburn of their respective portions of that 

burden. The number of full-time magistrates in the province has, during the past fiscal year, been 

increased from 12 to 17, and the number of part-time magistrates has declined from four to two. Some 

further increase in the number is provided for, in 1958. The amount of the use made of provincial 

magistrates has, however, risen in a spectacular way. Final figures for the currant fiscal year will not be 

available for some months yet. We have, however, Royal Canadian Mounted Police reports of 

prosecutions each month, and I will refer to them in a few moments. 

 

Early last year, the R.C.M.P. were requested by this department to use the services of salaried 

magistrates wherever possible, except in those cases where serious inconvenience would be caused to 

the public and in such cases as involve inter-provincial transport workers and transients and others. At 

the same time, each magistrate 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

45 

was asked to work out a weekly or fortnightly itinerary which would take him to every detachment point 

in his district, and this itinerary was supplied to the R.C.M. Police with the request to which I have 

already referred. 

 

As a result of these steps, there has been, as I have already said, a phenomenal increase in the percentage 

of work done by trained and salaried magistrates. In the first nine months of the present fiscal year, of 

R.C.M. Police cases, the percentage handled by salaried magistrates has risen from less than 20 per cent 

to more than 78 per cent of the total. These results, in my opinion, are very satisfactory. The few days 

delay which is occasioned by the accused having to wait until the magistrate comes to town, gives him a 

chance to consult with his friends, perhaps with his lawyer, and to reflect upon the plea that he should 

enter and the defence which he should conduct. The holding of regular trials at scheduled times and 

places gives some formality to the Court's proceedings, and some publicity, which, in my opinion is an 

essential ingredient of trial and punishment. Trained magistrates, accustomed as they are through 

adjudicating upon hundreds of cases a year, are in a position to apply a. more or less uniform standard 

— I don't say uniform penalties, I say a uniform standard — of judgment in applying penalties to 

convicted persons. This, I am pleased to report, has put an end to the all-too-prevalent complaint of 

people who have been convicted and who didn't really know that they had ever been in court. They 

thought they had been fined or put in gaol by the police, not recognizing the informality of the Justice of 

the Peace Court as being a court of law. 

 

We will probably never have enough trained magistrates in the province to take care of all cases, 

desirable as that might be. It was not possible for me to forecast this program to the House, last year, 

because so many preparatory steps had to be taken that it was not by any means sure that the program 

would get under way during the current fiscal year at all. It has been done without any conspicuous 

increase in the expenditure of money, and has been done simply by organizing the magistrates and the 

police to make the best use of one another. 

 

Reference was made in His Honour's Speech to the Government's intention to extend our program of 

legal aid to persons charged with offences and who have no funds to conduct their own defence. 

 

I would like to say something about the legal aid now provided by the Provinces. For several years now, 

since this Government came into power, the Crown has paid the fees for defence counsel when assigned 

by the trial judge to the case. The fee was set at $50 per day in murder cases, and $25 per day in other 

cases, in the Queen's Bench and District Court judges criminal court. The fee of $50 per day 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

46 

applies only in murder cases. In addition, the Crown assures that the witness' fees and transportation fees 

of all witnesses on behalf of the accused persons will be paid. Also, the copy of the transcript of the 

preliminary hearing is supplied to the counsel for the defence, and that amounts also to a substantial 

item. In all such cases, however, the fee which the counsel accepts must be accepted by him in lieu of all 

fees for that service. He is not permitted to collect also from the accused to supplement this small fee 

provided for this service by the provincial treasury. 

 

The Canadian Bar Association at its 1957 annual meeting devoted a good deal of time and discussion to 

this problem, and it would appear, from the discussions and the contributions made by lawyers of other 

provinces, that Saskatchewan now leads most of the other provinces in Canada in providing these 

services. 

 

There is another type of very helpful assistance available to accused persons in Saskatchewan which is 

provided gratuitously by the members of the Law Society. At several judicial centres, principally the 

larger judicial centres, a panel of lawyers, who have volunteered to serve without fee in defending 

impecunious accused persons, is available. It is working very well particularly in the Magistrates' Court, 

where this financial provision does not apply. The principal defect, however, of both of these schemes, 

is that adequate coverage is provided in rural areas. Now that these cases in rural areas are being tried by 

magistrates, we hope that it will be possible to achieve some uniformity in applying these benefits in 

rural areas also. The principal defect or shortcoming of the free system provided by the Law Society is 

that it is only available in the principal cities, the larger cities, of the province. I think that we ought to 

aim at not only spreading this service out more widely, but also making it more efficient by providing it 

at an earlier stage in the proceedings, before it actually gets to the Judge at the preliminary hearing stage. 

The services ought to be available from the beginning, and that is one of the shortcomings we hope to 

remedy in the immediate future in this regard. 

 

The problem has, however, been considered ameliorated during the past six months or so, because of the 

fact trained magistrates are hearing most of the criminal cases in the province now. It is not an 

uncommon thing to see a situation where a constable who has no particular legal training, lays a charge, 

the accused pleads "guilty" and the magistrate on asking the accused about the circumstances and 

hearing his story, instructs him to enter a plea of "not guilty", and on the police presenting their 

evidence, the magistrate acquits the accused. 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

47 

There is not any longer such a serious risk of people being convicted simply because they do not know 

what their rights are. That is only a beginning. This legal aid service must be available for serious 

offences in rural areas as wall as in the cities. And it is proposed by the department to invite, besides the 

hon. members of the Legislature, members of the legal profession and other persons interested in the 

solution to this problem, to meet some time early in the new fiscal year to discuss and to work out ways 

and means of remedying these shortcomings. The Government has no hard and fast ideas as to what 

should be done. We are prepared to do what is reasonable, what can be done, without any waste of 

public money, and what can be done that will give the benefit of this service to all areas of the province. 

If we are to attain a more democratic administration of the machinery of justices, there must be no 

longer a disparity in the weight which the Crown bears against an accused person in the Criminal Courts 

of this province, and the lack of legal aid is the chief factor which might contribute to that kind of 

situation. 

 

Mr, Speaker, I propose to have something further to say about judicial reform when I present several 

pieces of legislation to this House, and something further to say about the administration of the 

Department, perhaps during the Budget Debate. For the present, I only want to say that, in my opinion 

the Attorney-General's Department together with all the other departments of this Government, are 

concerned, and vitally concerned, with the welfare and liberty of the people of Saskatchewan. 

Everything that is done, everything that is put forward in this Legislature by the Attorney-General's 

Department and by all of the departments in this Government, are put forward with the end in view that 

they will result in a substantial improvement in the standard of living of the people and in the standard 

of welfare and well-being which they enjoy. 

 

For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I, unreservedly, oppose the amendment of my hon. friend opposite and 

will support the motion. 

 

Mr. P.A. Howe (Kelvington): — Mr. Speaker, I am not going to speak this evening at all. I just wish to 

ask for permission to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

48 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Co-operative Guarantee Act 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Douglas 

(Weyburn): 

 

"That Bill No. 2 — An Act to amend The Co-operative Guarantee Act — be now read the second 

time." 

 

Mrs. Mary J. Batten (Humboldt): — I have now had an opportunity to peruse the proposed 

amendment, and there is nothing in the proposed amendment that I object to, particularly. As I 

understand it, it is merely to allow the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council to allow a guarantee of over 50 

per cent to be made. Perhaps the only observation is the usual one that we on this side of the House 

make which is that the power should be in the hands of this Assembly rather than the 

Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council. However, I assume that this amendment is made at the request of the 

Credit Unions and for that reason I will not object. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

SECOND READING 

 

Bill No. 3 — An Act to amend The Credit Union Act, 1956 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, there is no overall principle involved in these amendments to The 

Credit Union Act. There are a series of amendments, all of which have been asked by The Saskatchewan 

Credit Union League. I can run over them. They are, however, really a matter for Committee. 

 

The first amendment, for instance, provides that the Co-Op. Trust Company and Federated 

Co-operatives will have power to use credit unions for banking purposes. It also gives credit unions the 

right to act as an agent for the Cooperative Trust Company. We are also asking for an amendment which 

will increase, in the case of municipalities, the amount which can be borrowed from the credit union. 

Hon. members remember that, some time ago, we amended The Municipal Act so as to allow 

municipalities which wanted to, to use a credit union for their bank. These municipalities, at certain 

seasons of the year, require fairly large credit. Under the present Act there is a limit which 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

49 

makes it almost impossible for municipalities to use the Credit Union, because it cannot get the large 

amount of money which it needs. We are proposing, for the municipalities only, raising the amount of 

money which they can borrow on a short-term basis. 

 

We are also providing some changes in the matter of reserves, which I think can be discussed better in 

Committee. These reserves have to do mainly with the credit unions that have a checking system, those 

that have assets of over a million dollars. One final amendment which gives the credit unions, an 

organization like the Credit Union League, the right to make a contribution to a national Credit Union 

organization. The hon. members know the credit unions for some years have been anxious ultimately to 

get not only a provincial credit society, but to get a national credit society with a federal charter. Just as 

now, the credit unions are able to make deposits with the provincial Credit Society, and thereby help 

each other. This would allow the provincial Credit Society to make, in turn, a deposit with a national 

organization. This is a preliminary step to this end. Until they get this charter, the idea would be to set 

up a national organization to press for such a national charter which would give those authority to join 

such an organization, and to pay into it. 

 

I think any other details could probably better be discussed in Committee of the Whole, and I would, 

therefore, move that this Bill No. 3 be now read a second time. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

SECOND READING 

 

Bill No. 7 — An Act to amend The Highways and Transportation Act 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, these amendments deal largely with a 

reclassification of our highway and road system in the province, but, in order to do so, you will note 

there is a transfer of some of the sections dealing with definitions which have legal interpretations. 

These we are adding to the old section of definition and are providing for a new classification. 

 

I might point out that when we were working on this problem in the Department, the Canadian Good 

Roads Association, on which I have a member of my staff working, provided a new classification 

system for Canada. This was done at the request of the Dominion Bureau of Statistics who were having 

difficulty in relating the various types and various classifications used in the different provinces. 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

50 

Saskatchewan is the first province to adopt the recommendations of the Canadian Good Roads 

Association, but in discussing this matter at the Good Roads Convention, last fall, with a number of the 

other Ministers, I believe that this will become fairly general all across Canada. It will make it much 

simpler for us to compare work that is being done in the various provinces, when we have the new 

classification set out. 

 

The other matter we are dealing with here is providing for penalties where stock is allowed to run at 

large on a provincial highway. You may recall that, a few years ago, we brought in legislation dealing 

with this matter, but only provided for the impounding of stocks. It is not proving too satisfactory for 

those who are endeavouring to administer the Act, and we are now providing for a penalty in cases 

where animals are allowed to run at large, unattended, on a highway system. 

 

That covers what we deal with in this amending Bill, and I believe, Mr. Speaker, they could be more 

fully dealt with as matters in Committee. I would therefore move second reading of Bill No. 7. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

SECOND READING 

 

Bill No. 8 — An Act to Amend The Pipe Lines Act, 1954 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, the Bill to amend The Pipe 

Lines Act is a very simple amendment to provide, that where a Board of Arbitration has given an award 

for access to property in connection with a pipe line, the award may be registered in the Land Titles 

Office oven though it is an easement and not a title. Details of the Bill can be discussed in Committee. I 

move the bill be now read the second time. 

 

Mrs. Mary J. Batten (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, there seems to be considerable difficulty in the 

administration of this Act. I believe, or at least I have run into a considerable number of cases where 

people have been waiting for actually years in order to get paid for an easement in the case of pipe lines. 

I don't think that is too satisfactory. They are not paid any type of compensation for that long wait; there 

is damage to the crop and so forth, and this thing just waits until the Government, at its leisure, gets 

around 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

51 

to paying them. In a number of cases they have had to supply legal counsel to get compensation and I 

cannot see why merely an award will, or can, be registered and then people can be allowed to go in and 

enter on the land before an easement has actually been prepared, or the survey made. I understand that 

would be the case. Actually the only thing that would register is the award which would tie up the entire 

title until an actual easement could be prepared and executed. I think that would encumbrance a title. I 

think it would delay proceedings, and I am quite sure it wouldn't help the farmer who owns the land, or 

whoever he may be, to get compensation any earlier. I certainly cannot see how I can support this 

amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. Minister is about to close the debate. Anyone else wishing to speak may do 

so now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, the Bill actually has, I believe more to do with the 

privately-owned pipe lines than with the publicly-owned pipe lines under the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation, though it can apply to both. The amendments were requested by the industry, and the 

question of speed of settlement will certainly not be affected by this, except that it might be improved in 

this way that they can get a settlement and get an easement. Previously, if they had to go to arbitration 

over it, and wanted their award registered in the Land Titles Office, they had to get a title to the land 

which, in the matter of pipe lines, is not the best way to proceed with it at all. I think this will help the 

situation. If there are problems in connection with administration, why that's another question altogether. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

SECOND READING 

 

Bill No. 10 — An Act respecting the Superannuation of Members and Employees of The 

Workmen's Compensation Board 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, this Bill is The Workmen's Compensation 

Board Superannuation Act, being brought in at the request of The Workmen's Compensation Board and 

its employees. As you know, the various superannuation Acts have been brought in line over the last few 

years — the Civil Service Superannuation Act; the Act which governs the Power Corporation; the 

Saskatchewan Government Telephones and so forth. This Act is the last one to be brought into line. I 

think possibly much 



 

February 21, 1958 

 

 

52 

of the detail could best be discussed in Committee. 

 

However, I just want to cite an example as to one change that is being made: Section 11. Under the 

present Act, the employees have been paying 4 per cent into the fund. To bring it in line with the other 

Acts, you will see that those who commence employment under the age of 30 pay 5 per cent, between 

30 and 40 they pay 6 per cent; between 40 and over, they pay 7 per cent. 

 

There is another change that will be noticeable when we get to it — Section 14, sub-section (2), where 

the present maximum pension is $2,000 per year. That amount was in all the other Acts, but they have 

gradually been increased to $4200 per year. In this Act, we will be raising the amounts of pension 

payable by $20 a month, and it will take several years before they get up to the maximum of $4,200 a 

year. These are the last important changes in the Act, and with that explanation, Mr. Speaker, I would 

move second reading of Bill No. 10. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Leader of the Official Opposition): — Did I understand the Minister to say the 

pension had been increased to $4200 in the other Acts as well? Is that the same figure in the Acts we 

have amended in years gone by? 

 

Mr. Williams: — Yes, they are belatedly catching up to the other Acts, which are at a maximum of 

$4200 — they may not be up to that now, but they go up $200 a year. That will eventually be the 

maximum. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — They go up $200 a year, whereas they go up $20 a month here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — Yes, we're trying to catch up — we're a little late. It's really $240 a year. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at next 

sitting. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 5:30 o'clock p.m. 


