



















































Hansard: March 26, 1958


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

30th Day 

 

Wednesday, March 26, 1958 

 

The House met at 10:00 o'clock a.m. 

 

Before the Orders of the Day: 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would like to draw 

your attention to a slight error in the report of this morning's 'Leader-Post'. The figure quoted here for the 

amount of debentures by the Provincial Government of school debentures is 15.1 per cent, as quoted by 

the paper. It is quite possible that I mumble slightly in my beard, and it is quite possible that the 

acoustics of this House are not too clear, but the actual figures for the amount of school debentures 

purchased by the Provincial Government is 28.1 per cent. 

 

REQUEST FOR LEAVE OF ABSENCE 

 

Mr. John J. Harrop (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I 

beg to ask the House for leave of absence next week. There is no plane out on Tuesday, and it would be 

impossible for me to get back until Thursday morning, and it is a long way to come for just one day's 

sitting. 

 

(Agreed) 

 

CORRECTION OF PRESS REPORT 

 

Mr. F.E. Foley (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with I would 

like to draw the attention of the Assembly to an article which appeared in yesterday's 'Leader-Post' 

entitled: "Action Urged to House Collection of Paintings." It is my opinion that this article conveys 

many erroneous impressions of what I consider to be an extremely fine and worthwhile Art Gallery. It 

attributes to myself several derogatory remarks which I never made, and which I feel have 

misrepresented the true picture of the studio and its contents. In the first place, some hon. member 

described it as 'an old barn'. Unfortunately, this remark 



 

March 26, 1958 

 

 

2 

was attributed to myself in the ‘Leader-Post’ article, and I must categorically deny having made it, and 

defend the studio. It certainly is far from being an old barn. The truth of the matter is, it is a large 

stuccoed hall with many large windows; and it is decorated on the outside with many of Mr. Imhoff's 

own murals and frescos. It is true the exterior is faded, but many of the murals can still be seen. 

 

In the second place, I never suggested that the studio be moved elsewhere. I believe it was the hon. 

member for Regina (Mrs. Cooper) or the member for The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer), who may have 

suggested that; and I want to dissociate myself from that statement also. I am confident that the Imhoff 

family and the people of St. Walburg want the studio maintained at its present site, as a permanent 

memorial to the greatness of the late Mr. Berthold Imhoff, the famous painter. 

 

The statement that the gallery and its paintings are rotting and deteriorating fast, which also 

unfortunately appears in this article, was made, I believe, by the hon. Minister of Agriculture (Hon. Mr. 

Nollet), and not by myself. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I did not say the paintings were rotting; I 

said there is some deterioration through lack of proper care, and the family recognizes that, too. 

 

Mr. Foley: — I appreciate that, sir. I merely felt that the wording as it appeared in the ‘Leader-Post’ 

article was unfortunate to say the least, and does put the studio and the people who have cared for and 

guarded it these many years in a rather unfortunate light. In regard to the condition of the paintings, with 

your permission, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to quote a very short article here . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think the hon. member is trying to dissociate himself with a matter on which 

he did not agree. 

 

Mr. Foley: — I would just like to say that an art critic from Winnipeg describes the conditions of the 

paintings as extremely good, in spite of the number of years they have been housed there. 

 

My main purpose in drawing this to the attention of the Minister of Tourist Affairs was to emphasize its 

importance, not only as a tourist attraction, but also as a monument to the achievements of Mr. Imhoff, 

and I would urge the Tourist Branch to give all possible recognition to this famous man by assisting in 

the maintenance and preservation of the studio and its contents at its present site. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o'clock p.m. 


