



















































Hansard: February 14, 1958


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

2nd Day 

 

Friday, February 14, 1958 

 

The House met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

MOTION OF CONDOLENCE 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier): — For several years now, before embarking on its sessional program, 

the Assembly has followed the appropriate and laudable practice of paying tribute to former Members 

who have passed on, since the House last met. For two or three years in succession, it has been my 

melancholy duty to record the passing of quite lengthy lists of former Members, and, in doing so, I have 

recalled their services and asked the House to honour their memories. Many of those so commemorated 

were pioneers of the province, members of the earlier Legislatures, and men who helped lay the 

foundations of autonomous government and its administration institutions in Saskatchewan. Naturally, 

in this inexorable process of attrition to which mankind is subject, the ranks of surviving members of 

these earlier Legislatures are lamentably shrunken. And it may be evidence of that process and of that 

shrinking that, today, I have only two names to place on the record of those who have rendered long and 

distinguished service to Saskatchewan and its people. The first is that of a Member of the 1st Legislature 

of the Province, one of the last survivors of that distinguished coterie who sat in that historic Legislature 

which first met on March 29, 1906. I refer to the late CHIEF JUSTICE JAMES THOMAS BROWN, 

who died suddenly on April 28th last, at the age of 86 years. 

 

Chief Justice Brown was born in Huntingdon, Quebec, in 1871, and received his primary education in 

Huntingdon Academy. In 1893, he graduated from McGill University with a Bachelor of Arts degree, 

gaining top honours in mental and moral philosophy, and the same year he came west to Winnipeg to 

begin his career in law. Three years later he moved to Moosomin, then the judicial centre of the East 

Assiniboia district of the North-West Territories. In 1904 he was appointed Crown Prosecutor for the 

East Assiniboia, and in 1907 was created a King's Counsel. 

 

Contesting the first provincial general election as a Provincial Righter in 1905, the future Chief Justice 

won Souris 



 

February 14, 1958 

 

 

2 

constituency for his Party, and, though a Liberal federally, sat in the Legislature as a member of the 

Haultain opposition. He resigned his seat in 1908 to contest Qu'Appelle riding in the Federal election of 

that year, but was unsuccessful. Elevated to the bench as puisne judge of the Supreme Court of 

Saskatchewan in 1910, he was appointed Chief Justice of the Court of King's Bench eight years later, a 

position he continued to occupy with popular acceptance, with dignity and great distinction until the 

time of his death. In 1921, his Alma Mater, McGill University, conferred on him an honorary degree of 

doctor of law. 

 

Chief Justice Brown had many extra-judicial interests and activities throughout his long career of 

devoted public service. Ha was chairman of the Saskatchewan Royal Grain Inquiry Commission of 

1929, and did particularly valuable work as a member of Boards under the Farmers' Creditors' 

Arrangement Act during the difficult period of the 'thirties'. An active churchman, he was also one of the 

founders, and an ardent supporter, of Saskatchewan Music Festival, serving as its president during the 

years of its most notable expansion. He also had been honorary president of Regina Astronomical 

Society for many years. As a sportsman, he found outlet in golf, curling, hunting and tennis. 

 

In 1902, he married Alice M. Lewis, of Rutherglen, Manitoba, who died in 1951. Chief Justice Brown 

remarried some time later, and is survived by his widow, four sons, a daughter, nine grandchildren, a 

sister and brother. 

 

Tributes paid him by his colleagues of the judiciary, by representatives of the Canadian and 

Saskatchewan Bar, of the Government, and of the Church he had served for many years, all testified to 

the high esteem in which Chief Justice Brown was held and to the affection he had won through his 

sterling qualities of heart and mind. 

 

The second name which must regretfully be added to the list of deceased former Members is that of the 

Rev. Robert Sterritt Leslie, who was the highly respected Speaker of this Assembly from 1930 to 1934, 

during the term of the Co-operative Government headed by the late Dr. J.T.M. Anderson. Mr. Leslie 

died at Red Deer, Alberta, last Thursday, February 6th, at the home of his only daughter, Mrs. J.A. 

Lampard. 

 

Mr. Leslie was born, April 25, 1875, at St. Mary's Ontario, of Irish-English parentage. He received his 

early education at St. Mary's College, and came west in the early 'twenties' to teach school at Ninga, 

Manitoba. Later, Mr. Leslie attended Wesley College, Winnipeg, and graduated in Theology. 

 

His first church was at Alameda, Saskatchewan, and in 1905 he was called to the Presbyterian Church at 

Weyburn, and it was 



 

February 14, 1958 

 

 

3 

during the early years of his pastorate that the first Presbyterian Church was built in Weyburn, which 

stands today as a monument to his untiring efforts and supervision. The Church observed its 50th 

Anniversary, last Autumn. 

 

Mr. Leslie later homesteaded in the Trossachs district, and for many years served as secretary-treasurer 

of the Rural Municipality of Brokenshell, while still continuing to serve the church of which he was a 

steadfast adherent. 

 

Contesting the Constituency of Weyburn in the provincial general election of 1929, as a Progressive, 

Mr. Leslie was elected, and at the 1930 Session, was appointed Speaker of the Assembly, winning the 

confidence and respect of all Members of the House by his dignity, impartiality and deportment in the 

Chair. 

 

Defeated in the general election of 1934, Mr. Leslie devoted himself to farming and to his municipal 

duties, always maintaining an active connection with his church. Retiring in 1944 from farming and 

from the municipality he had served so faithfully and well, he moved to White Rock, B.C., where he 

was pastor of the Presbyterian Church there until 1950, when he moved with Mrs. Leslie to take up his 

residence at Red Deer, to be close to his only daughter Mrs. J.A. Lampard. 

 

Predeceased by Mrs. Leslie in 1952, and by his son, Norman, in 1924 the Rev. Mr. Leslie is survived by 

his daughter and five grandsons. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this concludes the statistics of the lives of these two former members of the Legislature, 

but of course a great deal more can be said about them. Most of us knew Chief Justice Brown who each 

year was regular in his attendance at the opening of this Legislative Assembly. Those of us who knew 

him I am sure marvelled at his vitality and his keen interest in all that went on about him, and despite his 

advancing years, he showed a great awareness of what was going on and took a very active part in the 

life of his community. I know that his passing will be regretted by all honourable members. 

 

I had the privilege of knowing Mr. Leslie personally, and counted him as one of my friends over a long 

period of years. In fact in 1934 he and I both ran in the election of that year. When the ballots were 

counted we found that we were both just walking; it was the Liberal candidate who was running. We 

were very good friends despite the fact that in that campaign we were political opponents. I knew him 

before that election, and of course had many contacts with him in the years that followed. I had a high 

regard for him both as 



 

February 14, 1958 

 

 

4 

a man and as a public servant, and I know that all the people of the constituency of Weyburn who 

appreciated his high qualities will want to join with me in extending to Mrs. Lampard, his daughter, our 

deepest sympathy at his demise, and to all of the members who remember him as a Speaker of this 

House, I am sure that they too will want to pay tribute to his memory. 

 

The passing of these two former members of the Legislature remind us that we owe a great deal to these 

men and many others who, in days gone by, sat in this Legislature, served the people of their day and 

generation, and helped to lay the foundations of government in Saskatchewan. 

 

In paying tribute to the memory of these two men we also pay tributes to all of those who have gone 

before, and who have left us such a fine heritage of public service. 

 

On motion of the Hon. Mr. Douglas (Weyburn), seconded by Mr. McDonald: 

 

Resolved, That this Assembly records its profound regret at the loss suffered by the Province and its 

people in the death of the HONOURABLE JAMES THOMAS BROWN, a Member of 

Saskatchewan's First Legislature, a pioneer jurist and Chief Justice of the Saskatchewan Court of 

Queen's Bench from 1918 until his death on April 28, 1957, and of the REVEREND ROBERT 

STERRITT LESLIE, B.A., a former Member for the Constituency of Weyburn, and Speaker of this 

Assembly in the Seventh Legislature from 1930 to 1934, who died on February 6, 1958. 

 

In paying tribute to their memories and to their exemplary services to the Province and its people, this 

Assembly desires also to express its sincere sympathies with members of the bereaved families. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Leader of Official Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, it is always a privilege, I am sure, 

for all of us to have this opportunity of paying our respects to the ex-Members of this Legislature who 

have passed away during the past year and I, like the Premier, have noticed that over the last few years 

we have had quite a lengthy list of Members who have passed on in the previous months. However, this 



 

February 14, 1958 

 

 

5 

year we are most fortunate in only having the two names before us, this afternoon. 

 

It was not my privilege to have known the late Mr. Leslie, but I understand that when he served as 

Speaker of this Legislature he served well and that his judgments were considered to be fair and just to 

both sides of the Legislature. 

 

With regard to the late Chief Justice Brown, naturally I knew him very well because he lived in my 

home town for some considerable time in the very early years, before Saskatchewan was formed; and all 

the people of that area of the province — the pioneers — had high regard for the late Chief Justice 

Brown. Many parts of Saskatchewan were not settled when Mr. Brown moved into what is now 

Saskatchewan, in 1896; and when he was practising law in Moosomin the judicial area covered most of 

the province of Saskatchewan and most of the province of Alberta. We can see how our province has 

progressed and how western Canada has progressed over that short period of time from 1896 until 1958. 

I understand we are having some amendments, this year, which may change our judicial districts again; 

but we should keep in mind always the work that was performed by the senior members of the judiciary 

here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Chief Justice Brown was known as a very friendly man and I can recall, on several occasions, meeting 

him, for instance, in the Air Force here in Regina. He was a man over eighty years of age and he would 

either be returning to this city or leaving the city on official business in the wee hours of the morning, by 

air. He was a very devoted public servant and I think that probably his record will go down in history as 

one of the gentlemen who gave his all, not only to the public life, but to the protection of the individual 

throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

He had friends from the north to the south and the east to the west and I think the nark he left on the 

Province of Saskatchewan is something that all of us should set our sights on, and endeavour to better 

ourselves and to example our lives upon the life of the late Chief Justice Brown. The people of the 

Moosomin area, especially the older citizens, felt, when Judge Brown left that community, that they had 

lost him; but they soon realized that the loss in that particular community was the gain of all of the 

people of Saskatchewan. I think that, at his death, there were probably as many people throughout the 

whole of the province of Saskatchewan who recognized his worth and his ability as the people in his 

original community in western Canada — that is, the community of Moosomin. 

 

Again I want to say that I wish I had had the opportunity of knowing Mr. Leslie when he was a member 

of the Legislature, but I am sure that some of our colleagues here in the Legislature 



 

February 14, 1958 

 

 

6 

knew him well when they sat in this Chamber with him and I hope they will express their sentiments 

here, this afternoon. 

 

Mr. A. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add a few words to what has already been 

said. I did not have the privilege of knowing Justice Brown intimately, although I had met him on 

various occasions; but I was very well acquainted with the work that he did for the people of 

Saskatchewan, particularly the farmers, when he headed the adjustment under the Farmer's Credit 

Arrangement Act. As a man who has served the country as he has done, and the province as he has done, 

I'm sure his name will be in the memory of many farmers and business men as well. 

 

As far as Mr. Leslie was concerned, I think I am probably the only one in the House, at the present time, 

who was here when he was Speaker of the House and I want to say to you without hesitation, that Mr. 

Leslie endeared himself to all members of the House, even to the Opposition. I very well remember that 

his congenial temperament made him always welcome in a group, because I think he excelled even the 

Premier of Saskatchewan in story-telling, and as such — a man who has the gift of that art — is usually 

pretty popular among a group of people when they gather. I want to say that Mr. Leslie, as far as I knew, 

served his country well and served this legislature well as Speaker. He had a pretty tough job to perform 

at that time, when we had twenty-eight old parliamentarians or legislative members from the previous 

Government on this side, and we had about thirty-three greenhorns on the other side. So you can 

understand the difficulty that he ran into during the five years that he sat in the Chair that you now 

occupy. But he discharged that duty with grace and credit to himself and to the general satisfaction of 

members on both sides of the House. Having said that, I want to concur in all that has been said before 

and endorse that wholeheartedly. 

 

(The Motion of Condolence was then passed by silent standing vote) 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Douglas (Weyburn), seconded by Mr. McDonald (Leader of Official 

Opposition): 

 

"Ordered, That the Resolution just passed, together with transcripts of the oral tributes in memory of 

the deceased former members, be communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this Assembly, 

by Mr. Speaker." 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 3:10 o'clock p.m. 


