



















































Hansard: March 20, 1958


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

26th Day 

 

Thursday, March 20, 1958 

 

The House met at 10:00 o'clock a.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

CONGRATULATIONS TO REGINA PATS 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded 

with, I am sure that all hon. members will want to join with me in congratulating the Regina Pats on 

being the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey Champions and in sending them our very best wishes for a very 

successful play-off season. They will now be going to Alberta, then east to Manitoba, and we hope they 

will capture the Memorial Cup trophy for this province. Last year Flin Flon took it, and they, of course, 

are in Saskatchewan as far as hockey is concerned. 

 

I would like at this time, however, to assure the hon. member for Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) that his 

Flin Flon team did put up a wonderful battle and to express our regrets that Prince Albert passed out of 

the picture so early. 

 

MUNICIPAL REORGANIZATION 

 

The Assembly resumed from Tuesday, March 18, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. 

Gardiner, as amended: 

 

"That this Assembly recommend to the Provincial Government that, before any basic change is made 

in the organization of Municipal Government in Saskatchewan, consideration be given to the report of 

the Continuing Committee on Local Government, and consultation be held with local government 

organizations regarding the best method of ascertaining the wishes of their ratepayers." 

 

Mr. J.W. Horsman (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak a few minutes on this 

amendment . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — On the motion as amended. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — Yes, on the motion as amended. I understand that no 



 

March 20, 1958 
 

 

2 

reference can be made to the former motion, is that correct? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That is correct. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — It seems a little difficult to argue a question like this unless you can refer to the 

source from which this amendment was made. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You could have done that by participating in the debate before the amendment was 

passed. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — I am going to refer this much to the former resolution. I am going to state that there 

was only one simple request made in the original motion, and that was that people should be given a 

vote on this question before there was any change made in municipal boundaries. This amendment was 

drafted to cut that part of the motion out, and it asks that "consideration be given to the report of the 

Continuing Committee on Local Government and consultation be held with local government 

organizations regarding the best method of ascertaining the wishes of their ratepayers." 

 

Still it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that this could be argued from the point of view that the best way of 

ascertaining the wishes of the ratepayers would be to let them have a vote on the question. I see no other 

way of arguing this thing unless I am allowed that much latitude. A few days ago, as a matter of fact last 

Friday, there was a resolution introduced into this House by the Premier, a resolution to set up a 

Committee to investigate certain phases of the liquor sales and so on, in this province. Everyone agreed 

with the Premier's remarks, that day; I am sure everyone in the House did, but he laid great emphasis on 

the fact that before anything like this could be done the people should have a chance to vote on it; should 

have a chance to decide by plebiscite whether they wanted any changes made or not. He emphasized 

very clearly that in a democratic country it was a democratic right of the people to make their own 

decisions on matters of importance to them. So I see no difference between these two things; they are 

parallel, to me. It seems to me that the people who will be mostly affected, and directly affected, by this 

matter under discussion, this morning, are the people who should have the opportunity to make their 

own decision on the matter. 

 

Now we have a Committee appointed here — and I have no criticism to offer to the members of this 

Continuing Committee. I have their names here; but, in looking over the list, it seems to me that it is 

very evident, before the report ever comes in, as to what that report will be. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 



 

March 20, 1958 

 
 

 

3 

Mr. Gardiner (Melville): — That's his opinion. 

 

Mr. Horsman: — I am just expressing my opinion on that. When I look over the list of the members of 

the Committee, it looks to me that it is pretty well loaded against the rural people. We have 

representatives from the municipal associations, from the urban associations; there are four Cabinet 

Ministers on that Committee, and the opinion of the Cabinet Ministers is well known on this subject. For 

many years this Government has favoured changes in municipal boundaries. I can remember when the 

hon. Mr. Brockelbank was Minister of Municipal Affairs, quite a few years ago. Even at that time he 

was very much in favour of changes in municipal boundaries, of larger municipal units. It was not 

passed in the House because it never came up in the House; but the reason it wasn't put in long ago was 

because of the determined opposition of the municipal men in this province. I think it would have come 

in long ago if it had not been for that. I think that on a matter of so much importance to the local people, 

they should at least have a chance to vote on the matter. 

 

I am not going to say very much about this because I haven't got very much range, but I am going to 

move an amendment to this amended motion. 

 

I am going to move, seconded by Mr. McFarlane, (Qu'Appelle-Wolseley): 

 

That all the words after the words "method of" in the fifth line be deleted, and the following words 

substituted therefor: 

 

"conducting a plebiscite to ascertain the wishes of the ratepayers." 

 

The amendment will read as follows: 

 

"That this Assembly recommend to the Provincial Government that, before any basic change is made 

in the organization of Municipal Government in Saskatchewan, consideration be given to the report of 

the Continuing Committee on Local Government, and consultation be held with local government 

organizations regarding the best method of conducting a plebiscite to ascertain the wishes of the 

ratepayers." 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. I am not asking 



 

March 20, 1958 
 

 

4 

Your Honour to be able to make a snap decision by just looking at it, but I would submit that this 

amendment simply says what the motion before us says, in slightly different words. 

 

The motion before the House that "consideration be given to the report of the Continuing Committee on 

Local Government, and consultation be held with the local government organization regarding the best 

method of ascertaining the wishes of the ratepayers". This amendment says the same thing: "that 

consideration be given to the report of the Continuing. Committee on Local Government, and 

consultation be hold with local government organizations regarding the best method of conducting a 

plebiscite to ascertain the wishes of the ratepayers." With the exception of the word "plebiscite" it is the 

same thing. It is simply a matter of how you interpret the best method of ascertaining the wishes of the 

ratepayers. I submit that this is not a proper amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — In considering this proposed amendment to the motion as amended, it can only be 

regarded as an amendment to the amendment which the House has already passed, the other day; and 

consequently I must rule it out of order for that reason. It is an amendment to a decision already arrived 

at at this Session by this Assembly, and any amendment which would be in order would be to the 

original part of the motion which does not include the amendment already passed. I must rule the 

proposed amendment out of order. 

 

Mr. G.H Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, you are ruling that no one can amend an 

amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I am in order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I should, perhaps, make it more clear. This amendment would have been in 

order if it had been offered before the amendment to the motion was passed. Then it would have been in 

order. But after the House has made a decision at this Session to introduce an amendment which would 

alter that is not in order. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, then what are we debating the amendment for? If it has already been 

passed? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — We are not debating the amendment. We are debating the motion as amended. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — It should be appealed. 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I would like clarification 



 

March 20, 1958 

 
 

 

5 

as to why, you ruled it out of order. Was it because the amendment had been passed, or because it is an 

amendment to an amended motion? I am not just clear on it. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Because it simply raises . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — It is, Mr. Speaker, I am asking. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The House has already passed an amendment and this proposed amendment 

would reverse the decision of the House on the previous amendment. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — But, Mr. Speaker, I . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member may appeal from my ruling but I am not going to argue about 

it here. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I just want to ask one question . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — My question is this: When the amendment was passed, it replaced the original 

motion; is that not correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — No, no. 

 

Premier Douglas: — It didn't replace the whole thing. It just replaced the last part. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, that is what I mean. It took things away and put other things in place of it. 

 

Premier Douglas: — That's right. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — And that is the amendment. And now this discussion is in order, otherwise this 

whole discussion is out of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The discussion was on the motion as amended and the amendment had already been 

passed. If the hon. member for Wilkie had submitted this amendment before the House had adopted the 

amendment, it would have been in order, but at this stage it is not. Is the House ready for the question? 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say a word about the motion as amended. The 

member who just took his seat (Mr. Horsman) made two references about which, I think, I ought to 

comment. One is to the effect that this motion as amended is somehow or other denying to the people 

the right to express 



 

March 20, 1958 
 

 

6 

their opinion, or to have a vote. He made reference to another debate when we were talking about a 

Committee to study the liquor question, at which time I said that I hoped that Committee would keep in 

mind the proper and inalienable right that people have, to express their opinion on this question, because 

it affects everyone; and he felt that this motion as amended was denying this fundamental right. 

 

I want to point out, of course, that it does nothing of the sort . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes, it does. 

 

Premier Douglas: — What it says is . . . 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Why did you vote against us? 

 

Premier Douglas: — If my friend will listen, he will learn something. That is why has two ears and one 

mouth. If he would use the former more than the latter, he would learn something. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — You'll hear a little more after, too. 

 

Premier Douglas: — It says "that consideration be given to the report of the Continuing Committee on 

local government" — that is the first thing. That we wait until we get that report and that we study it. 

Now when that report is available and has been made available to everybody concerned, that report will 

not only come to the Government and the Legislature, but the representatives who are on that 

Committee came on that on that Committee on the distinct understanding that they would take this 

report back to their respective provincial organizations and that those provincial organizations would 

have to concur in the report. So, that is the first thing: there will be consideration given to the report of 

this Committee. 

 

Then, assuming that the Government, the Legislature and the provincial organizations represented are all 

in agreement on the proposals, we would then consult with these provincial organizations regarding the 

best method of ascertaining the wishes of their ratepayers. 

 

There is a very strong possibility that when those discussions are held, a plebiscite or a vote, of that sort, 

will be what the provincial organizations will recommend. How it will be taken or by what method it 

will be taken, will be for them to make suggestions to us about. As I pointed out the other day, there are 

very practical difficulties as to how you take it and how you assess such a plebiscite. 

 

This is not ruling out a vote, however. What it is 



 

March 20, 1958 

 
 

 

7 

saying is that we ought, in all fairness, do the two things which the Government has committed itself to 

do: first, to take no action until we receive a report from this Continuing Committee, and secondly, to 

consult with the provincial organizations on that Committee as to what they think are the best 

procedures to be adopted in respect of ascertaining the wishes of the ratepayers. So, when gentlemen 

opposite say this motion as amended is denying the right to vote, they are simply not in accordance with 

the facts. They are suggesting that, when these provincial organizations are consulted, they will be 

opposed to any kind of a vote. I don't think so. They are suggesting that the provincial — that is the 

S.A.R.M, the town and village section of the S.U.M.A., and the Trustees' Association, and the health 

regions and hospital districts, who are represented on that Committee — when those are consulted, they 

won't have as much concern for properly ascertaining the wishes of the rate-payers as they have. Now I 

am just not prepared to agree with that. I think these provincial organizations will be just as anxious, 

indeed more anxious than any one of us to see that the just democratic procedure that can be devised 

will be utilized to ascertain the wishes of the ratepayers. 

 

The other thing the hon. gentleman said which disturbs me a good deal, and I think it will disturb some 

of the provincial organizations, was when he said that the Continuing Committee on Local Government 

has been loaded against the rural people. Let us look and see who is on this Committee. May I point out, 

again, Mr. Speaker, that the Government did not appoint this Committee. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Huh! 

 

Premier Douglas: — The member for Arm River laughs, and he has already got into a little trouble by 

laughing, because he has already made some of the provincial organizations very angry with the 

insinuations he has thrown at them. 

 

The Government appointed its own four representatives — the Minister of Education, the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs, the Provincial Treasurer and myself. All the other members on the Committee were 

appointed by the provincial organizations, who were asked to name people they wanted on the 

committee to represent them. The Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities put three people on 

this Committee — their president, Mr. Garland, Mr. W.J. Irvine and Mr. Stan Ferguson, their provincial 

secretary. 

 

The Saskatchewan Trustees' Association also put three people on — Mr. A.B. Douglas, Mr. G.J. 

Hindley and Mr. J.A. Trew, — all farmers. So there you have six farmers already. 

 

The Association of Urban Municipalities put on 



 

March 20, 1958 
 

 

8 

Mayor McAskill, of the city of Saskatoon, Mayor Maher, of the city of North Battleford (a former 

member of this Legislature, who did not sit on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker), and Mr. H.J. 

Partridge of the town of Gull Lake. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Is that four urbans, Mr. Premier? 

 

Premier Douglas: — No, three — McAskill, Maher and Partridge. There are three from the S.A.R.M., 

three from the Trustees', and three from the Urban. 

 

Then the health regions and hospital boards of the province were allowed two. The health regions are 

represented by Mr. C.J. Fahlman of Kronau, also a farmer and a former reeve of a municipality; and the 

hospital boards are represented by Mr. E.S. Bourassa of the Grey Nuns Hospital here in Regina. 

 

I submit that that does not look very much like a Committee which has been loaded against the rural 

people — three S.A.R.M. people who are farmers, and three trustees who are farmers; and you have the 

health region representative who is a farmer. So, the farmers are the predominant group among the 

members of the Committee. 

 

In addition to the members I have stated, who are voting members, there are associate members, who 

have no vote but have a voice. They are there to protect the interests of the groups they represent, and to 

give such technical assistance as they can. The associate members are: on behalf of the Larger School 

Unit Secretaries, Mr. R.J. McKinnon of North Battleford; on behalf of the Rural Municipal Secretaries, 

Mr. G.E. Cripps of Wolseley; and on behalf of the Teachers' Federation, Mr. G. Eamer of Saskatoon. 

These, of course, are associate members and not voting members. 

 

I think this Committee is a very representative Committee. I say again, apart from having four members 

on the Committee, the Government appointed none of these people. They were selected from their own 

organizations. I want to say that this Committee, when it was appointed . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I would like to ask a question. What is the Premier 

debating? Is he debating the amendment which you already ruled out of order? 

 

Premier Douglas: — No, I am debating the motion as amended, and I am replying to the remarks made 

by the member from Wilkie (Mr. Horsman), who said that this Committee was badly loaded against the 

rural people. I am simply pointing out that the rural people have a predominant membership on the 

Committee. I am 



 

March 20, 1958 

 
 

 

9 

pointing out that members on that Committee were nominated and selected by their provincial 

organizations. 

 

I want to make one more point: that that Committee itself, when it held its first meeting on 24th June, 

selected its Chairman. The Chairman was not selected by the Government. The Chairman was selected 

by the Committee, and they selected the mayor of Saskatoon, because he was persona grata to all the 

various groups and also because he was able to give a considerable amount of time to the work of the 

Committee. I want to say, with some regret, Mr. Speaker, that some of the remarks made, the other day, 

about him being picked by the Government and being a sort of a rubber-stamp for the Government, have 

not had very good repercussions, and the Chairman of this Committee feels that, in the interests of the 

usefulness of the Committee, he ought to withdraw as chairman. The S.A.R.M. and other organizations 

have asked him to continue, and whether or not he will continue I do not know. But I do want to say that 

he has done commendable work during the period he has been the Chairman, and I hope the Committee 

will be able to persuade him to his work. 

 

Unless it is for the purpose of creating fear in the province, I can see no purpose in constantly raising 

this question about votes and plebiscites. The Government has made it abundantly clear, first of all, that 

we have no intention of doing anything without a report of this Committee; and, as I said when the 

Conference was here, we don't want a report in which the Committee is split seven to three, or 

something of that sort; we want a report which will recommend itself to all the groups represented. 

Secondly having received the report, we will consult with the different organizations represented on that 

Committee. The Government, of course, can make no changes without coming to the Legislature. We 

also consult with the provincial organizations represented on the Committee, not only regarding the 

report, but regarding the best method of implementing any report which may be made and the best 

method of ascertaining the wishes of the local ratepayers. 

 

It seems to me that the motion as amended now expresses some confidence that the Continuing 

Committee will endeavour to bring in a reasonable report. They may not be able to reach any agreement, 

in which case we won't have any report; but if they can reach some area of agreement and bring in a 

report, this is expressing some confidence that the report will be a sane and reasonable one. Secondly, 

the motion as amended is expressing confidence that, if the Government consults (as it will) with the 

provincial organizations, those provincial organizations will make suggestions as to the best methods of 

ascertaining the wishes of the ratepayers, and that they will do so with a full sense of their responsibility 

and of their desire to see that local ratepayers do not have anything foisted upon them against 



 

March 20, 1958 
 

 

10 

their wishes. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be most unwise for us to do anything other than express our 

confidence not only to the Continuing Committee, but in the provincial organizations whom they 

represent. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take a moment or two on this motion as amended, just to deal 

with some of the things the Premier said. It was rather disturbing to me when he left the inference that 

we were not in favour of the Continuing Committee as set up, and that they were receiving criticism, so 

much so that the Chairman of the Continuing Committee was ready to resign. If that is so, it is 

regrettable that he should take that attitude. With the exception of a couple of remarks that were passed, 

the other day, I don't think anyone in this House has criticized in any way the members of the 

Committee or the work they are attempting to do; or has said, in any sense, that they did not have 

confidence in the report which this Committee might submit. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege. My hon. friend listened to the member for 

Wilkie when he said this Committee was "loaded". 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I am coming to that. You pick up every little opportunity, every little loose word that 

is dropped, and play it up into something big; and such remarks as the Premier made today are adding to 

the very thing he is criticising these particular members for having done. 

 

The member here, as I heard him, said that there were four Cabinet Ministers on that Committee, and 

that the Cabinet Ministers, with their prestige and their position, should exercise considerable weight on 

that Committee. That is the objectionable feature that he was pointing out. Let us keep the record 

straight. Because of the attitude of the Government, he feels that the Government stands for a 

progressive move towards some system of larger municipalities, or the county system. I want to go on 

record and say this: that at no time did I ever, in any words that I have spoken, say anything other than 

that I have complete confidence in the Continuing Committee, and I speak on behalf of Mr. McDonald, 

the Leader of the Official Opposition. I want that understood. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Do you speak for your colleagues? 

 

Mr. Cameron: — It is a strange thing that in a House with 53 members, someone would think that, 

because some remark was passed by one or two members of a House of 53, the situation is such as to 

disturb the whole harmony and the work of the Continuing Committee. I think that is drawing lines just 

a little bit too fine. 



 

March 20, 1958 

 
 

 

11 

Now, speaking on the motion itself and on the amendment, the original motion, as you will recall, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You are debating the motion as amended. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — . . . simply asked that we, as a Legislature, assure the people that, in the event of 

reorganization, they would have a vote in the area in which the people are vitally concerned. That was, 

in simplicity, exactly what the resolution asked; no more, no less. Now the amendment goes back to this: 

"That this Assembly recommend to the Provincial Government that before any basic change is made in 

the organization of municipal government in Saskatchewan, consideration be given to the report of the 

Continuing Committee on Local Government." We have no objection to that. They have to consider it: 

"and consultation be held with local government organizations" — that is an accepted fact. You couldn't 

have a report unless you had consultations with the local government officials. Here they have a 

Continuing Committee which is coming to the Government and submitting its report. They could not 

submit a report unless they were in consultation with them. That is a foregone conclusion; consultations 

are going on constantly with the Committee because you have four Cabinet Ministers sitting with them. 

"Consultation will be held with local government organizations regarding the best methods of 

ascertaining the wishes of their ratepayer" — of course, it will be. There is no question about it because 

you are sitting on the Committee. 

 

When the Committee submits its report it is going — (let me put it this way): it is going to suggest to the 

Government whether or not it considers a plebiscite is necessary. So you can't do otherwise than consult 

with the local officials, the governing bodies, as to the best way of ascertaining the wishes of the people. 

Nobody says otherwise. It has to be done, or you would have no Continuing Committee. 

 

But this resolution as amended, in simplicity says this: "that the Government may, or it may not, give a 

plebiscite depending upon their views after consultation with the executives of the local organizations." 

That is the key thing: "we may or we may not". There is no guarantee that you are going to. The 

Government proposes to consult with regard to the best method of ascertaining the wishes of the 

ratepayers. There is a possibility that there may be a vote; but it is only a possibility. There is no 

guarantee that there will be a vote. It is all right for the Premier to say this shows lack of confidence in 

the Continuing Committee. He has been building that up all this Session. It does not show lack of 

confidence in the Continuing Committee. We asked for a simple commitment that we would guarantee 

the local people in those local areas the right to have a vote, if an enlarged municipality was to be 

created, or the county system or something which affected them vitally was proposed. 



 

March 20, 1958 
 

 

12 

That is all that the resolution asked for. 

 

This, in my opinion, would have aided immensely the work of the Continuing Committee, because it 

would have dispelled a great deal of apprehension that is rampant throughout the province in all 

municipal organizations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — Who created it? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You did. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — And it would have aided the Committee in that assurance that a vote would be given 

and the people would be in a receptive frame of mind to accept some of the recommendations, and there 

would not be this amount of resistance towards any thought of change that you find today. 

 

For that reason, because the amendment says the Government may or it may not. It is possible we will. It 

is equally possible we won't; so this amendment doesn't suggest or solve anything. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — What amendment are you referring to? 

 

Mr. Cameron: — This motion as amended doesn't solve anything. You ask us to go along and say to 

these people in the rural areas; we will leave it to the Government, after consultation with the local 

authorities, their Executive, as to whether we will or, whether we won't give you a vote. Possibly we 

will, possibly we won't, and that is exactly the substance of this motion as amended. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege. Where does it say the 'Executive'? We 

say, "consult with the provincial organizations", and we mean the provincial organizations, and they 

have already gone on record as saying that these reports must come back to their annual conventions, not 

to their Executives. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — That's right. But you are not dealing with the people at the local level. You are 

dealing with the municipal organizations, the trustees' organization. I don't know whether they call it 

their executive, but presumably it would be to their executive officials. 

 

Premier Douglas: — To their convention. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Pardon? 

 

Premier Douglas: — When it says here we will consult with the provincial organizations, we are 

talking about their provincial conventions, not their executive. 



 

March 20, 1958 

 
 

 

13 

Mr. Cameron: — Not necessarily so, no. It may be submitted to a convention. You are consulting with 

the provincial organizations, but it does not say you are going to call them all into convention to consult 

with all their delegates. 

 

Premier Douglas: — They appointed their representatives to the Committee . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — All right, Mr. Speaker. Never mind what they said. Sure they are guaranteeing their 

people that before they take a step they will call a convention and put it before their ratepayers. That is 

their commitment, but that isn't yours. Your commitment is that you will consult with the officials of 

these organizations; so I say that this motion as amended has not added one thing to the situation in the 

province. It has not clarified the Government's situation. It has just left things hanging in the air. The 

Government says: "We may or we may not; it is possible, possibly not". That is the way it hangs. It has 

not clarified anything. It hasn't given any reassurance to the local people. It hasn't induced them to look 

with a more receptive mind at some proposals that might be made, knowing that they will have the final 

judgment in the matter. Because of that, Mr. Speaker, I am going to vote against this motion as 

amended. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, the Premier has made a speech on my remarks, the 

other night, and he is welcome to do that, because the more he speaks and the more noise he makes these 

are all created to try to blot out the facts that this Government and this Legislature, ruled by the C.C.F. 

party, has voted down a motion which would have granted the right to the people and the ratepayers of 

the province to decide for themselves what they want to do. 

 

I said something in regard to that Committee. I am not denying the fact; and I am not the only one. Let 

me tell you that, Mr. Speaker, that I am not the only one. We sat here a year ago, last fall for three or 

four days, and saw the circus and the performance that was going on on the floor of this House; and any 

man who had some understanding of the issues involved could see clearly what was going on. 

Everybody, so far as I have been able to find out, both by printed words and utterances made in this 

House, makes it obvious that they are in favour of this thing; that their minds are made up before the 

report of this Committee will ever come before them, so far as the Cabinet members of that Committee 

are concerned. 

 

We have had a Royal Commission appointed that was going around the length and breadth of this 

province telling the people that this has to be done and that the people would have no right to vote. That 

Commission was appointed by the Government and evidently all the recommendations are going to be 

accepted by this Government. Do you 



 

March 20, 1958 
 

 

14 

wonder, then, that the people of the province do not trust this Government? What did you do with the 

Larger Units? There were 28 Larger Units that petitioned for a vote and how many petitions, of these 28 

were in order? All except two. Did they vote? Oh, no! It didn't please the Minister . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, that statement is 

completely incorrect. No such comment was ever made. 

 

Premier Douglas: — It is just his imagination . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I am going to bring in a report to this House and show you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege again, I assure the members of the House that 

in every instance where the petition was that which was prescribed in the Act, a vote was taken. Mr. 

Speaker, I am making this statement. It is correct; but I don't expect the member for Arm River to accept 

it. He isn't that kind of person. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I can ask your permission to bring the proof into this House. I haven't 

got it with me. I think can find it in the Journals of this House . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Go ahead and search them! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — . . . and you can find it in the public press, but you can deny it now if you wish to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Get the journals. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That's all right . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Oh, he's just having, a pipe dream! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Here is what they did, Mr. Speaker. They didn't let them vote then, but they did say 

"you can vote five years from now." 

 

Premier Douglas: — They could have voted then. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — And during that period every schoolhouse they could sell was sold, fences were torn 

up; the barns at the schools in the rural areas were hauled away and sold too. 



 

March 20, 1958 

 
 

 

15 

There was nothing left of the old establishments as far as the local school districts were concerned. This 

Committee or Board or whatever it was had ceased functioning in these districts and everything, was 

gone. There was nothing to go back to. And I wouldn't be surprised to see the same thing happen here, 

unless there is some provision made. But they will say, "we will try this thing out, and in four or five 

years if you don't like it, we can go back to the other system." There was some hint by the Premier when 

he spoke, a few days ago, not directly but indirectly . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. gentleman is not going to put inferences or hints in my 

mouth. If he is going to quote me he can quote from the transcript of the record. Otherwise he will not 

quote me or make inferences which are unwarranted. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I think we will do it when we get the transcript. 

 

Premier Douglas: — By next year he will say I said it, and by the year after that he will be absolutely 

sure I said it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is your method. You have practised it here for 14 years now. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I am not going to stand for this falsification of facts. You have specialized in this 

for years. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — This systematic story is one of your methods. I can bring in piles of your statements. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member must speak to the motion. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes, I am going to speak to the motion. This motion that has already been passed. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Stop manufacturing statements. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Now, there has been nothing said here that would insult anyone on that Committee; 

but the Premier tries to magnify these things; and he is an artist with words, with sneering words. And if 

he can get anybody, by any stretch of the imagination, where he can make it sound bad and smear a 

person, that is his long suit. 

 

This motion of substitution means one thing, and one thing only; that this Government says, "so far as 

we are concerned we are not going to give the people a chance to vote." 

 

Premier Douglas: — Nonsense. 



 

March 20, 1958 
 

 

16 

Mr. Danielson: — That is what it means. We voted one motion down and an amendment that brought 

this same principle back into this amended motion was ruled out of order by this House. That is what I 

have to say. I am not afraid any of the remarks I have made about that Committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — You'd better be. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I still don't see why the Mayor of Saskatoon should be the Chairman of a Committee 

which deals entirely with rural matters. I said that before. There are thousands of farmers in the province 

of Saskatchewan saying that same thing today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You said more than that. You said the Government appointed him. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, I didn't say any such thing. Anybody could see the machinery working here, a 

year ago last fall, when that Conference took place; and they could understand, and see through what 

they were doing. 

 

Again I say that this Government has denied, and is continuing to deny a vote to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers who have built up this country, have built up their local 

services organizations through the municipal secretaries and their municipal offices. There are very few 

in this country, or sitting on the floor of this House, who haven't been in municipal work; and they 

should really understand the tremendous service and usefulness of the municipal offices in this province. 

The local secretaries are the trouble shooters for everyone. Everybody comes in and asks them about 

anything; and the secretaries are well-informed, well-educated gentlemen, who are able to give correct 

information. 

 

I was in municipal work for about 16 years before I came into this House, and I know something about 

it. Now that local service is going to be taken away from the people, if Mr. Baker's Commission 

recommendations, which have been accepted by this Government, are put into effect — and there are 

four Cabinet Ministers sitting on this Committee as pre-judges of this thing, before any report of the 

Committee is brought in, there is going to be no indication in regard to the acceptance of the proposed 

measure by way of letting the people say themselves, "we want this thing", or "we don't want it." 

 

Premier Douglas: — That is nonsense. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say a few words on this 

motion. It seems to me that we are getting all excited and mad about just a little matter. 



 

March 20, 1958 

 
 

 

17 

It seems to me that the only difference between the thinking on the opposite side and this side of the 

House is this whether we should tell the people (which is the opinion on the other side) what this 

Government is going to do now, before there has been any decision on whether we are going to have 

larger units of administration or not. The hon. members opposite would like us to go and tell the people 

that is such-and-such a situation should develop. If such-and-such a recommendation is made to this 

Government, then we are going to do it this way. I think what the Government would like to do is to find 

out first what the wishes of the majority are. To me it seems that is the only difference on the thinking 

opposite and the thinking on this side. 

 

I think the democratic way, of course, is to ask the people for guidance — tell them that there has been a 

recommendation by the Continuing Committee that we should have certain action taken and ask what is 

the public's opinion. So I don't think we should be prepared, at this time, to say that the only way a 

decision will be made is by a vote f the electorate. Maybe that is a very good way, it could possibly be 

the best way. But are we in a position, at this time, to tell the people, as the Liberals have always told the 

people. This is the way it is going to be done. I think we should be able to tell them we want to find out 

how they want this problem settled. One of the reasons for my argument is that in the northern part of 

Saskatchewan I know there are certain areas right now that are ready to join a larger unit of 

administration without any vote. They have already decided. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Where? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Right in my own area. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Would you permit a question? Would you name that area? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Give us the municipality or local improvement district. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I am saying it is the general opinion of people I have met. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Oh! That's different. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — They are favourable towards the Larger Unit of administration, and the hon. 

members in this House know why. When you have small municipalities whose administration costs are 

high, notwithstanding what the council of a municipality may think, the fact is that the people realize 

that if they are to save money in their administration, the way they can do it is by having a larger unit of 

administration. 

 

In any event, that is all I wanted to add to this 



 

March 20, 1958 
 

 

18 

debate. To me it is only a difference of opinion — the democratic way, which is suggested by the 

Government, and the less democratic way which is suggested by the Opposition. 

 

Mr. L.N. Nicholson (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, I didn't intend to take part in this debate; it is getting 

down to pretty small details as far as I am concerned. When we stop to consider that we are arguing over 

one little point, which is whether or not the people who will be concerned should have the right to vote, I 

don't know what we are arguing about. It is the natural and the only reasonable way to arrive at a final 

decision. 

 

Now with reference to what the member from Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) has said, that he knows 

the north is ready to enter into the larger municipalities . . . 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I did not say the north. I said in my area, where I live. 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — All right, your area adjoins mine. We have two very large municipalities in our area. 

Through circumstances, unfortunate weather and so on, those municipalities are in very bad shape. I 

have been talking to the municipal men who are in this town right now. I had two different groups in my 

room, last night. Both happened to be from municipalities that are in good condition, and they outwardly 

opposed this idea. I want to concur with what the hon. member from Maple Creek said a few moments 

ago, that, if they knew, today, that before any final decision was made that those concerned would have 

the right to have a vote on it, I believe things would be advanced much faster, and they would not have 

the fear or the feeling that they are going to have it shoved on them, whether they like it or not. 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh (Minister of Municipal Affairs): —Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member from 

Arm River made it quite clear that the hon. member from Maple Creek was speaking for himself and not 

for all of those sitting on your left. Undoubtedly, in view of what the hon. member from Arm River had 

to say this morning, this whole question will probably receive further consideration at other provincial-

municipal conventions that are going to he held in the near future. We take the position that the people 

to consult are the elected officials of the ratepayers, in the final analysis in other words, the local 

municipal council. My hon. friend from Arm River stated that he had spent 16 years in municipal 

business, and after 16 years in municipal business he now shows up the total ignorance he has of the 

right by legislation that the rural municipal councils have. 



 

March 20, 1958 

 
 

 

19 

There has been some alteration in boundaries over the past few years. The hon. member from Nipawin 

made mention of one. When that area was organized into a municipality, there was a vote taken by the 

people. When a change was made in the of R.M. of Lacadena, No. 228, the local elected officials 

decided they would like to get an expression of opinion from their ratepayers before they made a final 

decision, and a plebiscite was taken by the officials of that municipality. There was also a vote taken in 

R.M. 249, when additional territory was added thereto; and you go to R.M. 276 and R.M. 306, you will 

find the same condition there. That, then, does suggest that the local municipal councils have the right 

for an expression of opinion by a plebiscite, if they so desire. Yet my hon. friend from Arm River, after 

16 years in rural municipal business (and I am familiar with his association with his local municipality), 

should have, at least before he got up in the House here this morning, taken a look to refresh his memory 

as to the rights of the ratepayers as spelled out in the Rural Municipal Act. 

 

Ratepayers can make two approaches. The ratepayers can petition the local council for a vote. A 

hundred ratepayers can petition the local council to take a plebiscite on this particular question; 20 

ratepayers can petition the local council on any matter which they feel is of vital interest to the 

ratepayers. 

 

So there are at least two approaches whereby the ratepayers can come to their local council, and the 

local council has the right to take a plebiscite, as has been demonstrated over the past few years by the 

municipalities I have mentioned. 

 

The amended motion now before the House simply suggests that, when the Continuing Committee 

makes their recommendations to the Government, the Government is committed, and the Continuing 

Committee is committed, to have those recommendations go before their provincial conventions, either 

a regular or a special provincial convention, to discuss the recommendations of the Committee. Then, 

beyond a question of doubt, it will move from there to the local governing bodies individually or 

collectively within areas, in order to get an expression of opinion. Then, Mr. Speaker, if the local 

governing bodies decide that, rather than they themselves making a decision on behalf of the ratepayers, 

they should take a plebiscite, provisions are made in The Rural Municipal Act for the local council to 

take a plebiscite. That is the approach of the Government. The provisions, therefore, are made, and have 

been in the Act, for a good many years, for the local ratepayers to petition the council, and the council, 

on its own initiative, can ask for a plebiscite. 

 

So I see nothing wrong with the motion as amended. I think it is keeping within the practice that has 

been followed over 



 

March 20, 1958 
 

 

20 

the years, and I have no hesitation in saying it is quite democratic. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the hon. Minister a question: if this is in the law 

now (which he knows it isn't), what is the purpose of discussing it now. It has nothing to do with this 

resolution, or no connection with it. If it is in the Act now, why did you vote against it? 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: — If it's in the Act now, why — I didn't get that. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the Minister one question, if I may. I was interested, 

and it was news to me that 50 or 100 ratepayers could at any time petition the council for a plebiscite on 

any matter. I am not too familiar with this. I thought it was only restrictive fields, such as debenture 

issues, and other things of that nature. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think the hon. Minister can get in touch with the hon. member later. 

 

Mr. John Thiessen (Shellbrook): — Mr. Speaker, I had no intention of getting into this discussion 

here, but I have been with municipal work pretty nearly all my life, too. I have spent the last 25 or 26 

years as a councillor or reeve, and as a municipal secretary. I am a municipal secretary at the moment, 

and I do not think anyone needs to be afraid of this resolution, because rural people have the best 

guarantee they could get right in this resolution, and that is the local government organizations. Taking a 

look at my own constituency, who are the local government organizations? First of all I have one L.I.D. 

with four representatives and a secretary; I have the R.M. of Canwood with six councillors and a reeve, 

the municipality of which I am secretary, and I don't think you need to look any further for better men 

than we have in our municipality. They will never let the people of the R.M. of Canwood down on any 

count, regardless of what it is, whether the Government would propose this scheme or not. 

 

Then I have the R.M. of Shellbrook. We had the representation in here yesterday, and those fellows are 

there for the ratepayers, not for the Government, nor anyone else. They are there to see that the 

ratepayers get the best deal out of any deal, whether it is federal or provincial issues. Then we have the 

R.M. of Leask, with Mr. Elder as secretary. I know those fellows, all of them, and they are there for the 

same purpose. Then I have the biggest part of Blaine Lake municipality, and I know those fellows; I met 

some of them here yesterday. They are going to watch the interest of their ratepayers in any move that 

might come from this side of the House, or any other side of the house, from this Government. Then, if 

we take a look at the larger 



 

March 20, 1958 

 
 

 

21 

school unit (my constituency is practically all in one school unit), we have six school unit trustees, and 

those trustees there are definitely not going to take anything that is not good for the ratepayers of the 

district, either. They are there to guarantee they are going to get for their ratepayers that which is just 

and which is right. 

 

Then, we have the Union Hospital Board, and we have 14 members on this, who are elected or 

appointed by council, and some elected. Those fellows are not going to let anything be slipped over on 

the ratepayers. They are going to be there, and that is the guarantee we have in this resolution, "held 

with local government organizations regarding the best method of ascertaining the wishes of their 

ratepayers". I don't think that any rural people or anyone else is going to ask for any more guarantee than 

what they are getting in this resolution. 

 

Mr. M.J. Willis (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I think this motion as amended is going to fall in with the 

wishes of the people, because rural and urban councils will see to it that no government provincially will 

push them around. In reply to the member from Arm River, I was quite interested in what he said about 

the larger school unit. All the time since 1944, we have heard this story about the larger units, and on the 

other side of the House there hasn't been one member who has got up and said they were for or against 

it. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, I have declared myself on different occasions 

in this House . . . 

 

Mr. Willis: — But they have continually sniped at it and all its weaknesses . . . 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Keep to the truth; that's what we're here for. 

 

Mr. Willis: — Mr. Speaker, the gentlemen across make me smile. The member for Arm River is 

worrying about the right of the people to vote. In 1938 he was elected for a term of five years and 

remained one extra year in this House. These are the people now who are worried about the right to 

vote. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Watch your blood pressure. 

 

Mr. Willis: — Lest the people forget, they would have been turned out a lot sooner if the people of this 

province had to put up with a Government that was bankrupt of ideas in 1943, and had to wait another 

year, and the hon. member from Am River was one of those who saw that the people of this province 

didn't 



 

March 20, 1958 
 

 

22 

have the right to vote that year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I shall support the motion as amended. As a member of this Government we shall see that 

the people have their rights when the proper time comes. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Rights! Don't say 'vote'. 

 

Mr. Isaak Elias (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, would a question be permitted? I have with great interest 

listened to the debate. I want to ask a question of the Premier, just to clarify in my own mind, because I 

think we are all confused . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member would be out of order . . . 

 

Mr. Elias: — I cannot ask a question? 

 

Premier Douglas: — . . . unless the House by unanimous consent allows a reply. I have already spoken 

in this debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Does the House agree to allow the hon. member to ask a question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Mr. Elias: — My question is this: The motion as amended, does it give the people the guarantee that 

they will have a right to vote on this question before any change is made in organization? That is my 

question. Does it give the people a guarantee that they would have a vote, or not? 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, it is a guarantee that the Government will consult not only with the 

Continuing Committee, but with the provincial organizations which they represent, and with the local 

governing bodies. We will consult with them as to the best method of ascertaining the wishes of the 

people. If they want it on a local option basis, or on a general plebiscite, we will give this undertaking to 

whatever they want; we will follow that procedure for ascertaining what the people want. What are you 

talking about? Are you talking about a general plebiscite over the whole province, or are you talking 

about a local option in each municipality, and in each school unit? You have to define what you mean. 

We would want to sit down with these people and say, "How do you want to find out the people's 

opinions?" As I said the other, day, you could use a string of townships which should go into this area, 

and the rest of the municipality go into that area; the townships and municipality may both go in here, 

but the string of townships may not want to go. 



 

March 20, 1958 

 
 

 

23 

Would we take the vote of the whole municipality, or do we take the vote of just the string of 

townships? 

 

It is a complicated question, and I am saying that we are prepared to consult with these organizations, 

and whatever method they feel is the best method of ascertaining the wishes of the people, the municipal 

people we will follow that method. I think we can trust to protect the interests of their people and to 

make suggestions to the Government that will be workable and democratic. 

 

Mr. Douglas T. McFarlane (Qu'Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I hadn't intended taking part in 

this debate because I think all the views have been pretty well discussed during the two opportunities we 

have had to discuss them. But, I don't to take issue with the remarks made by the member for Elrose 

(Mr. M.J. Willis), and of the cross-fire across the House when the statement was made that, even though 

the Liberals support some of these ideas, we still criticize them. Well, if there is one thing I want to 

emphasize here this afternoon, for the benefit of those opposite it is that we will continue to criticize 

regardless of whether we support them, or whether we don't support them; if we think there is room for 

criticism, you can rest assured that there will be constructive criticism. 

 

That is why, over the period of history, the Liberal party not only in Great Britain or Canada, but in any 

other country, has remained the greatest party throughout the history of the world because of that 

principle. 

 

Premier Douglas: — They're sure doing well in Great Britain these days. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! Will the hon. member speak to the motion. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — I was quite surprised to hear the Premier of the province take issue a few minutes 

ago with some of the statements by the member for Arm (Mr. Danielson). If the member from Arm 

River had made statements with which the Premier did not agree, I believe that is the privilege of the 

member from Arm River. I suggest that nobody has to be more concerned than the Premier of this 

province, when he made the statement at that convention a year ago, to the effect that, if the 

municipalities want to continue 'muddling' along the way they have been doing, then that is their 

business. So I suggest if there was ever an aspersion cast on the people of the municipalities of this 

province, I don't think there was ever a greater one cast than when he used the term 'muddling'. So I 

would say that possibly one of the reasons why the Government opposite has never been able to 

influence, and has never been able 



 

March 20, 1958 
 

 

24 

to control the municipal men of this province, is because of the attitude they have taken. 

 

I would suggest that, in all sincerity, regardless of whether we have had a sub-amendment to the motion 

or not, if they had had the best interests of the people in this province at heart, they would have made 

sure the people got the right to vote. Now they have come up with an amendment which says they may 

or they may not. If they had been sincere with themselves, they would have said, "You will have the 

right to register an opinion on this very vital subject." 

 

In the debate, the Government have negated the original motion which we had felt should have gone 

through this House without too much discussion in the interests not only of the Government, but in the 

interests of the ratepayers in the municipalities. Now that there is no definite guarantee to the people in 

my part of the province, and no definite guarantee to the ratepayers in other parts of the province, that 

they will have the vote, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the motion as amended. 

 

Mr. Kuziak (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I too was not going to take any part in 

this thing and I'm going to be very short. I have been in municipal work and a municipal secretary-

treasurer for the past 17 years, and I want to say that this resolution as amended absolutely takes the 

rural municipal men into our confidence. In other words, the Opposition has no confidence in what the 

municipal men are prepared to do. We are taking them democratically into our confidence, and will with 

them work out a way. As far as I can see the Opposition have no confidence in the municipal men of this 

province. They think they can serve their interests better than will the municipal men of this province. I 

have confidence in the municipal men of Saskatchewan, and am going to support the motion as 

amended. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You should go up and talk to the municipal convention. 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — There is only one thing I want to say in regard to some of the 

inferences which have been cast on this Continuing Committee by some members opposite. We have 

two members on that Committee from my constituency. One is an ex-member of this Legislature and a 

man whom I opposed in the political field, and I certainly want to say that I have every confidence in his 

stewardship of Mr. Irwin, Reeve of the Douglas municipality also on that Committee. I resent anything 

that is said regarding these people in this House. 

 

Mr. Karl Klein (Notukeu-Willowbunch): — Mr. Speaker, before the member got up to speak I 



 

March 20, 1958 

 
 

 

25 

was going to ask the Minister who spoke just prior to him (Hon. Mr. Kuziak), if he would permit a 

question. I would like to know who were the first in this province to recognize the need for municipal 

reorganization? Was it the municipal men who thought they needed the reorganization, or was it the 

Government? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Any answer on any question permitted must be very brief indeed . . . 

 

Mr. Kuziak: — Mr. Speaker, I'm going to reply to that question. I know that I attended municipal 

conventions 16 years ago and municipal men were talking about reorganization then. I believe it is the 

progressive municipal men of this province who have been seriously thinking about that particular 

problem. 

 

Mrs. Mary Batten (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to clear up one or two impressions which 

might have been left that I don't think are quite correct. The hon. Minister of Municipal Affairs (Hon. 

Mr. McIntosh) pointed out that, under the Act as it presently stands, ratepayers in the municipality can 

ask for a plebiscite. He is quite correct, but that in the first place, does not guarantee, of itself, that there 

is going to be a vote taken, or that for some reason or other things won't become so confused that that 

request will never be made. In the second place, the mere fact that that is the law today does not mean 

that will be the law next year at this same time. Although I have all the confidence in the world in the 

local governing bodies, I have not all that confidence in this Government, and I certainly cannot rely on 

them keeping those provisions in the Rural Municipal Act and in The Town Act that are there at present 

for the protection of the ratepayers, if they should see fit to change it. They could very well introduce 

legislation in the next Session and do exactly that, and there would be absolutely no commitment from 

them that they are not going to do that; there would be no guarantee absolutely to the municipal men and 

to the ratepayers that they would have a vote. 

 

I agree with the hon. member from Nipawin (Mr. Nicholson) that it was such a simple thing that was 

asked — just a vote. It certainly wasn't enough to bring in a complicated amendment and to bring in this 

motion amended. There's no reason why everybody cannot support this motion in itself. It's merely —

there's not a single thing in it. 

 

Mr. Klein: — It just ties the hands of the municipal men. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Certainly this Provincial Government would not have gone to the trouble of calling 

Conference and setting up the organization of a committee without giving some consideration to the 

report of that committee when it is made. Of course you are going to consult with local government 

organizations 



 

March 20, 1958 
 

 

26 

regarding the best methods of ascertaining the wishes of the ratepayers. Everybody in Saskatchewan 

takes it for granted that this Government is going to do those things. They are so self-evident it's foolish 

to put them into a resolution. There is absolutely nothing in that resolution except the very obvious fact 

that you have a Continuing Committee; that that Committee is going to bring in a report; that you are 

going to consider that report, and that you are going to consult with local governing bodies. But I would 

like to . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, my hon. friend should finish the sentence. She says, "to consult with 

them", but she does not say what we will consult with them in regard to what. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to be free of interruption unless it is on a point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, that is a point of privilege. The hon. member may not know it, but if 

she would study the rules, she would find out that you cannot quote part of a resolution and leave it 

there, and leave the inference that that is all there is to it. We say we will not only consult them, but we 

will consult them "as to the best means of ascertaining the wishes of the ratepayers." That is an 

important point. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — I read the resolution, Mr. Speaker. I believe I read exactly that part. 

 

Premier Douglas: — One would never know it! 

 

Mrs. Batten: — And I went on to talk about it, and certainly I don't understand this point of privilege 

that the Premier mentioned. Maybe it is true that the Premier of this province has the right to stand up 

and speak on a point of privilege whenever anything is said about the Government . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Any member of the House has a right to raise a point of privilege, if the 

quotation is not complete. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, what is your ruling on the point of privilege raised by the Premier? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think the point of privilege was well taken. If it is true that the hon. member from 

Humboldt did not complete that quotation, I am quite sure that that is . . . 

 

Mrs. Batten: — But Mr. Speaker, I'm not disputing your ruling. I 



 

March 20, 1958 

 
 

 

27 

agree with you, whatever your ruling may be; but I want to ask you this, Mr. Speaker, and I hope I'm in 

order to do so: I understood that a point of privilege was that any member could get up and speak on a 

point of privilege if there was a statement attributed to that member which was not true, or which be 

claims is not true. Now, I attributed no statement to the Premier of this province at all. I wasn't talking 

about him. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I still has a point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! Will the hon. member proceed. 

 

Mrs. Batten: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now, in case there was any wrong impression left, let me read 

the whole thing again: 

 

"That this Assembly recommend to the Provincial Government that before any basic change is made 

in the organization of Municipal Government in Saskatchewan, consideration be given to the report of 

the Continuing Committee on Local Government . . ." 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, and I think everybody in Saskatchewan must agree with me, that certainly nobody is 

going to act up and pay the expenses of a Continuing Committee; appoint or condone the appointment of 

people to this Committee; set up a secretariat which is costing the people of this province money; set up 

a system by which the various problems of reorganization can be studied, all of which is costing the 

taxpayer money, and not give it consideration. Of course, the report is going to be given consideration, 

not only by the Government of this province, but by everybody who is interested in the problems. 

 

Now, to go on exactly from where I left off: 

 

"and consultation be held with local government organizations regarding the best method of 

ascertaining the wishes of their ratepayers." 

 

Of course that's going to be done. There is no question about it. But who are these local government 

bodies in the first place? I'll admit I was confused when I listened to the Conference that was convening, 

because it was not only the rural municipal that were here as representatives of local governments, 

together with the urban people; it was also represented by the School Trustees; there were also 

representatives from the Hospital Boards; also representatives from other groups. Now, those people are 

all being considered as part of the local government, 



 

March 20, 1958 
 

 

28 

and I have no dispute with that; but in many cases these people represent exactly the same people. In 

fact, I would say in most cases. So where the School Trustees can say, "Our people don't want a vote", 

speaking about the very same people, your rural municipality executives may say, "Our people do want 

a vote." That's the whole problem. How much are you going to listen to one group of local governing 

body executives, and how much are you going to listen to the other? We have at no time denied the right 

and privilege and duty of this Government to consult with these local governing bodies as to how a vote 

should be taken. The very simple request that the original motion was for, and that this motion as it now 

stands is denying, is that people in Saskatchewan be guaranteed a vote. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Nonsense! 

 

Mrs. Batten: — We didn't tell them how to take the vote. It is up to this Government, and the local 

governing bodies as to how it is going to be done, and it is not fooling anybody to say that we cannot say 

right now, how it's going to be done; therefore, we can't guarantee it. That's a ridiculous statement, and I 

have never heard a more ridiculous statement all the time I have been in this House, (and I have heard 

some very foolish ones, Mr. Speaker), than the speech or statement from the hon. member for 

Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) when he said that it was "undemocratic to say to the people that you 

have to have a vote". Nobody but a socialist would make a statement of that kind. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. I did not say it was undemocratic to give 

people a vote. I said it is undemocratic, in my opinion, for the people at the top to tell what should be 

done, instead of using the democratic way of asking people from the bottom to say how it should be 

done. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — I have jotted it down; I must have taken it wrong, it was a "dictatorial stand, when you 

say people must have a vote," because you are telling them they must have a vote, whether they want 

one or not. 

 

It is very easy for people to avoid that dictation, because even though they have a vote, they don't have 

to utilize it; they don't have to vote. But to give the opportunity to vote is as democratic as any other 

provision that we have for the governing of the people of Saskatchewan, and I think that this motion is 

denying that guarantee. It is not saying they are not going to vote. Of course it isn't. It's not saying 

anything except, very obviously, they are going to look at the report and they are going to consult with 

local governing bodies. And because, Mr. Speaker, this motion is utterly meaningless as it now stands, 

and because it deliberately evades giving people of Saskatchewan, particularly the rural people 



 

March 20, 1958 

 
 

 

29 

the guarantee that their wishes will be respected and will be listened to by the pronouncement of the of 

their vote, I will vote against the motion. 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I gather from the remarks of the members opposite 

that they are assuming that the only way to handle this problem, the only way to get a representative idea 

of what the people of the province think, is to take a plebiscite all the way across the province on this 

question. 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Here we go again. Read the original motion. 

 

Mr. Wood: — I would gather that this method of doing things could not always answer the question 

correctly. I have had a certain amount of experience in municipal work, and, I find that things are not the 

same in all parts of the province at the same time. There may be a certain set of provisions in one part of 

the province that would not add to requirements of certain other parts of the province, and an overall 

plebiscite sent to all parts of the province might not be a satisfactory way of handling it. 

 

I think it should be left to the members of this Committee and the local governing bodies of this 

province to say what the final decision is going to be, to find out what the people want and to express an 

opinion on the matter. I don't think we at this time can tie the hands of that Committee, or tie the hands 

of local governing bodies or the Government, to say it has to be done by one certain method. It would 

appear to me that the members opposite are adopting the principle that a promise is better than a record. 

 

The member for Elrose stated that, the party which is represented by the members opposite back in 

1943, flouted the rights of the people to express their wishes, and the party which sits on this side of the 

House has always respected the rights of the people in this regard, and I think we can have implicit trust 

in them and that the assurance they are giving is sufficient, and I will certainly support the motion as 

amended. 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, I am very happy that the member from 

Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) assured the Legislature and, I hope, the province, of their confidence in the 

Committee and the personnel of that committee, and its competency to study its particular problem. I 

sympathize with him when his address had to be following the words of the member from Arm River 

(Mr. Danielson) which somewhat upset that confidence perhaps; but knowing the member for Arm 

River I think we could have expected that, and nobody is going to be too much disturbed about it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — What did you refer to? 



 

March 20, 1958 
 

 

30 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — I'm not going to enter into an argument with regard to larger school units at this 

point, Mr. Speaker. I do want to say, though, that the member for Arm River has, ever since I have been 

in this House, indicated on many occasions his opposition to that move; and he continues to indicate it, 

as he did this morning. It seems to me it is important, however that people who assume positions of 

responsibility are not content just to say that certain ends should be achieved in education, for example, 

and at the same time go on to say that you shall not use the only means by which these ends shall be 

achieved. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — That was compulsory. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That's right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — The big problem in talking about local government is to get people to look at the 

problems which it presents, without looking just at their prejudices. That was the reason, of course, that 

that conference was held. That was the reason why the Continuing Committee was set up. In other 

words, these moves were taken so that groups of people who were interested in, who were familiar with 

the problem, who have a legitimate right to talk about it, could sit down, could have the benefit of 

research facilities, and hope to come up with an answer to this extremely important problem. 

 

With regard to the solution itself, I submit that there is only one question before this Legislature at the 

moment, and that question is this: are we going to attempt to spell out all the details now, before the 

Committee has had opportunity to complete its study, or are we going to wait until the Committee has 

completed its study, and at that point decide what action is to be taken? That is the only question before 

this Legislature: whether we are going to attempt to spell out the answers now that we want the 

Committee to find, or are we going to wait until the Committee has finished examination of the evidence 

and has made up its mind on it, and then we will take that into consideration in making up our minds? 

 

In this regard, I think the action taken at the Conference of the Association of Rural Municipalities this 

week confirms the wisdom of the resolution, confirms the fact that this is in line with the thinking of 

those delegates. This is 'The Leader-Post' of March 19, and they refer in one paragraph (page 3, I think it 

is) to this action. They said: 

 

"Initially, and with very brief discussion, the Convention tabled a calling for the Provincial 

Government not to proceed with the organization of larger municipalities until a vote of the areas 

concerned had been taken. 



 

March 20, 1958 

 
 

 

31 

"The resolution went before that Convention, saying that there will be no action taken until a vote has 

been held, and the Convention said, 'We are not prepared to deal with that now'. We will table it." 

 

In other words, the Convention (if is correct) is saying exactly the same thing that this resolution says, 

namely, that we will wait until this competent and representative group of people have finished their 

examination of their evidence. We will wait and see what conclusions they come to after that evidence, 

and at that point we will make up our minds as to how to proceed. That's all the resolution says; that's all 

that is before this Legislature at the moment. 

 

The members of the Opposition who declared themselves as being prepared to vote against it are, in fact 

then, voting against this suggestion, which again simply says we are going to wait until all the evidence 

is before us and then make up our minds, and not make up our minds before we have examined the 

opinions and evidence of the competent group of people who have examined that evidence. 

 

Mr. J.R. Barrie (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, I did not intend to take part in this debate, but some certain 

observations have been made in this House. I think possibly I have to disagree with the hon. Minister of 

Education when he outlined what he considered was the crucial matter in connection with this item at 

the present time. I don't think any member in this House will disagree that, at the present time, there is a 

great deal of concern throughout all of Saskatchewan regarding this matter of effecting, probably at a 

later date, larger municipal units of administration. Otherwise, there would not be the jockeying around 

with the original motion that was made in bringing in this amendment. It is a matter that is being 

particularly discussed at this time in the city of Regina, where members of all the Rural Municipalities 

are meeting. It is not a matter of the original motion. The original motion was not a matter of telling 

when, how or what; but it would have allayed concern that is being fostered in the minds of (I would 

say) the majority of the people in the province of Saskatchewan. For one reason — going back to the 

Conference which was held in 1956 — it was very evident, so far as I was concerned in attending that 

Conference, that there was a very decided movement and support by certain members who spoke to that 

Conference, for a larger unit of municipal administration and more centralization of power. The Baker 

Commission — the Royal Commission on Rural Life — had a certain observation or statement in that 

particular report, which has caused this concern to the people of the province of Saskatchewan, because, 

when they discussed the matter of the larger units of administration, they made mention, and they 

warned against having votes taken by the people concerned — the ratepayers of the province — that this 

possibly should be put in without 



 

March 20, 1958 
 

 

32 

a vote. I believe that is the basis of the concern which is being held particularly by the rural people at 

this particular time. 

 

If our friends opposite had now wanted a vote to be taken, or were opposed to a vote, then they would 

do exactly what has been done; but if they weren't opposed to a vote, there was nothing tied up in the 

original motion that would have said how it would have to be done, or when it had to be done. This 

report will come in, and they will consider the report. Certainly they will consider the report, as the hon. 

member for Humboldt mentioned. But the thing is, they have destroyed the intention of the original 

motion, and I am quite sure, from discussions I have heard in the last day or so, particularly in this city, 

that there is a great deal of concern amongst the rural people of this province, and amongst the 

representatives of the rural people of this province, the municipal councils. 

 

In view of that, Mr. Speaker, I will not support the motion as amended. 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to close the debate on this motion, it is very 

difficult for me to recognize this motion as the one I originally moved, some weeks ago. At the time I 

made the motion I did not feel for one moment that the simple little motion I moved on that occasion 

would generate the heat and the debate that it has in this Assembly. I felt at that time that every one of 

us, no matter what our political beliefs are, believed in the right of the people to a democratic vote in this 

province. But it appears from the actions of the members of the Assembly that they don't believe that the 

real way to get the wishes of the ratepayers, the people, of this province, is to ask them through a vote 

what they desire. It seems to me a year or two ago, when there was a very minor question, an issue 

placed before the Government of this province, the question of time was fought out. The Government 

was not prepared to put it into effect. They said that they wanted to see what the wishes of the people 

were in this regard, and they called a plebiscite. But here, on one of the most important issues that has 

faced the people of this province probably since 1905, with regard to local government organization in 

Saskatchewan, we are told that the Government of the province should not promise to the ratepayers and 

the people of this province a vote on this question. 

 

My main objection to the motion, as we have it before us at the present time is that, all well and good, 

speakers who have preceded me have mentioned the fact that the consideration of the report of the 

Continuing Committee, and also the fact that the Government is going to take consultation with local 

government organizations, is well understood and well believed to be a fact. My objection to the 

resolution is that, while they have gone that far, they don't even 



 

March 20, 1958 

 
 

 

33 

indicate that they are prepared to accept the advice that would be given either by the Committee or by 

the representatives of local organizations. All that is said is that they are going to consult with them. 

There is not even any guarantee that they will accept the recommendation of the local people after that 

consultation, and I think that is why as suggested by the member for Pelly a few moments ago, the 

municipal people at the present time, in spite of what the Minister of Education has said, have fear in 

their minds with regard to this issue, because the resolution as it appears here now has not given any 

guarantee whatsoever. In spite of what the Premier may have said in statements, it does not give any 

legislative guarantee that the recommendations of any group, local or otherwise, are going to be 

accepted. Even if they were to state that they desired to have a vote in this province, the Government is 

not prepared to accept that particular advice. 

 

That is the main basis on which I believe the members in this Legislature should oppose this motion that 

is before us at the present moment. Someone across the way said that, after all, we should meet with 

them and decide what is the best way of taking a vote. In other words, he is more or less agreeing that 

perhaps a vote should be taken. But actually the original motion did not rule out the possibilities of the 

Government consulting with anyone with regard to taking a vote or a plebiscite, and, of course, the 

amendment that was suggested here, this morning, would have left definitely to the local people their 

right to advise the Government on the method of taking that plebiscite. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! The hon. member may not speak on an amendment which was ruled out 

of order. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Well, I think there has been reference made to it before I spoke. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to make one or two things clear before I take my seat. When this motion was 

originally moved by myself (the original motion), I don't believe there was anything said in it that 

referred to a possible decision that might be made by the Continuing Committee. I don't believe that, at 

any time, either through the press or in the proceedings of this House, have I attacked personally any 

individual sitting on the Continuing Committee, in spite of the inferences that may have been made by 

certain members of this House that might have been pointed at myself in that connection. Never at any 

time have I objected personally to anyone being on this particular Committee; but I would like to leave 

this thought in your mind at this time, because of the fact that it has been brought up here this morning; 

only six out of the 14 on the actual Committee can be termed rural representatives, or rural people. 

There are the four Cabinet Ministers, who admittedly are not representatives of farm people. They may 

be in their constituencies, to a certain extent; but 



 

March 20, 1958 
 

 

34 

none of them are farmers or were farmers before coming into this House, at least not to my knowledge. 

The Urban Municipal representatives, all three are from towns or cities which, I think, will have very 

little chance or opportunity of being included in counties because of the size of those particular towns 

and cities. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Like Gull Lake! 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Gull Lake? I'm not sure of the population, but I think in recommendations that have 

been made, it has been suggested at conferences here, that possibly towns under 500 might be included 

under the possible county system; but towns larger than that, there is a very little possibility that they 

would be included. 

 

I am quite prepared to admit the three school trustees are people from rural areas of the province, and, of 

course, can be included in the six, along with the rural representatives who are actually practising 

farmers and ratepayers in rural municipalities in this province. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Has the hon. member forgotten the representatives of the health regions? 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — I maybe should have mentioned, Mr. Fahlman — that makes seven. That would make 

half the Committee composed of men who are representatives of rural areas or are possible ratepayers in 

rural areas of this province. So we have 50 per cent of the representation on that Committee, which 

includes representatives of the rural ratepayers in this province, considering a question which affects 

almost entirely the rural people of Saskatchewan. That is the only objection whatsoever I would have to 

that Committee. I have no objection to any particular individual being on it. I don't care what individuals 

are on this Committee to bring down the proposals that we are to deal with, and the people of this 

province are to deal with, providing the people themselves, and the ratepayers, have the final 

responsibility to decide what form of government administration we are going to have in Saskatchewan. 

 

As far as the consultation with local government organizations in the final analysis, and the statements 

that have been made by the Minister of Education, I would like to make reference again, as others have 

in this debate, to the larger school units. I know that in statements he made a few moments ago, he was 

probably making references to myself, but I believe I can state to the hon. gentleman that at no time to 

my knowledge have I actually stated direct opposition to the larger school units. 

 

Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 



 

March 20, 1958 

 
 

 

35 

Mr. Gardiner: — I have brought up objections to the system of administration and the method in which 

it was established in this province, and the method in which it is being handled in many ways in this 

province at the present time, but never have I made the statement that I am opposed to the basic idea of a 

larger school unit. In fact, I would remind my hon. friends across the way that it was no less a person 

than my father who put on the first enabling legislation to enable larger units to be established in the 

province of Saskatchewan back in 1927. 

 

Premier Douglas: — What happened that they weren't established? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Mr. Speaker, there is one indication I want to leave about the value the Government 

here gives to votes of the people in this province. It is an example I can take from my own area. I 

happened to be attending a meeting, which was considering the calling of a vote in the larger school unit 

area where I happened to live, a few years ago. Just prior to the taking of that vote, I was attending the 

meeting as secretary of our local school district. The school superintendent who was at that meeting 

made the statement that he thought it was a very democratic thing to have a vote on the units in that 

particular area. I agreed with him, but I said: "Isn't it true that a petition was presented to the 

Government, six years ago, asking for a vote on the larger unit question? He said, "Yes". I asked, "Why 

wasn't the vote taken?" He said, "They knew it would be defeated, and it would just be a waste of 

money." That was the statement that was made. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, on a point, of privilege . . . 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — What is the point of privilege? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Take your chair. Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — In the first place I think it is rather unfitting of a member to quote a public servant 

without any proof of the fact that this is what the public servant says; in the second place, may I point 

out that the petition which was referred to was a petition asking that a vote be held before the unit was 

established; it is not asking that that vote be held at any particular time. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — I don't know, Mr. Speaker. It was at a public meeting I'm speaking of, and I am quite 

certain I can remember the words that were said quite well. The gentleman made them, and I am quite 

certain if I spoke to him today, he would 



 

March 20, 1958 
 

 

36 

admit having made that reply to me at that particular meeting. And if we cannot make statements with 

regard to things that take place publicly in the province, I don't know what we are here for. That is 

actually what took place on that particular occasion. The vote was held, and I would just like to leave 

this idea in the Minister's mind that at no time during the course of that vote did I attend any meeting, 

did I ever indicate to anyone what my views were on the larger school unit issue. I think on three 

occasions I had people come into my office, not supporters of my party, but supporters of the party 

across the way. They were the only three that ever asked what my opinion on the larger school unit was, 

and I told them both the pros and cons — the only way I believe that it should be given to the people of 

this province. 

 

I think, on this particular issue that we are discussing at the present time, that if the Government of this 

province has the faith in the people that it claims to have, it should have supported the original motion. 

But as I have already states, there is no guarantee whatsoever; not only is there not a guarantee that a 

vote will be given, there is not even a guarantee that the advice of the groups that have been suggested in 

this resolution will be accepted by the Government of this province, that advice has been given. There is 

no guarantee of that in this resolution. So I can definitely state here now, Mr. Speaker, that for those 

reasons I definitely cannot support the motion as amended. 

 

The question being on the motion as amended, it was agreed to by 27 votes against 17. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 87 — An Act to amend The School Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, most of this Bill can be properly discussed in Committee of the Whole. I have just one or 

two comments to make on it at this time. 

 

One of the changes which. the Bill makes is to increase the amount of fees which a school district may 

charge a student attending, who is resident in another school district. Hon. members will be aware of the 

fact that the costs of providing education have gone up very considerably, and this is simply a move to 

make it possible for a district to recover something more like the actual cost. The previous maximum fee 

for a high school student was $70 per year; that is 



 

March 20, 1958 

 
 

 

37 

being increased to $100. The previous maximum fee for a public school youngster was based on 15 

cents per day, per family. This is being changed to 25 cents per day in respect of one child, or 50 cents 

per day in respect of two or more children. 

 

I would like to point out that this ceiling which is established here does not apply when one school 

district negotiates with another school district for taking care of the youngsters from that area. It applies 

only in those cases in which younger people go, on their own as it is, to another school district to obtain 

educational facilities there. There is no limit to the amount which can be charged when school district A 

sits down with school district B to say: "Well now, if you will look after the education of our youngsters, 

we will pay you a certain amount." They are not bound by these particular limits. 

 

There is one other matter that should be referred to. We have been having a little bit of difficulty in 

some cases, due to the fact that titles to property on which schools have been built have not been 

obtained. In many cases, years ago, land was given to the school district in order to build a school at that 

particular point; and in a few cases the title was not obtained. A school house has been built and 

established on that property for 20 or 30 years. We have had a few cases in which the lack of title has 

proved rather difficult. We had one case, for example, in, which the school board now discovered that 

they had title, and the man who had the title to the land simply moved the school off it and made a 

granary out of it. In another case, I believe, one person moved it off and started a store in it. I think this 

is plainly not right and, in consultation with the Attorney General's Department, they have suggested a 

method whereby the school district could get title to this land, and that is provided for here. There will 

be a House amendment inserting that action can be taken only with the approval of the Local 

Government Board. 

 

Those are the main items, Mr. Speaker; the rest, and they too, can be discussed in Committee. 

 

I would move second reading of the Bill. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to ask a question of the Minister. When he is speaking 

about the moving of buildings, I understand there are one or two cases where, back in the old days, the 

school was built not only as a school, but more or less the community centre. In some places where 

those schools have now been closed, the school district never has title . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! It seems to me the kind of question the member is raising is one which 

should 



 

March 20, 1958 
 

 

38 

be asked, properly, in Committee. We are just dealing with the principle of the Bill. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Well, I just wanted to know the recourse in this regard. He mentioned that that was 

one of the main things in the Bill — the matter of title. The titles, in these cases, have not been 

transferred to the schools and they are not in the name of the school; they are actually still in the name of 

the individual farmer. There have been attempts made to move the building and he has refused to allow 

it to be moved. Well, under this Bill would it give authority to the school board to insist upon that school 

being taken off the farmer's property, because there has never been any title in the name of the school as 

far as the Land Titles Office is concerned. The buildings on that property, I would imagine, would 

belong to the individual himself, and I would just like to know, first, if this could be a means of 

expropriation, of taking the buildings whether the farmer approved of it or not. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. Minister may answer the question when he closes the debate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — I am glad you said, Mr. Speaker, I may answer it, because for the life of me I really 

don't know what it is. He started at one place and went around . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! It is my duty to inform the Assembly the hon. Minister is about to close the 

debate. Anyone wishing to speak should do now. 

 

Mr. F.E. Foley (Turtleford): — I presume this discussion is referring to clause 53(a) of the Act. I 

would like a little clarification on this particular clause, Mr. Minister, where we have, in the principle of 

this clause, which states: "Expropriation of land on which school buildings are situated." 

 

Now I presume that the board of a district in this case refers to the local school board, and I wonder if 

there is any provision in this Act where the local school board and the board of the unit are not in 

agreement as to disposition of school property, if there is any clause in this particular portion to set up a 

Board of Mediation. I know of one or two cases where, as I say, there has not been agreement between 

the local board and the unit board on the disposition or rural school property. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd (closing): — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am still very confused over the question which the 

hon. member for Melville, (Mr. Gardiner) attempted to ask, and all I can say is to repeat that the only 

purpose of this section is to take care of 



 

March 20, 1958 

 
 

 

39 

those cases in which a school house or a school building has, for many years, been standing on a site 

which, it was supposed, had been the property of the school district, and it is now discovered that title 

had never been properly transferred. Everybody knows that the school was there and had been used for 

20 or 30 years and, in an ordinary sense, is the property of the school district; but because of this 

technicality it cannot get the control of it; and because of this technicality the man who is still the owner 

of the site can take the building and, as I understand it, he can use it as he sees fit. This is simply to 

provide a procedure whereby, with the approval of the Local Government Board, the school district will 

be able to obtain title to this particular property. 

 

With regard to the question of the member for Turtleford (Mr. Foley), this particular provision has 

nothing to do with that particular problem. 

 

(The Motion for second reading was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the 

next sitting.) 

 

Bill No. 90 — An Act to amend The Larger School Unit Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill to amend The Larger School Units Act, and again I think 

most of our discussion can be properly and profitably held in Committee. 

 

It does establish a slightly different date for nominations of Unit trustees in order to give a somewhat 

longer period of time between nomination and election. 

 

The main provision in the Bill is, however, that one which puts into effect the grant changes to which I 

referred, in speaking in the Budget debate. Since I stated the general principle at that time, Mr. Speaker, 

perhaps I do not need to do so at this time, and we can continue the discussion on it when it is before us 

in Committee. I would move second reading. 

 

(The Motion was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting.) 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o'clock p.m., without question put. 


