



















































Hansard: March 13, 1959


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

21st Day 

 

Friday, March 13, 1959 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. Stone (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I would 

like to draw the attention of this Assembly to a group of pupils from the North Park School in Saskatoon 

who are sitting in the west gallery. I am sure all members will join with me in welcoming them to the 

capital city, and we hope their stay here will be pleasant and profitable. 

 

TAX-RENTAL AGREEMENT 

 

Moved by Mr. K. Thorson (Souris-Estevan), seconded by Mr. E. Johnson (Kerrobert-Kindersley): 

 

That this Assembly requests the Government of Saskatchewan to again urge the Government of 

Canada to convene a Dominion-Provincial Conference at which special attention will be given to 

establishing a policy whereby the Provinces receive a larger share and a more equitable distribution of 

funds from the Government of Canada within the framework of the Tax-Rental Agreements. 

 

Mr. Kim Thorson (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, just eight years from now the people of Canada 

will be celebrating 100 years of Confederation. Now, and perhaps not even by 1967 will we have yet 

solved the financial problems involved in the confederation of Canada. In fact, on the national scene, 

this problem of fiscal and financial relations between the central government and the Province is rivalled 

in importance only by the lack of method we have in Canada for amending our constitution. It would be 

quite understandable in a federal country like ours if we have a great deal of controversy about what 

amendments should be made. 

 

I am sorry I do not have more time to spend on this question of constitutional amendments, but I wanted 

to point out that the only other issue on the national scene which is as important as the financial and 

fiscal relationships between the provinces and the Dominion, is this question of constitutional 

amendment in Canada. I don’t mean, of course, there isn’t a very strong case for federalism in Canada. 

At the time of Confederation the men who met to establish this new nation in British North America 

realized that, with a wide diversity of economic, social and cultural conditions spread over a wide and 

regionalized geographical area, a federal nation was the only possibility. These diversities of conditions 

are still with us today, and we still need a federal nation. but from the very beginning of Confederation 

to the present time, the financial arrangements made between the provinces and 



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

2 

the Dominion were never satisfactory. In fact, the province of Nova Scotia, almost before the ink was 

dry on the British North America Act, was beginning to negotiate for better terms, and quite 

understandably so, because the province of Nova Scotia was running large deficits in its budget 

immediately following Confederation. I think perhaps the prime reason for finding this dissatisfaction 

with financial arrangements stems first of all from the stipulations laid down in the confederation 

agreements, and secondly, of course, from the fact that the British North America Act, in Section 92, 

allocated to the Provinces exclusive jurisdiction and, therefore, responsibility for things like roads, 

health services, welfare services, education, and local matters. Also the British North America Act 

provides the Provinces with financial resources, to meet these responsibilities, only the direct taxation 

which is levied within the province. These provisions may have been reasonable at the time of 

Confederation almost 100 years ago, but I submit they are not reasonable today. I do not blame the men 

who made the agreement which brought Confederation into being; they could not foresee the 

tremendous changes that were about to take place in the twentieth century. I don’t want to take a long 

time to dwell on these changes, but I want to call members’ attention to the fact that governments play a 

much more important role in all fields of endeavour today than they did 100 years ago. In a book 

published in 1946, written by Mr. Wilfrid Eggleston, called ‘The Road to Nationhood’, he has a table 

which sets out the expenditures on various government functions in 1867, and the expenditures made in 

1937 — I want to deal with the period following 1937 later on. But it is interesting to note what a great 

changes was made in Government responsibilities over that period of time. For instance — and these are 

all combined expenditures of Dominion, provincial and local governments — in 1867, on highways and 

transportation, Canada through all its governments, spent $9 million; in 1937, $240 million; on Public 

Health and Welfare (including unemployment relief), $1.2 million at Confederation, $284 million in 

1937. All of the other expenditures made up $12.3 million in 1867, and $352 million in 1937. This gives 

a total of government expenditures in Canada at the time of Confederation of $25 million, but in 1937 

not $25 million, but $1 billion. This means that in 1867, our governments’ per capita expenditure was 

$7.50 per person, but in 1937 we were already spending $90 per capita on government services. As a 

percentage of national income: in 1867, 8 per cent; by 1937, 26 per cent of our national income was 

expended in government services. 

 

I mention these figures just to point out the increasingly important role of governments in all fields of 

endeavour today, as compared with almost 100 years ago. I do not need to dwell on the fact that because 

the British North America Act, our constitution, allocated to the provinces jurisdiction and responsibility 

for highways, education, public health and welfare services, that means the expenditures and 

responsibilities of provincial and local governments have increased much more than the expenditures of 

the Federal Government in Canada. This is because the increasingly important role of governments is 

felt in these particular fields — roads, education, health and welfare. 

 

In fact, even by 1920 when the Hon. C. A. Dunning was presenting his budget address in this Assembly, 

this is what he said, and I want to quote it: 



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

3 

The Dominion Government does not render to the people of Canada anything like the volume and 

value of service performed by the provincial and municipal bodies of the Dominion. 

 

If that were true in 1920, we are all aware that it is infinitely more true in 1959. In fact, the last 30 years 

have demonstrated very dramatically how unsatisfactory the financial arrangements of Confederation 

were. Those members whose memory goes back to the 1930’s do not need to be reminded of the disaster 

of those days. Many provinces were bankrupt, and Saskatchewan was one of the hardest hit of all. These 

conditions gave rise to the appointment in 1937 of the Rowell-Sirois Commission, a royal commission 

on Dominion-Provincial relations, which did a very exhaustive study, particularly of the financial 

arrangements of Confederation. Though its recommendations have not yet been accepted in total, the 

study of this Commission, the recommendations it made, have had a very significant effect on 

Dominion-Provincial financial relations since the early part of the war years. 

 

I do not want to take time to deal with the war-time tax agreements between the Dominion Government 

and the provincial governments, except to say that, in the post-war period, the tax-rental agreements 

between the Dominion Government and the provincial governments have been much better than any 

previous financial arrangements between the Federal and Provincial Governments, but they are still not 

satisfactory. The present tax-sharing agreement, which was established in the last days of the Liberal 

Government before the June election of 1957, and which is still in force, represents some 20 years of 

negotiation and compromise and evolution in the Dominion-Provincial financial arrangements. Under 

this Agreement the provinces rent to the Federal Government exclusive jurisdiction in the matter of 

collections from person income tax, corporation income taxes, and succession duties. I should say, of 

course, it is only the provinces in the Agreement who have rented these fields to the Federal 

Government. Then the payments are made from these collections to the provinces, on the basis of giving 

to the provinces 10 per cent of the income tax, 9 per cent of the corporation tax and 50 per cent of the 

succession duties. The allocation to the provinces is based on the average yield of these three taxes in 

the two provinces where the yield is highest. 

 

Of course, there have been some alterations in the agreement since the new Government was elected in 

1957. I just want to say a word about that. The new Conservative Government maintained the 

agreement, and all members will recall the very extensive and wide-spread talk of Conservative 

candidates in that election campaign on the need for more money being made available to provincial and 

local governments in the tax-sharing agreements. As a matter of fact, these Conservative spokesmen 

were in no doubt of the need for more money to provincial and local governments. When they were 

elected they maintained the tax agreement. They had said a good deal about calling a Dominion-

Provincial Conference immediately they were elected, but as a matter of fact they did not call a 

Conference, until November, 1957, although the election had been held in June and this new 

Government was sworn into office in July. 



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

4 

Then, Mr. Speaker, when the provincial Premiers and their assistants went to the Provincial-Dominion 

Conference, the Federal Government, instead of presenting to them a program which would provide 

more revenue for the local governments and the provincial governments said — and we really very well 

the Prime Minister saying that he was prepared at this Conference “to listen and to learn.” Quite a 

change from the days just prior to the election of 1957 when no Conservative spokesman was in any 

doubt about the need for more revenues to provincial and local governments! But by November, 

apparently, their knowledge had changed a good deal, and they were now willing “to listen and to 

learn.” The end result of the Conference, of course, was that the provincial Premiers were told by the 

Federal Government to go home, and to wait to be called to another Dominion-Provincial Conference 

early in the new year, 1958. but of course the new year 1958 is now the old year 1958, and no 

Dominion-Provincial Conference has yet been called. As a matter of fact, the Minister of Finance, rather 

than call the provinces together in a conference, simply announced a little over a year ago, by telegram 

to the Premiers, that the formula for payments under the Tax Rental Agreements would be changed from 

the 10-9-50 formula to the 13-9-50 formula, and he has announced this again for the coming year. The 

attitude of the Federal Government since its election in June, 1957, an attitude which the Conservative 

spokesmen condemned when the Liberals were in power, is still to say to the provinces: “This is what 

we offer you; you can take it, or leave it.” No consultation! No new Dominion-Provincial conference to 

work out terms and arrangements! 

 

That’s why I think this calling of a Dominion-Provincial Conference is overdue, because the Federal 

Government, after all, promised they would do it, and the need for more revenues to provincial and local 

governments is as great today as it was two years ago, when the Conservative Party was campaigning 

for votes in Canada. 

 

Three essential improvements are needed in the present tax-sharing agreements. First of all, the 

provinces should have a larger share of these tax collections than the present formula allows. There can 

be no justification for the Federal Government receiving the lion’s share of these tax collections when 

provincial and municipal responsibilities are increasing at such a rapid rate under the provisions of our 

constitution, the B.N.A. Act. As a matter of fact, while our responsibilities on the local level have been 

increasing so rapidly, the Federal Government’s responsibility, except in the field of national defence, 

have not been increasing so rapidly. I submit that, while large expenditures are made by our Federal 

Government on national defence, a good portion of these expenditures have been wasted. I think the 

money might better have been spent providing for economic security and economic improvement in 

Canada. I do not believe the expenditures which we have made on obsolete armaments — the most 

recent example, of course, is the money we spent on developing the Arrow, which will not now be 

produced; these expenditures have not made Canada more secure in the world. I submit if there had been 

a good portion of this money spent to solve our own economic problems, it would have made Canada 

more secure not only at home, but in the world community. The expenditures of these moneys on 

obsolete articles has not only not 



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

5 

brought us security, has not solved our problems internationally, but it has left unsolved a number of our 

domestic problems. 

 

In addition to a larger share of the Dominion-Provincial tax-sharing agreement being made available to 

the provinces, there is also a need for more stability in these annual payments to the provinces. I submit 

that one way to achieve this stability is to guarantee to every province that in any future year it will not 

receive less than it received in the year just past. 

 

The other improvement that is needed in the tax-rental agreements is to come to an agreement on 

arrangements whereby the provinces will receive not only a larger share of these tax funds, but a more 

equitable distribution of these funds among the provinces. Payments to all of the provinces should be 

based on the yield of these three taxes that are rented, on the highest province, not on the eaverage in the 

two highest provinces. And there should be not discrimination against one province as opposed to 

another in the payments from the collection of these taxes. 

 

In addition to these improvements in the Agreement itself, we need to have the Federal Government go 

another step further in the field of Dominion-Provincial financial relations. It seems to me that the 

payments made to the provinces from the central government in our Confederation of Canada ought to 

be based on the fiscal need of the provinces. I spoke earlier of the wide diversity of conditions in 

Canada. One of the widest diversities is in economic resources and economic development. Some 

provinces are much wealthier than other provinces. The best measure of the wealth of one province as 

against another is the personal incomes which the citizens of various provinces are able to earn, and 

there is a wide variation in personal incomes in Canada as between one province and another. where the 

personal incomes of the less wealthy provinces are lower, provincial tax levies yield less revenues to 

provincial governments. This is true for taxes such as sales taxes, motor vehicle and license fees, which 

are charged by provinces. Of course, if these collections are lower, and the personal incomes of people 

in those provinces are lower it means that their services are sub-standard and do not come up to the 

average of services in other parts of Canada. Therefore, federal grants should be paid to less wealthy 

provinces to make up the deficiency in provincial tax yields resulting from lower personal income in the 

less wealthy provinces. 

 

The resolution which I present to the Assembly asks for special attention, at a Dominion-Provincial 

Conference to the arrangements for the tax-rental agreement. There are a number of items which could 

be included on the agenda at such a Conference. We think of the need in Canada today to coordinate our 

national development programs in such fields as power and fuel; soil and water conservation; renewable 

resources; roads and highways. The second item might be the whole question of agricultural marketing 

and income. Thirdly on the agenda could be included the need to expand the national hospitalization 

service to include T.B. patients and 



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

6 

mentally-ill patients. Also on the agenda should be placed the whole question of unemployment in 

Canada, and the possibilities for removing the categories for public assistance programs where the 

provincial governments are assisted by the Federal Government. Of course, another item would be the 

whole question of municipal finance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wanted to say quite a bit about this question of municipal finance, particularly the 

problems of raising capital funds for local public works. I am not going to take as long as I had intended, 

because I recall that, a year ago, the member for Swift Current (Mr. Wood) have a very thorough 

discussion of this during that session. I don’t need to impress upon the members of the Assembly, and 

on the dedicated public servants in local governments in Canada and in Saskatchewan particularly, how 

difficult it is for us in all municipalities, and particularly in this province, to raise money for capital 

expenditures. Interest rates are very high, and in some cases the debenture market will not accept the 

debentures of municipal corporations from Saskatchewan. The result of this difficulty in the capital field 

has been that local governments, more and more in Saskatchewan, finance public works, capital 

investments programs, out of their current revenues. They attempt to market their debentures locally, 

and we know there is not a very large market for the purchase of debentures within our province alone. 

 

Of course the Provincial Government has tried to come to the assistance of local governments by 

purchasing a good many of these issues of school boards, hospital boards, and of some of our cities, 

towns and villages. But provincial purchase of bonds and provincial guarantees of bonds do not increase 

the availability of money for capital expenditures, because we must go outside of the province to bring 

capital funds in for these purposes. Also the Provincial Government already has heavy obligations — 

telephone service, power and gas service — where money must be borrowed. 

 

We must, in this field, turn to the Federal Government, which has not only the constitutional power to 

meet the problem, but, because of its role in our national economy, it could influence the direction of 

capital investment, and it should take a more active role in directing our investment for the socially 

necessary expenditures: schools, hospitals, roads, and other local works. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I began by saying that in just eight years we will be celebrating our Centenniary in Canada. 

And I have been talking about he problems of municipalities. This gives me an opportunity to make an 

announcement to the members of this Assembly. I was just informed, this morning, that another 

celebration will be taking place not eight years from now, but this year, in the province of 

Saskatchewan. The community of Estevan, just 60 years ago this year, was incorporated as a 

municipality under the laws of our land at that time. Very quickly it was incorporated as a town rather 

than a village, and just two years ago the city of Estevan was incorporated. The members will recall the 

ceremony that took place in the Premier’s office at that time. 



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

7 

May I take this opportunity to invite all the members of the Legislature to be with us in Estevan this 

year, to celebrate our Diamond Jubilee. The main celebrations will take place during the last days of 

June and the first days of July, at our Exhibition and Fair in the city of Estevan. 

 

I mention the fact that Centennary Year is very near because it seems to me that, if we are to celebrate 

that event of 100 years of Confederation in Canada, if we are to celebrate it with a growing pride in our 

Canadian citizenship, we ought to begin to plan now for increased financial grants to local governments 

by increasing revenues to the provinces within the Tax-Sharing Agreement. We also need to plan now 

for long-term public investment programs in resource development and in social development, for 

schools, hospitals, roads and housing. Our aim as Canadians ought to be to raise living standards for all 

Canadians, without discrimination, regardless of which part of Canada they may live in. This calls for 

more than just planning, essential though that is. This calls for action and co-operation on the part of 

local governments, provincial governments, and the Federal Government. I want to emphasize again 

that, since Confederation, the responsibility of provincial and local governments has increased much 

more than the financial responsibilities of the Federal Government and, at the same time, the revenues 

available to the Federal Government have increased much more than have the revenues available to 

local and provincial governments, which are limited to means of direct taxation only. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by Mr. Johnson, the resolution as it appears under my name 

on the Order Paper. 

 

Mr. Eldon Johnson (Kerrobert-Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to associate myself with this 

resolution by being privileged to second it. The mover has given a very comprehensive resume of the 

Federal-Provincial fiscal relationships that have existed since Confederation, and, as he has pointed out, 

these relationships, in pursuance of the principles laid down at Confederation, have endured even though 

many things have changed since that time. 

 

I think it is fair to the Fathers of Confederation to state that they envisaged placing the heaviest financial 

responsibilities on the Federal Government and, as pointed out by the mover, there has been a very 

distinct and very important change in the proportion of the expenditures that are expected of the 

provincial, federal and municipal governments. I think the principles which they have laid down have 

endured, and I think it is not the principle that is at this time under question. 

 

I would like to quote from an article in the ‘Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science’ by 

Prof. W.F. Waines, of the University of Manitoba. He says: 

 

Financial arrangements should be such that each area of government must be able to meet the 



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

8 

obligations constitutionally and politically imposed upon them to a level which is generally accepted 

as a minimum Canadian standard, without unduly high taxation in one region relatively to another, and 

with a tax structure which will distribute the burden of financing minimum services of national 

importance equitably among the taxpayers of the country. 

 

I certainly concur in that statement, and I think there is general concurrence in this remark. I would like 

to read further from Prof. Waines: 

 

Financial resources should be redistributed to the point where minimum standards can be maintained 

either by grants or by direct expenditures. 

 

It is these principles which should be discussed at any future Federal-Provincial Conference. 

 

I would like to comment specifically on the matter of social service, and by that I will include all these 

matters such as education, welfare and health. We can see that the Federal Government has engaged to a 

certain extent in these things. However, anyone familiar with municipal finance is well familiar that we 

are expecting far more of our social services than we did years ago. At the time of Confederation it was 

regarded as a personal responsibility to assume responsibility for health, education and welfare. Now it 

is commonly regarded that those things should be public responsibilities, and therein lies the chief 

change in the relationship between the federal and provincial governments. 

 

We can notice the important things the Federal Government has done, such as contributing towards old-

age pensions, hospitalization and so on. This principle has been subscribed to by the Federal 

Government. We might ask ourselves, then, what is the case for increased financial support to the 

provinces? We might say that it is this — and we could look first at the personal incomes of people in 

different regions, because I think it is accepted that there should be equality between regions, as Prof. 

Waines has outlined. We notice disparity in personal income between the Maritime provinces and 

Ontario, and as between Saskatchewan and Ontario. We notice for the year 1956, the personal income 

for the people of Saskatchewan was $1,123, whereas in Ontario it was over $1,600. The average for 

Government for 1956 was $1,395. certainly the personal income is a gauge of a tax which people are 

able to support, in supporting their public services, and I think there is agreement that we should be able 

to maintain comparative standards at no excessive taxes to any particular region. 

 

I think it is germane to the discussion at this time to remark on the exports from Canada. I think it is 

well-known in this Legislature that wheat is the export of second greatest value from Canada, having a 

value of $573 million in 1956, which is second only to newsprint. I think it is also well-known by this 

Legislature that the province of Saskatchewan is the greatest producer of wheat in Canada, and yet we 

notice the disparity in income. 



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

9 

I think it is also germane to this resolution to point out the effects of tariffs on the income of people in 

Saskatchewan compared to the most industrialized region, that of Ontario. There is no dispute that tariffs 

benefit Ontario people to the detriment of the people in Saskatchewan. I think, therefore, that there is a 

case in the matter of income for not only increased aid to provinces, but greater particular assistance to 

this province. 

 

Also I think it is germane to observe, something that this province has observed, the recent municipal 

conventions, rural and municipal. It is interesting to observe that these organizations, in endeavouring to 

maintain the standard of services which they wish to provide, are themselves applying to their senior 

governments, the Provincial Governments. 

 

I think it is also important to observe in this motion the recent budget debate. I don’t intend to dwell 

upon that, Mr. Speaker, except to draw attention to the fact that the budget gives an outline of the 

intended expenditures for the province for the coming year, and no speaker on this side nor the opposite 

side indicated any desire to reduce any service that the Government was intending to province, and no 

speaker proposed any method by means of which more finances could accrue from taxes to this 

Provincial Government. I think, therefore, the conclusion that we must come to is that this Government, 

through a Federal-Provincial Conference, must apply for a better financial arrangement for the province, 

in order that the social services that the people of this province expect can be developed and may be 

maintained at a satisfactory level without excessive taxation. 

 

Mr. E. I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

[Debate adjourned] 

 

FREIGHT RATES AND TRANSPORTATION 

 

Moved by Mr. Brown (Bengough), seconded by Mr. Meakes (Touchwood): 

 

That this Assembly, recognizing the impact which rising freight rates have had upon the economy of 

the province, 

 

(1) commends the Government of Saskatchewan for its efforts to limit the rise in freight rates and to 

secure a more equitable freight rate structure, and 

 

(2) urges the Government to continue its efforts to alleviate the inequitable impact of increases in 

transportation costs on the Western and Maritime provinces. 

 

Mr. A. L. S. Brown (Bengough): — Mr. Speaker, the subject matter of the resolution which I propose 

to introduce can be considered possibly as equal in importance to that which has just been discussed by 

the two previous speakers on the previous debate. They both date back to 



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

10 

the age of Confederation. In fact the one to which I refer dates back to many years previous to 

Confederation, and both of them have had a very serious impact upon our society and the development 

of the type of economy here in Canada and particularly in western Canada. 

 

The resolution which I propose to introduce recognized four basic factors, I believe. It recognizes, first, 

that freight rates have had an impact upon our economy not only in this province but in Canada as a 

whole. Secondly, we recognize and we want to commend this Provincial Government for its efforts to 

limit the rise that has taken place in freight rates on every occasion the railways have asked for this 

increase. Thirdly, we want to sincerely commend them for their efforts to secure a more equitable freight 

rate structure here in Canada. Fourthly, we ask through this resolution that this Assembly urge the 

Government to continue their efforts to alleviate the inequalities that are created by our present freight 

rate structure here in Canada, particularly as these rates affect western Canada and the Maritime 

provinces. 

 

Recognizing the impact that freight rates have had on our economy, recognizing the impact the 

transportation system has had upon our economy here in Canada, I think we have only got to realize 

that, as long as the railways push from the east to western Canada and as the branch lines branch out 

from these railways, it made it possible for western Canada to develop. It was the result of a 

transportation system being built into western Canada that made it possible for western Canada to 

become known as the granary of the world. As this transportation system was pushed westward, as I say 

it had an effect upon our economy, but it is equally true that it had effects upon the social developments 

that took place here in western Canada, and today it is still having the same effect both on our economy 

and upon our social life as well. 

 

There is no one who is not affected by the transportation system, by the effects of the transportation 

system, by the cost of a transportation system. It determines to a large degree the development which 

will take place in any given area in Canada, and by virtue of our position here in western Canada and by 

virtue of the fact that we have had to pay high costs for that transportation system into this province and 

out of this province, has no doubt had its effects upon the fact that we have had to pay high costs for that 

transportation system into this province and out of this province, has no doubt had its effects upon the 

fact that we have had not the industrial development that has occurred in other parts of Canada. So our 

transportation is still having its effect and I feel and I think the Government in its presentation has 

expressed the desire and the hope that there can be worked out a means by which the transportation 

system can work in the interest of all the people of Canada, and can be so adjusted that we can have 

developed here in western Canada an economy comparable to that in any other part of Canada; that we 

can have developed in the Maritime Provinces an economy comparable to other parts of Canada. 

Because of this importance of the transportation system and particularly the rail transportation system to 

our economy, I think that we here in this Legislature are justified in commending this Government on 

the actions they have taken. 

 

You will recall, Mr. Speaker, that back in 1946, following the war, the C.P.R. and the C.N.R. (but 

mainly through the C.P.R.) made application for increased freight rates and that, during the ensuing 

years, there has been 



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

11 

continuous applications for increased freight rates before the Board of Transport Commission. Going 

back to 1946, at that time the railways asked from the Board of Transport Commission an increase of 30 

per cent. They were granted at that time, not 30 per cent it is true, but were granted 21 per cent. Through 

the ensuing years there have been continuous applications for increased freight rates and continuous 

approving of them by the Board of Transport Commission, with the net result that, from 1946 up until 

the present time, there has been imposed an increase of 157 per cent in our freight rates, on the average. 

That is to say that, on the average, we are paying today 157 per cent more on our freight rates than we 

pain in 1946 and 1947. 

 

The Minister of Municipal Affairs yesterday gave us some figures in respect to this article in which 

there has been much more than 157 per cent increase, and to compensate for that it is equally true there 

are some articles on which the freight rate has not increased as much; but on the total rates they have 

increased 157 per cent. The significant think about it is that, in general — not in all particular cases but 

in general — they have been horizontal, they have been across-the-board increases. Because they have 

been across-the-board increases on general freight they have had a more serious impact upon our 

economy and upon the economy of the Maritimes than they would have, possibly, on other parts of our 

Canadian economy. 

 

Because it appeared, at the time of the first request for increase following the war, that it was going to 

have a serious impact upon our economy, the Government of Saskatchewan set up what they term their 

Freight Information Service Division, established in April 1948. It was established originally under the 

Department of Co-operation and Co-operative Development, and later transferred to the Department of 

Municipal Affairs under the Minister of that Department. 

 

This department for freight information and services was set up more than for the simple purpose of 

combating that proposed increase in freight rates of 1946. It was set up so that a study could be made of 

our whole transportation system in Canada and in Saskatchewan as to how we could make the most 

effective and best use of all our means of transportation. Throughout the years since it was established 

this freight information service has appeared when there was application for increase by the railways 

before the Board of Transport Commission, and it has made a contribution in the appeals which have 

gone from the Board of Transport Commission to the Federal Government. I feel that this division and 

the service rendered by it, and the Government by its representations before the board of Transport 

Commission and before the federal Government, have prevented what might have been considerably 

greater increases in freight rates than have already taken place. 

 

Not only has the Government appeared and place the case before the Board of Transport Commissioners 

but, in addition to that, you will recall, Mr. Speaker, that there was appointed a royal Commission, under 

Chief Justice Doiron, to study all aspects of the transportation systems in Canada, through the medium 

of freight information services and through the Provincial Government, they have made a submission 

and through that medium were able to place before that Commission many of the views held by the 

people of western Canada. I think that in that Commission’s report, as we read it, you will realize 



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

12 

that the solution to this problem is not a simple but a complex one, and one that cannot be solved simply 

by saying that we should have equalized freight rates, one that cannot be solved simply by saying that 

we need freight rates subsidization. 

 

I think that this illustrates both the report and the submissions which have been made by this 

Government to the Board of Transport Commission and indicates clearly that what we need in Canada is 

an equitable freight rate structure which is considerably different from simply an equalization of the 

freight. I don’t think that it would do us too great a good if we simply said that between given points of 

the same distance that the freight rates shall be the same in all parts of Canada. I don’t think that would 

solve our problem. What I do think and do believe is that we have to look at our whole economy and 

decide on a planned basis how we are going to develop the economy, and then on that basis develop a 

freight rate structure that will make it possible for that to be felt in a most effective and efficient manner. 

To do this may require subsidization, and I believe that it will require subsidization; but I am not adverse 

to suggesting at this time that if through the means of utilizing subsidization we can create in Canada an 

equitable freight rate structure, that will be in the interests of Canadian economy. This is not the only 

industry that would be subsidized. Industries which I am convinced are not as important as our 

transportation industry in this province have been subsidized, and I refer to such industries as the gold 

mining industry. 

 

I am not suggesting that I could come up with all the answers to what we would have when we have got 

this equitable freight rate structure. It is true some efforts have been made towards what I would 

consider an equitable freight rate structure. For instance, there has been established in Canada for a 

goodly number of years what we have commonly referred to as the Crow’s Nest Pass Rates which has 

created some equity in so far as our transportation of our grain is concerned. It is true that the railways 

got considerable and, possibly, profitable concessions for the fact that they put into effect this particular 

rate structure as it applies to grain and certain other commodities. I think we must accept the fact that his 

was a form of subsidization. I think that we must accept the fact that, if we had had to pay the actual 

transportation costs of our grain out of western Canada on to the markets of the world, it would have 

delayed the development of the wheat basic industry in Canada, and in some areas in the province of 

Saskatchewan it might possibly have made it impossible. So here was a means of which an endeavour 

was made to create equity, and I suggest that by so doing the railways did in fact receive subsidization 

from the Federal Government of that day. 

 

There are some other forms of equities within our freight rate structure that are developed; but they are 

developing, I feel, on a non-planned basis. I refer to those freight rate charges which are commonly 

called ‘agreed charges’. Through this medium the railways are making it possible for some commodities 

to be moved at a lower rate and at a lower cost to the consumer, but as I say, these are being developed 

on a non-planned basis and do not necessarily fit in with our entire economy, do not necessarily fit in 

with our other means of transportation. I think that to arrive at a freight rate structure premium in 

Canada we must take into consideration the necessity and the need of our other transportation systems, 

such as the trucking industry, the airways and seaways as they exist in Canada. 



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

13 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that railways in Canada have a responsibility not only to themselves but to the 

people of Canada. I think that was clearly set out in the Railway Act when it was first inaugurated. I 

think that it might be of interest to note that, at the last application for a freight increase in Canada, the 

rules of the game were changed in two respects. First of all, they asked for a freight rate increase before 

the need arose; they asked for a freight rate increase in the expectation of an increase in their labour bill. 

The second rule of the game that was changed was that, on previous occasions, the C.P.R. was used as 

the yardstick and in this case it was the C.N.R. that was used as the yardstick for the simple reason that 

the C.N.R. was showing a greater deficit, and would show a greater deficit under the labour increases 

than would the C.P.R. I suggest that the railways have a responsibility to the people of Canada and in 

carrying out this responsibility they must look at the interests of the people of Canada and not at the 

interest of themselves alone or of any segment of our economy and, therefore, realizing the importance 

of a transportation system in Canada, realizing the impact which a continuation of the present trend can 

have upon particularly western Canada and the Maritime Provinces, I am pleased to move and ask for 

your unanimous endorsation of the motion which appears under my name on the Order Paper. 

 

Mr. Frank Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, on rising to second the motion moved by the hon. 

Member for Bengough, I think we will all agree that he gave a precise resume of the necessity of 

equitable freight rates. Seeing that, through the years and again recently, the railways are endeavouring 

to have this agreement done away with, I would like to deal for a few minutes with the history of the 

Crow’s Nest Pass Agreement, on the necessity of it, and on the falsity of the arguments of the railway 

companies which they are endeavouring to put forward as to why the freight rates of the Crow’s Nest 

Agreement should be done away with. 

 

I think that we should go back a little way into the history, the background, loading up to this 

Agreement, back into the history of what is now known as western Canada, back into the 1850’s, back 

into those days in our history books when it was known — I think most of us will remember the phrase 

— ‘fifty-four-forty-or-fight’. At that time the United States had already penetrated into the western part 

of the North American continent with railways. They were now turning their eyes northward into what is 

known now as the western prairies and British Columbia. At that time there was a colony settled in 

British Columbia. These people were not all of British origin, and although they were wanting to 

become a part of Canada, they felt they were in a bargaining position to do a little pressuring on Canada. 

By 1880, things were coming to a head. It might be interesting to read just a little extract of a letter that 

Sir John A. MacDonald, then Prime Minister of Canada, wrote to a friend of his, in which he said: 

 

Many thanks for your letter of the 26th, giving me an account of your conversation with . . . (he doesn’t 

say who it was with) . . . “It is quite evident to me, not only through this conversation but from advice 

from Washington, that the United States are



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

14 

resolved to do all they can, short of war, to get possession of the western prairies, and we must take 

immediate major steps to counteract it. One of the first things to be done is to show unmistakably our 

resolve to build a Pacific Railway. 

 

In the next 10 years, the Federal Government passed the Railways Act, and several railway companies 

built portions of the railway. By 1881, the C.P.R. was formed. This was part of the agreement — the 

Federal Government had agreed that British Columbia was to come into Confederation. They were to 

start a railway within two years and finish it in ten. Ten years was now practically up, and British 

Columbia was becoming very impatient. 

 

The C.P.R. was incorporated to do two things, or for two reasons: first, to complete the proportion of 

railway not already built, and second, under the Agreement, they were to operate the entire line in 

perpetuity. From this Agreement which the C.P.R. had signed with the Federal Government, they had 

several benefits. The first benefit was to receive all the ownership of any railways that had already been 

built by the Federal Government. The Federal Government was to pay a grant of $25 million to the 

railways. The Federal Government was to give 25 million acres of land; special care must be taken that 

this land was good land, and water was not to be counted in the Agreement. This land was to be in a belt 

24 miles on either side of the main line of the Railway. The Railway was to be able to receive all the 

ground necessary for road-beds, station wells and station grounds, free, whether it was land other than 

their own or not. The Government was to extinguish any titles — Indian titles — to the land and the 

road-bed. Then the Government agreed to build a 715-mile length of railway from Selkirik to Emerson 

at a cost of over $37 million. The C.P.R. was to have no duty on the purchased steel rails, and also a 

wide range of materials for the building of the railway. They were to have tax exemptions on practically 

all materials and on property for 20 years. No other railroads would be allowed to build within 20 years. 

Then it gave all these some previous benefits to any side-lines that were built by the C.P.R. 

 

Let us just take a look at what this Agreement has done for the C.P.R. It has now become a giant 

company, a company with assets of over $2 ½ billion; it has investments and over 20 controlled 

companies — that is, companies in which they own the controlling shares. They have investments in 

over ten uncontrolled companies. They are leasing over 30 railway companies either in Canada or in the 

United States. When you look at the financial report of the C.P.R. we find these figures: from 1928 to 

1957, they had net earnings of over $950 million; they paid in dividends for that same period of time, 

1928 to 1957, over $484 million. 

 

We come to the Crow’s Nest Pass Agreement again. By 1977, the C.P.R. was anxious to build a railway 

from Lethbridge to Nelson, B.C. This railroad was to lead into the rich gold fields in the Kootenay 

Valley, which is a heavy mineral area. But at this time (in 1877) they still needed financial assistance, 

and they were anxious to get financial assistance from the Federal Government to get into this area, 

because at this time the railway companies of the United States were anxious to get railways into this 

rich area of the Kootenay Valley.



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

15 

The Government was anxious to sign the Agreement for another reason. They felt that the only way they 

were going to get the western plains settled was to have some concessions for agricultural products to be 

shipped out, and the articles the farmers required to be shipped in. With the long freight haul, no water 

competition, they felt the only way they could get these western plains settled was through an 

Agreement with the C.P.R. 

 

It might be interesting to note what the C.P.R. said at this time. As early as 1897, the C.P.R. was 

impressed with the importance of the diversity of travel and of territories, and the assurance of their 

earning position. The Company’s Annual Report for that year stated in part: 

 

While the results of the harvest will always be a matter of great importance in affecting the earnings of 

the Company, the past year has shown that it is already comparatively independent of the crop in any 

one province, or in any one season. This is, in part, due to the vast expanse and great diversity in 

character of the territory covered by the lines of the Company, and in part to the development of mines 

and other industries not affected by those costs. 

 

They went on in that Report to discuss the foreign invasion of this rich area; to prevent the invasion by 

foreign mining companies of a district rich in precious metals and other natural resources: 

 

Your directors have secured the control of the charter of the Columbia and Kootenay Railway Company, 

and agreed with the Provincial Government that a railway shall be built about 30 miles in length, during 

the present season, to permit navigation waters to the Kootenay Lake from those of the Columbia River, 

thus opening a line for steamboat and railway communications of more than 250 miles. 

 

Under this agreement, the Government agreed to subsidize this 360 miles at the rate of $11,000 a mile. 

When the railway was finished, they finally paid the $3,404,720. In return, the Company agreed to 

several things, which I am not going to read completely, but I will read several things on which they 

agreed, and which I think pertain to this resolution: 

 

That as soon as the railway is open for travelling to the Kootenay Lakes, local rates imposed on the 

railway and on any other railway used in connection therewith and now hereafter owned or lease by, or 

operated on account of the company south of the company’s main line in B.C., as well as the rates 

between any points on such line or lines of railway, on any point of the main line of the company 

throughout Canada, or any other railway owned or leased by, or operated on account of the company, 

including its



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

16 

lines of steamers in British Columbia, shall be first approved by the Governor in Council, or by the 

Railway Commission, if and when such Commission establishes by law, shall at all times thereafter 

from time to time, be subject to revision . . .” 

 

This is really what they agreed to: 

 

That a reduction shall be made in the general rates and tolls of the Company as now charged, or as 

contained in its present freight tariff, whichever rates are now the lowest, for carloads or otherwise, upon 

the classes of merchandise hereinafter mentioned, westbound, from and including Fort William and all 

points east of Fort William on the Company’s railway to all points west of Fort William on the 

Company’s main line, or on any line of railway throughout Canada owned or leased by or operated on 

account of the Company, whether the shipment is by all rail line or by lake and rail, such reduction to be 

to the extent of the following percentages respectively, namely: . . .” 

 

I am not going to read the long list of articles. They have all been wiped out by the Railway Commission 

with the exception of grains. They go on: 

 

And that no higher rates than such reduced rates or tolls shall be hereafter charged by the Company upon 

any such merchandise carried by the Company between the points aforesaid; such reductions to take 

effect on or before the first of January, one thousand eight hundred and ninety-eight. 

 

I would like to go a little further and see how the C.P.R. has fared from this Crow’s Nest Pass 

Agreement. First of all, I would like to remind hon. members that the C.P.R. wanted to get into this rich 

mineral area of British Columbia. When they got the railway in there, they also received rich mineral 

lands. In 1906, into being came the Consolidated Mining & Smelting Company, a subsidiary of the 

C.P.R. This is a company with assets of over $185 million. In the three years, 1955-57, they got over 

$82 million net profit, and they have paid dividends every year since 1948. The company is engaged 

directly and indirectly in mining, smelting and refining, and exploration; it manufactures chemical 

fertilizer. It owns the Sullivan Mines, one of the largest mines of lead, zinc and silver in the world. It 

bought, in 1946, two chemical plants operated by the Federal Government during the war, at a fire-sale 

price; they received it for next to nothing. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, the main thing the hon. members want to remember is that the C.P.R. was given its 

charter not only to operate as a railway; it was given a charter to operate in many functions. When you 

study the charter, it is operating within its functions the way it is operating today; it is operating 

steamboats, mines, hotels, and is operating in a large field of commerce. It was given that right under its 

original charter.



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

17 

I mentioned in the beginning that the C.P.R. has objected several times, and again recently, that the 

Crow’s Nest Pass Agreement should be done away with. It is argued that they lose money on the grain 

haul out of the western prairies. But the Agreement was brought in because the Parliament of Canada 

was deliberately trying to compensate prairie agriculture in some measure, because of the lack of 

competition. In eastern Canada we have the waterways; in British Columbia we have the waterways. 

Here in western Canada the only means of transport was by way of rail. This was the reason that the 

Federal Government agreed to compensate agriculture with this measure for the long haul by rail. 

 

I think we should also remember that the C.P.R., when they signed this Agreement, agreed to certain 

maximum rates on grain in perpetuity. This was an agreement which they went into with their eyes 

open. Then they go on to argue that the rates under the Crow’s Nest Pass Agreement are unreasonable 

under today’s economy. This Government, in conjunction with other prairie provinces, have used the 

argument that this is not true. They have pointed out some of the discrepancies of the railway’s 

argument. Many rates are lower today than they were in 1997. These rates have been brought down to 

meet competition, and I think this is interesting enough to put on the records of this House a few figures. 

I will read from a joint submission of the Governments of the Provinces of Alberta, Saskatchewan and 

Manitoba, dated Ottawa, January, 1950. It is a submission given to the Royal Commission on 

Transportation. They have a table here in which they illustrate all rates on first-class traffic, which show 

rates below the 1897 level. Between Calgary and Red Deer, the present rates (this was for 1950) were 41 

cents; in 18967, they were 53 cents. From Calgary to Lethbridge, in 1950 they were 41 cents; in 1897 

they were 69 cents. Edmonton to CaMr.ose, present rates in 1950, 29 cents; 1897, 35 cents. Canmore to 

Golden, present rate in 1950 was 95 cents; 1897, $1.08. 

 

All that is left of this original Agreement, which the railway is still forced by agreement to carry at 

reduced rates, is grain and flour. That is all that is left of the old Agreement. Never have the railways 

been able to prove accurately to anybody that they have lost money. They have never been able to 

produce those figures. I think that, in speaking to the motion the member for Bengough brought in, we 

need an equitable freight rate, based on distance. we must not forget that here in western Canada we 

have a long haul. I don’t think that we should forget to take in the financial structure of the C.P.R., when 

we are fighting for an equitable rate. I think the figures I have given here today prove that the C.P.R. has 

not suffered. I think another thing that enters into an equitable freight rate across the country is the fact 

that, in western Canada, we do not have competition which is adequate; we have neither competition by 

water or by road. In eastern Canada the markets are close; in western Canada they are not. 

 

Pursuant to what I have said here, this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all hon. members to support 

this resolution, and I take pleasure in seconding the motion. 

 

The motion (Mr. Brown (Bengough)) was then agreed to, unanimously. 



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

18 

MORATORIUM ACT REPEAL 

THIRD READING 

 

The Assembly resumed, from Thursday, March 12, 1959, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion 

of the Hon. Mr. Walker: “That Bill No. 14 — An Act to repeal the Moratorium Act”, be now read the 

third time and passed. 

 

Mr. L.N. Nicholson (Nipawin): — When we were debating Bill No. 14 in Committee of the Whole 

there was a lot of horseplay went on from both sides of the House and I did not like it. When I realized 

that we could debate it on third reading, I asked for an adjournment and, Mr. Speaker, what I would like 

to know is: what was the origin of The Moratorium Act, when was it made law, when was it declared 

ultra vires; who, if anyone, was responsible for this legislation being declared ultra vires? 

 

Hon. R.A. Walker (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, in moving that this Bill be read a second time, 

I advised the House that the legislation had been held by the Supreme court of Canada to be ultra vires. 

At that stage the House was discussing and considering the principle of the Bill, and it is at that stage 

that the principle should be discussed, rather than in Committee of the Whole. Some question was raised 

in Committee of the Whole as to the history and origin of this legislation and as to why it was held ultra 

vires. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that most hon. members here know that this legislation was passed in 1943 and it 

was passed to replace The Debt Adjustment Act which had, just prior to that, been held to be ultra vires 

of the Saskatchewan Legislature. This, of course, I suggest, is not particularly relevant to the discussion 

except for background information, and this information is available to every hon. member of the House. 

What I thought was the relevant point was that the legislation was ultra vires in whole and, therefore, it 

could be repealed because it no longer had any legal significance. I did not have with me in the House 

that night the report of the Supreme Court of Canada, but I think I told my hon. friend, when he asked 

me, that my recollection was that it was in 1956. I have now the 1956 Canada Law Reports reporting the 

decision of the Supreme court of Canada, and at page 31 of those reports it sets out the judgment of the 

Court and the judgments of all the judges of the Court who heard the case. Judgments were given by 

Chief Justice Kerwin, Taschereau, Locke and Cartwright. Locke gave the actual judgment report and it 

was concurred in by all of the other judges. 

 

The relevant section of Mr. Justice Locke’s judgment is found on page 42, near the middle of the page, 

and I suggest that this is a paraphrase of what I said in the House, on second reading: 

 

The Moratorium Act as enacted in 1943 and as it appears as c. 98 of the Revised Statues of 

Saskatchewan of 1953, is, in my opinion, in relation to insolvency and, as I consider that those parts of it 

which might be justified as a proper exercise of provincial powers cannot be severed from those which 

clearly exceed those powers, the Act should be found ultra vires as a whole.



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

19 

This means, of course, that there is no part of the Act which has any legal significance at all. That is the 

decision of the Supreme Court of Canada. 

 

My hon. friend said he would like to know a little bit more about the history of the Act. I can only say 

that, when The Debt Adjustment Act of 1934 (the fall of 1934) was passed, it provided for the 

appointment of a Board which had the power to intervene in any action for foreclosure or in any action 

involving a judgment against a debtor in excess of $100, and this Board had the power to file with the 

Court a notice or a memorandum stopping or staying the action of the Court. 

 

In 1943, when this legislation was found to be ultra vires, the principal provisions of it were divided into 

three other Acts. They were The Moratorium Act — the one which we are dealing with; The Mediation 

Board Act, and The Limitation of Civil Rights Act. Some of the provisions (the ones which abolished or 

prohibited any recovery on personal covenants) were put in The Limitation of Civil Rights Act, and they 

are still there. the provision regarding the establishment of a Board and giving it power to mediate suits 

was put in The Mediation Board Act, and that is still there. the moratorium provision of the old Debt 

Adjustment Act, with some limitations, was put in The Moratorium Act. 

 

The Moratorium Act differs from the provisions of the old Debt Adjustment Act chiefly in this respect. 

The Debt Adjustment Board purported, on its own orders, to stop actions in the Court. Under the new 

legislation, however, this power was vested in the Lieutenant-Governor in Council, and it was limited to 

a two-year period. Under the old Debt Adjustment Act there was no limit. I could stay it indefinitely. 

The new Act (The Moratorium Act) purported to give the Lieutenant-Governor in Council the power to 

stay actions for two years on the recommendation of the Mediation Board. It was on this question that 

the Act was referred to the Courts. 

 

When it was referred to the Courts, it was referred, I may say, by way of a constitutional question, under 

The Constitutional Questions Act, to the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal by the Government of 

Saskatchewan, as a result of a decision of the Queen’s Bench Court of this province. In order to settle 

the matter without putting the parties to the expense of taking it to the Supreme Court of Canada, it was 

referred by the Government, and the Government, of course, paid the expense; much, as hon. members 

will recall, as was done with certain sections of The Vehicles Act last year when, the constitutionality 

having been called in question, rather than put the parties to the expense of airing an appeal to the 

Supreme Court of Canada, the Lieutenant-governor in Council referred the question of its validity to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal, and, therefore, paid the expense of both sides of the litigation through 

the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal and on to the Supreme Court. In connection with The Vehicles Act 

we had a little more happy experience and we were upheld. In that case, of course, it was questioned by, 

first of all, a member of the Legislature who violated the rules of the House by giving legal opinions to 

the House. 

 

Mr.s. Batten (Humboldt): — I am not the Attorney General, although you seem to think I am.



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

20 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — The principal question, however, which was put to the Courts was No. 3 which 

asked: 

 

Is The Moratorium Act, c. 98 of the Revised Statutes of Saskatchewan, 1953, ultra vires of the 

Legislature of Saskatchewan either in whole or in part, and, if so, in what particular or particulars, and to 

what extent? 

 

The answer which I read from the judgment of Mr. Justice Locke answers No. 3; and the Court said, 

having answered No. 3, it was unnecessary to answer any of the other 10 questions that were asked. 

 

I may say, in answer to my hon. friend from Arm River (Mr. Danielson) who opposed this legislation, 

that Saskatchewan was represented in both courts. The Dominion Mortgage Investment Association was 

represented in the Supreme Court of Canada. The Canadian Bankers Association was represented and 

argued the case, argued against its validity; and Mr. E.P. Varcoe and Mr. D.W.H. Henry appeared and 

argued on behalf of the Federal Government for the Attorney General of Canada, to the effect that the 

legislation was invalid, and they won. 

 

I don’t know if I have helped my hon. friends to know what the purpose of this repeal is. I think I dealt 

with the matter when I said that it was invalid, unconstitutional, a nullity, and, therefore, should be 

repealed to save paper. 

 

The motion was then agreed to; the Bill, accordingly, was read the third time and passed. 

 

SECOND READING 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Walker: “That Bill No. 35 — An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act”, be 

now read the second time. 

 

Hon. R.A. Walker (Attorney General): — There are two principles involved in this legislation. The 

first one is the one whereby we propose to repeal, effective next January 1st, the regulation-making 

power of the Lieutenant-Governor in Council as to the rules of Court. The other, and more important, 

principle is the one dealing with the ex parte interim injunction in labour matters. 

 

In introducing this amendment to The Queen’s Bench Act, the Government hopes to overcome and 

injustice which has developed in the use of labour injunctions. The injunction, for the information of the 

House, is a court order by which a person may be ordered to do something which is required by law that 

he do, or to prohibit him from doing something which is a civilly unlawful act, something which is a 

violation of someone else’s civil rights. The injunction is not used in the field of criminal law and should 

only be granted in civil cases where damages are not a good enough remedy for the party who will be 

injured. For example, if my neighbour decides to dig a hole in his back yard, a large hole which 

threatens my back yard with sliding into it, I might get an injunction against him to prevent him from 

digging the hole; otherwise I would suffer an irreparable damage or injury which could not be 

compensated for by mere monetary damages.



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

21 

Injunctions can be of two kinds, permanent or interim. If I commence an action against my neighbour 

for damages for the damage that I have suffered from the noise and the vibration of him digging in his 

back yard, I can get damages for that. I might also get an injunction, a permanent injunction, prohibiting 

him forever from doing any similar digging. If, on the other hand, I become apprehensive as soon as he 

starts digging and can convince the court that I am in danger of suffering permanent and irreparable 

harm, I might get an interim injunction which would prevent him from doing any further digging in his 

back yard until such time as the whole matter could be completely tried in the court to see who was 

right. In other words, the interim injunction actually goes further, and without the respective rights of the 

parties having being adjudicated upon. It maintains the status quo until such time as a trial can be held. 

Thus, the interim injunction, it will be see, was not designed to settle rights, but to merely preserve the 

right of the applicant until the matter can be tried fully and to protect him from irreparable harm which 

might ensue. 

 

Injunctions may be obtained from the court in two ways: one, by giving the other party notice of the 

intention of the application so that he can appear and oppose it, argue against it and produce evidence 

against it; or, an injunction may be obtained ex parte, without any notice to the other side, and without 

the other side even being present. This is where the injunction is required to prevent permanent serious 

injury to the plaintiff. 

 

Ex parte interim injunctions have been very useful over the centuries and this is a remedy which extends 

back over many hundreds of years. They have, however, caused considerable injustice in the field of 

labour disputes in recent years. When a strike starts, the chief weapon which labour has to further its 

rights is the right of strike action; and a strike, of course, can only be effective if it is supported by a 

picket line. As the law has been up to date, when a strike is threatened, an employer may make an ex 

parte application to the court, without any notice to the strikers or the intended strikers, asking the court 

to prohibit picketing. The employer, of course, in making the application would have to allege that he 

was apprehensive of some unlawful act, such as the carrying of defamatory signs, or trespass, or 

nuisance. He would not have to produce any witnesses or any other evidence except his own affidavit, or 

the affidavit of his agent or employee, and such affidavits may be on the basis of hearsay evidence 

alone; they usually are. The court could then, by injunction, prohibit the strikers from picketing or from 

continuing to picket. 

 

In many cases this injunction would, in effect, be prohibiting the workers from striking. This is 

particularly true when there are two unions in a plant and one of them goes on strike; usually the 

members of the other union will not feel bound to stay out of the plant unless there is a picket line which 

they would have to cross. The members might feel free to work and might continue working; and, of 

course, the usual case is where non-union labour is brought in, or attempted to be brought in, when the 

union is on strike. These, too, would be discouraged from entering the plant when a picket line was on 

the job. 

 

The right to picket has been upheld and affirmed by the courts on numerous occasions. It has long been 

recognized as a legitimate right of labour. Yet the situation has developed where the courts could give 

injunctions



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

22 

on the flimsiest evidence, without hearing both sides, and a strike could be broken simply because 

picketing was prohibited. This is not necessarily a criticism of the courts as they are obliged to act on the 

evidence put before them, and they are required to consider applications for an interim injunction 

without hearing both parties; but the result has been that ex parte interim injunctions, instead of being a 

mere remedy to preserve and protect the status quo, having in fact been settling labour disputes, in 

favour of the employers, by breaking strikes. 

 

In an effort to remedy this situation The King’s Bench Act was amended, back in 1951, to provide that 

such injunctions would have a duration not to exceed four days. However, experience has shown that the 

early days of a strike are the crucial days, and if picketing is prohibited during the early days, 

particularly in the first four days of a strike, the strike will likely collapse. If it does not collapse, then it 

will simply be prolonged by those additional four days or even longer, because labour has been denied 

the right to assert its right in an ordinary and generally lawful way during the first four days. 

 

It has, therefore, appeared necessary for us to introduce legislation at this time to prohibit the use of ex 

parte interim injunctions in labour disputes. If an employer feels, after this new legislation is passed, that 

he requires an injunction, he will have to serve notice on the strikers that he is going to make an 

application to the court. You will note that the new Section 20, subsection 2, requires him also to serve 

notice of the affidavits and other material which he intends to use as evidence. Formerly, he needed only 

to file these affidavits in the court, and if he did so on a Friday afternoon, of course, it just could not be 

examined or scrutinized by the union until 10:00 o’clock, Monday morning. Moreover, the new 

legislation provides that hearsay evidence will not be sufficient on which to base an application. The 

affidavits must confine themselves to facts which are within the personal knowledge of the deponents. 

 

The abolition of ex parte interim injunctions will not have the effect of depriving employers of their 

ordinary legal rights. If the picketers or strikers do damage to his plant or to his business, he still has the 

right, which is not abridged in any way, to seek remedy in damages; but he will not be able to use the 

courts to impose a solution on the strikers which he would not be entitled to receive in any other way. 

He will not be able to get an injunction to prohibit an act which would not otherwise be held unlawful by 

the courts. 

 

The labour injunction became a more serious problem in the United States much earlier than it did in 

Canada. In 1931, the State of Wisconsin took the lead in abolishing ex parte labour injunctions; in 1932, 

the United States Congress, in the Norris-Laguardia Act, limited the use of ex parte injunctions in labour 

disputes. Under their law the applicant must establish his case by calling witnesses who will testify 

under oath; there is no such thing as accepting hearsay evidence, merely on information and belief of a 

deponent. There is now legislation in some 20 or 21 of the American states similar to what we are 

proposing here. I won’t bother to give the House the names of those states, but nearly half of the 

American states have seen fit to outlaw ex parte interim injunctions and, as I say, the Congress of the 

United States has limited it so severely that it really amounts to the same thing as what we propose here 

in Saskatchewan.



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

23 

In England there is no legislation outlawing the ex parte interim injunction, and the reason for that is that 

employers there have made little, if any, use of this injunction procedure. Other jurisdictions, such as 

New Zealand and Australia, have not got the problem either, because they have other means of dealing 

with labour disputes. They have unique legislation providing for the rights of employers and employees. 

 

This legislation has been requested in Saskatchewan over a period of many years by the Trade Union 

movement. In their brief to the Saskatchewan Government in 1949, in 1950, in 1954, in 1955, in 1956 

and in 1958, the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour has called for restrictions in the use of injunctions 

in labour disputes. Experience has shown that such action is justified. I might point out, too, that the 

Federal Government has had similar representations from labour and have ignored these requests. 

 

At the merger convention of the Canadian Congress of Labour, in 1956, the limitation of the use of 

injunctions in labour matters was included in their platform of principles, and in January, 1957, 

submission was made to the Federal Cabinet for federal action. Prime Minister St. Laurent at that time 

said that many of these matters would fall under provincial jurisdiction, and he was not sure that the 

provinces would agree, that they might not co-operate in the issue. The fact of the matter is, of course, 

that the Federal Government has exclusive jurisdiction in certain classes of labour matters. This he did 

not see fit to act upon. 

 

Again, in October of 1957, the Canadian Labour congress presented this proposal to the Canadian 

Cabinet. The Federal Minister of Labour replied that the contents of the brief would be taken under 

consideration and, as far as I can ascertain, it is still under consideration by the Federal Government. No 

other province in Canada has yet seen fit to limit the improper use of labour injunctions and this makes 

another ‘first’ for Saskatchewan. 

 

With these few words, Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill be now read a second time. 

 

Mr.s. Batten (Humboldt): — Would the hon. Attorney General permit me to ask a question. How 

many interim injunctions have there been granted in Saskatchewan during the last three years? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I cannot give you the dates or the figures of the number that have been granted, 

because those are not in the ordinary course reported to the Attorney General’s Department. We have no 

other way of knowing except through the channels that are open to any hon. member. We hear about 

them, and I know of seven or eight in the last eight years; there have been seven or eight occasions when 

this remedy has been used. This is not an exhaustive list; it could have been used in any number of 

occasions without us having knowledge of it at all. 

 

Mr. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, I may be out of order, but I would like to know: How 

does that compare with the situation that is now taking place in British Columbia in regard to this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Well, comparisons are always odious and I am sure British Columbia will find it 

son in this case. British Columbia is proceeding in the opposite direction entirely.



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

24 

Mr.s. M.J. Batten (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, I only have a few words to say on this. I have not any 

particular objection to this change, particularly on the ex parte matter, but the question that I would like 

clarified is this. When the hon. Attorney General says that this legislation is not abolishing any rights, I 

have to take exception to that statement because it is, even on the face of it, abolishing the right of the 

employer to supply for an ex parte injunction; and it is abolishing a right that has existed in this province 

and which exists in every other province in Canada. 

 

Now I don’t know whether it was made clear to this House, but I think maybe the members are aware of 

the fact that this type of remedy is a very exceptional remedy not only in the case of labour; but to obtain 

any ex parte injunction is not the easiest thing in the world. The court has to be a convinced that there is 

very ample justification for such an injunction, and it is only in a case where there is almost no other 

remedy and where the dangers are almost instant and self-evident to the court that such a remedy is 

granted. 

 

I submit that the only justification that the hon. Attorney General has given for this legislation is that the 

labour unions want it, and I suppose that is reason enough; but I cannot see that the right of the union or 

of the worker has been jeopardized. Certainly there has been no illustration of a case where they have 

been hurt in any way. After all, it is only a four-day stoppage, and it could enable the employer to 

dispose, perhaps, of goods or services that are absolutely essential or that might spoil in the meantime. 

 

That is the only reason that I hesitate; first of all, because it is curtailing and abolishing a right that 

presently exists; and secondly, because it might be causing damage in our industrial life and to the 

economy of this province. However, I am willing to accept the word of the Attorney General that this 

has been well thought out by the Government and the Government is convinced it is proper legislation 

and that the unions need this for their protection. For that reason I won’t oppose it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I would like to make just one comment in reply. This is one occasion when I 

followed my notes rather closely, Mr. Speaker, and just to keep the record straight, what I did say was: 

“Abolition of the ex parte interim injunction will not deprive the employers of any right other than the 

right they have been claiming, to break strikes.” 

 

I went on to say: “But he will not be able to call on the courts to prohibit acts which he could not 

otherwise prove unlawful.” I did not say that it was not abolishing any rights. 

 

The motion for second reading of Bill No. 14 was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the 

Whole at the next sitting. 



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

25 

CROWN OIL UNDER ROAD ALLOWANCES 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: “That Bill No. 68 — An Act respecting Crown Oil within, upon, 

or under Road Allowances”, be now read the second time. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, before moving second 

reading of Bill No. 68, I would like to give a little bit of background information, and also some 

explanation of the principle of the Bill itself. 

 

I first want to make it clear that the minerals on road allowances, from the beginning of mineral 

administration in Saskatchewan, have been recognized as set apart. Section 4 of The Mineral Resources 

Act of 1931 reads as follows: 

 

The mines, minerals and mining rights in, on or under all public highways and road allowances shall 

continue to be vested in the Crown and may be leased or otherwise disposed of under the regulations. 

 

Since 1931 a similar provision has been found in every Mineral Resources Act. As a matter of practice, 

all other minerals except oil and gas, the other minerals which are non-fluid, have been handled by 

disposition. There the problem was quite simple. If you had a deposit of coal or gravel or anything else 

on a road allowance it would not run away as a fluid will into or onto the adjacent land. 

 

The other thing I would like to point out is that no permit for exploration, no leases which have been 

issued in the province of Saskatchewan in regard to oil and gas have ever included road allowances. 

They have always been confined to the specific legal parcel or parcels of land mentioned in these 

documents. So the background is that these minerals have been, from the earliest days of our history in 

this matter in the province, recognized as property of the Crown; and that situation has never been 

compromised by any lease or agreement or any clause or implication in any document. 

 

This problem (that of oil and gas under road allowances) is different from other minerals because, when 

oil or gas is produced through a well, it comes from the whole reservoir without regard to survey lines. It 

is a different situation altogether from that where mining is done by actually picking up the mineral from 

its original location and proceeding from that point. 

 

During the years that we have had oil production here in the province of Saskatchewan the oil producers 

and the owners of land along the road allowances, other than Crown land, have enjoyed the advantage of 

the fact that no provision at that time had been made for the disposition for the Crown of the road-

allowance oil. In many cases, particularly where there were freehold oil rights on both sides of a road 

allowance, the Crown would not even be getting any standard royalty from this oil; that would be 

enjoyed by the owners of the freehold lands alongside.



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

26 

It is also true that the parcels of land which have been included in exploratory permits and in drilling 

reservations and leases have been the areas which have provided the incentive and the returns for 

drilling and development. We approached this problem as one that had to receive attention at some time, 

and one of the first things that we took note of is that, where an oil field is drilled out, the facilities 

which are now in place, the wells, will produce the oil from that reservoir including the oil under the 

road allowances, without any additional capital cost and with very little additional operating cost. 

 

We could have proceeded to lease the road allowances but, of course, without interference with the 

pattern of drilling you could not have wells drilled on those road allowances. It could be done, but it 

would change the pattern, and it would be very difficult for all concerned. The administration, from the 

point of view of the Government and the companies as well, would be difficult. If you leased these 

parcels they could, of course, then have been pooled with the adjoining parcels; but that would mean 

many, many hundreds of pooling agreements which would have to be arrived at and agreed upon. So we 

rejected both of those methods. 

 

It is interesting to note that just recently in the State of Texas, they have had, or are having (I don’t know 

whether the sale is over yet) a sale of oil rights on road allowances, and it is proposed there to follow 

one of the methods which we have rejected — that is, of providing the right to drill and providing an 

allocation of production for that road allowance tract. That does not mean, of course, that the oil 

produced through the well drilled to get the road allowance oil will all be oil from the road allowance. it 

does not happen that way; but they would allocated a proportionate amount of oil which could be 

produced through that well, that proportion in relation to the area of the road allowance in comparison to 

the area of the adjoining land. 

 

In Saskatchewan we have different systems of surveying. In the first system there was a road allowance 

around every section of land, and the road allowance was six rods wide. that meant that the road 

allowance was approximately 3.75 per cent of the land in a township, which is quite a substantial 

percentage. Then, in our later surveys where we find a road allowance around each two-section block of 

land, and the road allowance is four rods wide, the road-allowance land is approximately 1.88 per cent 

of the land in a township. We considered the question of having variations from one area to another and 

decided to reject that, for the simple reason that the administration appeared to be quite difficult, and, 

therefore, we arrived at the conclusion to put in the Act that 1.88 per cent of the oil in any reservoir in 

the province shall be road-allowance oil, or shall be deemed to be oil that comes from under the road 

allowance. that is the percentage which is found in the survey with the smallest percentage of road-

allowance land. 

 

In the other areas of the old surveys, which includes some of our oil fields, the people who were 

previously enjoying some advantage will continue to enjoy half of that advantage, because this is 

actually about half of what it is in the road allowances in those other areas. 

 

Having established by the Act that 1.88 per cent of the oil in a reservoir is Crown oil from the road 

allowances, we then provide that approximately 53 per cent of this oil shall be delivered to the Crown 

and that the



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

27 

producer (the company doing the production) shall take for himself, for the cost of producing and lifting 

the oil, just over 46 per cent of the oil which has been established as road-allowance oil. That is the 

division of the oil: 53 per cent of the road-allowance oil will come to the Crown; a little over 46 per cent 

goes to the company for doing the job of lifting or producing the oil. 

 

The way the Act reads is that one per cent of the total oil produced in a field shall come to the Crown. It 

is put that way merely for convenience. It is actually just over 53 per cent of the road allowance oil. The 

comparison is between one and .88; and that is how you arrive at the 53 per cent and the 46 per cent. So 

the producers will get nearly half of the oil for the trouble of lifting it. When this oil is produced the first 

thing that will be calculated in regard to the production is the 1.88 per cent of the production, and that 

will be taken off the production — 53 per cent of it goes to the Crown and 46 per cent to the Oil 

Company; and then, on what is left, whatever royalties may be applicable, according to any lease or 

regulation or agreement, will apply. 

 

I would like to point out to this House that this is neither a tax nor a royalty. It is a share — taking a 

share of the oil which is the property of the Crown. I know a great many people will continue to call it a 

tax or a royalty, but it is no more a tax or a royalty than the share of the crop you get from your farm 

when you lease it out to somebody. It is in exactly the same position. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to get into too much difficulty, but there is a difference between what is called 

a farm-out, which is a share-production job, and a lease, where there is a standard or over-riding royalty. 

I am not going to worry about what it is called, but I did think that I owed it to the members of this 

House to explain exactly what it is. 

 

Members will probably want me to say something about the reaction of the oil industry towards this 

Bill; and naturally, quite naturally, they are not cheering and jumping up and down about it. You would 

not either, if you were in the business. I have known cases — and I apologize for bringing these simple 

cases of farming in as examples, but I know them best — exactly similar, where a farmer has broken up 

a road allowance that was not used, had farmed it for years and years, got crops off it, paid no rent to the 

municipality or the owner of the road allowance, and pays no taxes on it either; and I suppose when it 

came to the time that the municipality wanted to use the road he might feel grieved that he had lost 

something which he had been using for a long time. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — But this is a royalty, isn’t it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I didn’t expect my hon. friend to agree, but the example I cited is much the 

same situation. It will cost the industry some money which they have previously enjoyed and, if I were 

in the industry, I would weep and cry a little bit about that, too, personally, and so would everybody 

else. However, I think it is important to remember that it cannot be argued that this is not a fair 

proposition, that we take a share of the oil which is under the road allowance which belongs



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

28 

to the Crown — to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So I am pleased to move that Bill No. 68 — An Act respecting Crown Oil within, upon or under road 

allowances, be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. A. Loptson: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to get a little clarification on this Bill. In the first 

place I was quite interested to hear the Minister say that it isn’t a royalty or a tax. It is just like saying to 

a man who is drawing wages that it is neither a salary nor wages; but he is still getting paid. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, you get an indemnity, which is neither salary nor wages. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if this hasn’t got some far-reaching repercussions. After all, it 

is giving you and increase in royalties; that is what it is, a one per cent increase in royalties. Instead of 

the companies paying 12 1/2, which is the common rate, they are paying 13 ½ per cent. Isn’t that a fact? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — No. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — In addition they are getting this one per cent from the free-hold properties. You are 

getting it from the Crown Land, and you are also getting it from the freehold. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — No, that’s not right. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Then it doesn’t apply to the freehold? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — No, it only applies to road allowances. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — According to the Bill, it does. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — That is not freehold. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Well then, the man who has a freehold lease, he gets oil from the road allowance 

adjacent to that land. How can he help it? But take, for instance, a section that is divided into sixteen 40-

acre legal subdivisions and if you have 40-acre spacing for the wells, which is commonly done — I 

think that is the regulation here in Saskatchewan, and the hon. Minister can inform me if that is not right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — That is the case with some of them. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Then that is four wells per quarter-section. In this light oil I think that is common. 

That means that a well on Legal Subdivision 1, 4, 13, and 16 draws oil from a half-mile of road 

allowance, because he gets a quarter of a mile on each side. The wells on 2, 3, 5, and 12, 14, 15, 8, and 

9, draw oil from a quarter of a mile or road allowance. Then you get the four wells on Legal 

Subdivisions 6 and 7, 10 and 11, and they are a quarter of a mile away from a road allowance. Now how 

are you going to apply it to them? If you have all of these wells — four of them on a section that gets 

half a



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

29 

mile of road allowance, and sight of them drawing from a quarter of a mile — then you have the four 

wells in the centre of the section that will not draw any oil from the road allowance, and I am wondering 

how you are going to apply this tax. Is it going to be two per cent for the one on the quarter of each 

section that draws oil from a half mile, as compared with one per cent on the wells that will only draw 

from a quarter of a mile. I would like to have that explanation, if it is proper to have it at this time, or in 

Committee. I think it is rather interesting. 

 

I want to draw to the attention of this House the principle of this Bill which would indicate that contracts 

with this Government are not too secure, because this is an increase in royalty that has been contracted 

for, and what may be the next tax that they may decide to apply on the industries of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. D. T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, when the Minister introduced this Bill, 

it reminded me of a saying during the last war among service personnel at that time. The favourite 

saying, whenever they perused Orders of the Day, was that “something new has been added.” When this 

Bill was introduced, and in spite of the remarks of the hon. Minister that it isn’t a tax, to me I cannot see 

any justification for his explanation, because it still represents a form of taxation. 

 

I was not so much interested in what the hon. Minister said in explaining the Bill as I was interested in 

what he did not say. There are some clarifications which I think should have been brought out, and some 

that are probably of vital interest to the future of the oil industry in this province. 

 

One thing which has not been made clear — maybe I do not understand it, and I would like to be 

corrected if I am wrong — is whether this could even apply to farmers royalties. Wouldn’t the farmer 

also be expected to pay one per cent of his 1/8th of the royalties? That has not been brought out. The 

other thing that wasn’t clarified is: why do the oil companies, in certain cases, have to pay in kind, 

namely, deliver oil to the Government in staid of cash? That is something which is of vital interest, and I 

think that should have been explained. I can see a situation where the Crown could take its payment in 

oil, and take that volume of oil and possibly deliver it to a certain oil company, or to a certain company 

distributing oil. If they had that means of dealing with the public, there is a possibility there where you 

could have a price war among major oil companies throughout the province, and it appear that it could 

be used as a whip against one or any oil company. 

 

The other thing I was very interested in is, as has been stated before, there has been $374 million 

invested in this province by the oil companies in trying to develop oil. We have had situations in the past 

where oil companies have left this province and gone to other provinces. At the present time I 

understand there is some oil development in areas which is probably only marginal development. Some 

of the oil wells are not too good producers; the prospects for the future aren’t too good. The oil 

companies today say they are just operating some of these oil wells to try and get some of their original 

investment back. So I would suggest to the hon. Minister if this tax has the result of possibly shutting 

down some of these operations,



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

30 

then we, the people of this province, have a chance to suffer under a tax of this kind. 

 

The other thing is this. He went on to explain that the oil companies haven’t drilled on road allowance; 

but what kind of an agreement would you make supposing you were to start up under your own Crown 

Corporations and drill on some of your own road allowances? Then what kind of a deal would you make 

with the oil companies that had leased land next to your road allowance? Mr. Minister, I, therefore, think 

there is a great deal of explanation yet needed in the interest of the people of this province, in regard to 

this particular Bill. 

 

Mr. L. P. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, the hon. Minister, a few moments ago, said that the 

industry, or some in the industry, are crying about this. I don’t doubt that, and probably in some cases I 

would quite agree that they have too much, but what I would like to ask at this time is — are we not 

likely to cry at some future date? That is a question we should keep in mind. It took several years after 

the present Government came into the province before we could coax the oil industry into this province. 

Now, after they have somewhat established themselves and are just starting to get a return on some of 

the millions they have invested, they are leaving. We see considerable amounts of activity in British 

Columbia and the Northwest territories, and Saskatchewan’s share is dropping considerably. 

 

I think there seems to be some socialist planning in this, because we seem to be departing from the 

customary practice of other places or any other province or, in fact, states or even countries, in 

establishing this additional tax. Mind you, the Minister said he didn’t call it a tax. Well, it all comes out 

of the well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t say I didn’t call it a tax. I said it isn’t a tax. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — The Minister said it isn’t a tax. It’s a form of levy. The hon. member from Saltcoats 

(Mr. Loptson) said, a moment ago, that the oil comes out of an 88-acre block; it doesn’t matter where it 

is. The oil is taxed on that basis, or there is a royalty on that basis. So if you pump 20 barrels today and 

get one per cent of it, and then you add on the other 12 per cent, I have to alternative but to think of it as 

a form of tax even thought the Minister has said it is not a tax. Now it is a question of whether the 

Minister is right or wrong. I think that some way, somewhere we probably should have a larger share of 

the provincial oil revenue, but no more than what the other provinces or other areas are getting, because 

in so doing we are chasing out of this province the oil industry that we so greatly need. 

 

That is the one reason, Mr. Speaker, that I got up — just to bring out very emphatically that we must be 

very careful. It has been a hard, tough row to hoe to get the oil industry into this province. Now, let’s not 

do something foolish with our planning and lose it all.



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

31 

Mr.s. Mary J. Batten (Humboldt): — I was under the impression after reading this Act, that this Bill 

was intended to be a tax or a royalty in breach of agreements already made by this Government. But, 

since I have been informed by the hon. Minister that it is neither a tax or a royalty, I certainly would like 

leave to adjourn the debate so that I can study the matter further. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

SCHOOL GRANTS 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Lloyd: “That Bill No. 69 — An Act to amend The School Grants Act”, be now 

read the second time. 

 

Hon. Woodrow S. Lloyd (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, this Bill, together with similar 

amendments which will be introduced in The Larger School Units Act, provides the changes in the 

different methods by means of which school grants are distributed in the province. I have already had 

reference to the underlying principles when I spoke during the budget debate, so I think I can perhaps 

summarize in rather a brief fashion at this time. 

 

I first of all have reference to that group of schools in the province, each of which employs less than 30 

teachers. The only change insofar as this group is concerned is in the equalization grants. That is, these 

schools will continue to receive the $900 per year per elementary classroom, $1,200 per year per high 

school classroom, and $10 per day on the basis of their average daily attendance. The change, then, has 

to do with the basis of paying the equalization grants. Last year, for equalization grant purposes we 

included all of those districts with an assessment of less than $135,000. This year, we propose to include 

all those with an assessment of less than $140,000. We will provide also this year that when a school of 

this kind includes high school as well as elementary rooms, the rate of equalization grant will be 

somewhat larger than if the school only includes elementary rooms. 

 

The larger group is that to which grants are distributed under what we call the “general formula”, and 

includes all of the school units in the province, the 10 cities and two largest towns which are not in the 

school unit. In other words, it includes all of these areas which employ 30 or more teachers. here, as I 

intimated in the previous debate, we are broadening the basis of our foundation support, and we are also 

increasing the level of that support. 

 

May I have reference, first of all, to the assigned costs for the program as was used last year, and as we 

will apply them this year. We will continue to use the actual costs of transportation, of fees paid for 

students who attend schools outside the unit, or of high-school assistance. The second factor in program 

costs is determined by considering the members of classrooms or teachers, whichever happens to be the 

greater in the area. We continue to use as the basis in the elementary classroom, $3,600 as last year; but 

this



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

32 

 

is the major change, if the teacher who is employed holds a standard certificate or better, we will add 

$400 to that basic cost. In other words, in every elementary room in which the teacher holds a standard 

certificate or better, the assigned cost is $4,000. 

 

With regard to the high-school classrooms, we continue to use the basic assigned cost of $5,000 as last 

year, but we add this: if the teacher has a professional certificate, then we use $5,600 as the basis of cost. 

 

The third change is that if, in an elementary school, the principal holds a professional certificate, the cost 

assigned to that school will be $5,600. 

 

Those, Mr. Speaker, are the main changes which are proposed in this Bill which I move be now read a 

second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, and Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

STUDENT AID FUND 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Lloyd: “That Bill No. 70 — An Act to amend the Student Aid Fund Act”, be 

now read the second time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, this is a very brief amendment to which, I 

may say now, will be added an equally brief House amendment in order to make it possible to 

implement the plan of providing scholarships which are being proposed for this year. 

 

Perhaps I might take a few minutes to have a reference to the assistance which has been available in the 

province and the effectiveness of its operation, and use that as the basis for indicating how the additional 

assistance will be provided. As the Student Aid Report which was tabled in this House some weeks ago 

indicated, the giving of assistance to university students and teachers’ college students has been a 

practice in the province since the early ’forties. In 1949, ten years ago now, it was decided to put the 

assistance on a more organized and, more particularly, a more permanent basis. At that time we passed 

what was called The Student Aid Fund Act, and, as a result of the Act, invested $1,000,000, the earnings 

of which were to be used to provide assistance to students at teachers’ college, university, or those who 

were taking training as nurses. 

 

In addition to the funds so available were to be added repayment of loans which had been previously 

made, and which would be made in the future, and any payments which were available from the Federal 

Government. 

 

The extremely gratifying experience that we have had as a result of our loan plan can be generalized, to 

some extent, by saying that, in the ten years of operation, we have loaned out almost $2,000,000 — 

about $1,750,000 — which is almost twice the amount of the original revenue. The estimates this year 

provide a return of $75,000 in capital to that investment,



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

33 

 

so that we will have still the $1,000,000 invested. As a result, we have almost one-half a million dollars 

of assets in the form of loans which have been made and which, I may say, are being repaid almost right 

on time. One of the gratifying features of the plan, or rather of its operation, has been the very excellent 

response by those who have borrowed money, in regard to their repaying the money. We felt, however, 

that it was desirable to do something more than just make money available on the basis of the loan; 

consequently, the decision this year to introduce a plan of scholarships. 

 

The Bill does not give all the details, so I will give you some indication as to the policy which we 

propose to operate. The scholarships, first of all, are to be made available to University students in their 

first year, or to a student at Teachers’ College, or to students taking their first year of a two-year course 

at the Technical Institute. The question may be raised as to why we confine it to students in the first 

year. Our thinking has been that, while the Loan Fund has been made available and will be available 

through the Loan Fund, there is, I think, some psychological barrier, perhaps, which prevents some 

people from borrowing money. A great many people here in Saskatchewan (and all of us can understand 

why, I think) don’t like too well to borrow money. We feel that, once the student gets the first year 

under his belt (or wherever he happens to put it) is much more likely to continue. So, if we can get him 

over that first initial barrier, which I think is partly psychological, it is well worthwhile. 

 

Secondly, of course, a student who is going into his first year does not have a very long period of time to 

work in order to save money. he completes his Grade XII at the end of June and, in a couple of months, 

he has to be at University, whereas the University student who gets out much earlier does have more 

time — four or five months — in which to accumulate something towards the expense of his second 

year. We have felt that the best use of the money which we have would be to make it available to first-

year students. 

 

The amounts of scholarships will be $500 a year or $300 a year. They will be $300 a year for those 

students who are fortunate enough to live in the city in which one of the institutions happens to be. 

Students whose home is in Regina, and attending in Regina, will be eligible for $300; but a student 

living half-way between Regina and Saskatoon, who goes to Saskatoon or Regina or Moose Jaw, would 

receive $500. Students living in Saskatoon going to the University would receive $300; one from 

Meadow Lake going to Saskatoon would receive $500. They will be distributed on the basis of the 

academic standing of the students. Students will be required to write all of the Grade XII examinations 

in order to qualify. They will be required to apply for the scholarship. 

 

I should have mentioned that, with the $150,000 which is provided some of the scholarships being worth 

$500, and some worth $300 — we anticipate this will provide close to 350 scholarships. Instead of 

making the selection by ranging all of the Grade XII students who write their examinations in the 

province in one group, we propose to divide the province into zones. I am not quite sure at the moment 

how many zones there may be — 10, 12, 15 or 16. We will make available in each of these zones a 

number of scholarships based on the number of Grade XII graduates in that zone the year before.



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

34 

 

Doing it this way, we hope to get a somewhat better distribution of the assistance than we would if we 

treated all the students as just one group. In addition to that, we hope that we can make the dollars to a 

bit of ‘double duty’. They will be of assistance to the student in helping finance his university course for 

the first year. They will, I think, also be some valuable incentive, and more incentive when they are 

applied on an area basis rather than if they are applied across the province as a whole. 

 

It is difficult to say at the moment just what percentage of our students will receive assistance in this 

way. The students will have to have an average of at least 75 per cent, and perhaps higher, in their Grade 

XII examinations in order to qualify. Certainly a very respectable portion — I think might be the word 

to use — of the students in the province who have that kind of academic standing will have this 

assistance available to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have been able to say before in the House that the finances in this province of 

Saskatchewan are available to make it possible for anybody who qualifies and wishes to go on with 

higher education after Grade XII. I would like to say now, with even greater conviction, that his plan 

will make doubly certain that none of our abler students need to be denied the opportunities of 

continuing their education because of any financial problem. I am extremely enthusiastic about moving 

the second reading of this Bill. 

 

Motion for second reading agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

GROUND WATER CONSERVATION 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Nollet: “That Bill No. 73 — An Act respecting the Drilling of Water Wells and 

the Conservation and Utilization of Ground Water”, be now read the second time. 

 

Hon. I. C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, this is The Ground Water Conservation Act, 

and the reason that this legislation is being introduced is primarily because of the ever-increasing need 

for information on the location, quantity and quality of ground water, because of the tremendous 

demand on the part of urban centres as well as farmers. It is expected that this legislation will give us the 

best source of information from the well-drillers themselves. 

 

This Act is also associated with the work presently undertaken by the Saskatchewan Research Council, 

in conjunction with the Government, on the whole question of ground water supplies. The information 

and data obtained as a result of this legislation will be made available to well drillers, and will be of 

assistance to them. In addition, it will be of assistance to municipalities who are interested in ground 

water, and also to industry. We have obtained very considerable information from the Department of 

mineral Resources, but this method will give us more specific information relating to ground water, and 

locating ground water, and obtaining ground water of suitable quality and in sufficient quantities. 



 

March 13, 1959 

 

 

35 

This will, as I said, require registration and licensing of well-drillers in order that we may have a record 

and obtain samples from them, and also to provide them with useful data, which will be transmitted to 

the Water Rights Division, to the Research Council, and other media. With this explanation, Mr. 

Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Korchinski (Redberry): — Does the Government foresee any additional revenue to the 

Government from this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — No, the licensing fee will be a nominal licensing fee for the purpose of getting a 

record of the well-driller, and providing him with information which will be useful in the drilling of 

wells, to promote better well-drilling and better conservation of water. 

 

Mr. J. R. Barrie (Pelly): — Would the hon. Minister permit another question? Does this mean that any 

farmer, before he drills a well, shall report to the Department? I notice here it says: “Every person shall 

notify the Department before commencing the drilling of a well.” 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — It will not apply to a farmer drilling his own well. We are not greatly interested in 

the casual well-driller who drills shallow wells, although any person who drills wells will be asked to 

register his core sampler in order that we may have the information as to the subsurface structure of the 

well which was drilled. But it is not too important insofar as the individual farmer well-driller is 

concerned. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — What is the depth specified? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — There is no depth specified. 

 

Mrs. Mary J. Batten (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

[Debate adjourned] 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 10:00 o’clock p.m., without question put. 


