



















































Hansard: February 18, 1959


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session – Thirteenth Legislature 

5th Day 

Wednesday, February 18, 1959 

 

The House met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

Debate on Address-in-Reply 

 

The House resumed from Tuesday, February 17, 1959, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 

Mr. Brown (Bengough) for the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier): - Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne which His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor read to this Assembly last Thursday forecasts the government legislative program 

for this session. The budget, which will be brought down in due course, will forecast the financial 

program for this year. In the light of that fact I think it is appropriate that take a few minutes this 

afternoon to examine what is the long-term objective toward which this government is moving and has 

been moving ever since it assumed office. To be effective a government must have a clear-cut goal. This 

government has a set objective toward which all its efforts and all its programs are directed. I don‟t think 

I can sum up our long-term objective any better than to quote for first paragraph of the Winnipeg 

Declaration, which said: 

 

“The aim of the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation is the establishment in Canada by 

democratic means of a co-operative commonwealth in which the supplying of human needs and 

enrichment of human life shall be the primary purpose of our society. Private profit and corporate 

power must be subordinate to social planning designed to achieve equality of opportunity and the 

highest possible living standards for all Canadians.” 

 

I would draw particular attention, Mr. Speaker, to the phrase “Private profits and corporate power must 

be subordinated to social planning . . .” One of the things that concerns us most in our day and 

generation is that in our present society we are not only witnessing a growing concentration of wealth 

but we are witnessing a growing concentration of economic power. The great anomaly of the 19th 

century was that during the very period when the people of the western world were expanding their 

political freedom they were witnessing a contraction of their economic democracy. A hundred years ago 



 

February 18, 1959 

 

 

2 

farmers owned the land they tilled and did most of their own marketing. Artisans owned their own tools 

and their workshops because most of it was house industry. Merchants owned the stores which they 

operated. With the coming of the Industrial Revolution we saw the concentration of the means of 

production and distribution fall into the hands of those who supplied the capital, with the result that great 

masses of people were economically disinherited. In the same period of time that we were winning the 

right to vote we were losing control of the economic means by which we live. This was put forward very 

succinctly just a couple of months ago by an outstanding Canadian, Father M.M. Coady of St. Francis 

Xavier University at Antigonish, Nova Scotia. Most people will be familiar with Father Coady‟s works. 

I remember 25 years ago reading his book “Masters of Their Own Destiny”. He was one of the founders 

of the co-operative movement in Nova Scotia and in Canada. He is now an old man but he spoke at a co-

operative seminar in the United States a short time ago. This is what he said: 

 

“We may find that the real reason for the refusal of the world to rush in and accept our way of life is 

due not to illiteracy or ignorance or to political dictators, but to ourselves. 

 

“It may well be that we are trying to palm off a counterfeit democratic coin on the poor people of the 

earth. 

 

“The first great fact that stares us in the face is that democracy has declined even here in its own home 

in the North American continent. As a matter of fact, we have not got as much democracy here in 

North America now as we had over 100 years ago. 

 

“In the old days more than 70% of our people were on farms. They had ownership. This ownership of 

land was the very foundation of American democracy. It gave the people a measure of economic 

independence and that sense of responsibility that goes with effective political democracy. 

 

“The founding fathers, who had given their people an effective program of political democracy, did 

not figure out the vital connection between political democracy and a fair share of economic 

independence or what might be called economic democracy.” 

 

I recommend that statement to the careful thought of every person. 

 

President Eisenhower has been credited with coining the phrase “Our economic destiny must be settled 

in the market place.” But I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the concept of a free society in which the 

free laws of supply and demand operate uninhibited no longer obtains. The law of supply and demand 

does not operate in our society. For instance, if it were in operation, how would we explain that during 

the past two years when the demand for automobiles and farm implements has gone down, the price has 

continued to go up and so have the profits? How is it that during a period of 



 

February 18, 1959 

 

 

3 

two years of recession when prices should have been falling, they are still going up? The President of 

the United States appointed Dr. Sumner Slichter of Harvard University to make an investigation into the 

matter and he made a report to the President last year. In that report Dr. Slichter said that something over 

60% of the prices in the United States are administered prices. In spite of the fact that the demand is 

going down, the prices of such commodities as steel, cars and farm implements have continued to go up. 

This is the only way to explain how you can have unemployment and inflation side by side in spite of 

the fact that the classical economists have been telling us for a hundred years that you can‟t have 

inflation and unemployment at the same time. The concentration of economic wealth has gone on and as 

corporations grow larger the number of shares needed to control them grows less. Proxy voting and 

interlocking directorates make it possible for a relatively small number of people to have undisputed 

control over great areas of our economy. They do not always control just their own wealth but they 

control other people‟s wealth as well. The best example of this is the insurance companies, in the main, 

handle not their own money but the money of millions of policy holders. These men have the power to 

decide where that money will be invested and in whose interest it will be invested. This idea of a free, 

competing economy is a myth. It doesn‟t exist. It‟s doubtful if it ever did exist. Certainly today it exists 

only in the minds of the Liberal Party and in the minds of the Sifton press. I have always been amused 

by the cry of the Sifton press for unrestricted competition. It comes very well from a multi-million dollar 

corporation which has a virtual monopoly of daily newspapers and other media of mass communication. 

These same people who talk about unrestricted competition at the same time that economic control is in 

the hands of fewer and fewer people are the very same ones who object when labourers form themselves 

into trade unions and when farmers seek to organization a march to Ottawa to get for themselves some 

measure of economic justice. Mr. Speaker, let us face the fact that big industry is organized and big 

finance is organized. Labour and farmers have no recourse but to organize if they are to get any slice at 

all out of this economic pie. But where will such a trend take us? Big finances and big industry will 

inevitably lead to big labour and big farm blocs. The average citizen, who doesn‟t belong to any of these 

blocs, will find himself crushed in the battle of the giants. We in the C.C.F. don‟t believe in a society in 

which you have virtual economic wars between economic pressure groups. We believe there has to be a 

new approach if our society is to survive. We believe that we have to establish a society dedicated to the 

supplying of human needs and to the enrichment of human lives. To us such a society depends on two 

basic principles. First, there must be social and economic planning in the use of our human and material 

resources. Second, there must be social ownership of those areas of our economy which require sound 

planning in the interests of human welfare. This government has endeavoured to apply these two 

principles during its term of office. We have followed out the policy of social and economic planning. I 

can remember when we set up the Economic Advisory and Planning Board all the gibes there were 

about the “back room boys”. But the fact remains that any government which does not plan is a 

government which merely goes from crisis to crisis, floundering like a ship with a chart or a compass. 

 

I would like to ask the House to look for a few moments at the progress which we have made under this 

type of economic planning. I would ask the House first of all to look at the contribution which public 

enterprise 



 

February 18, 1959 

 

 

4 

has played in the development of Saskatchewan since the end of World War II. I am sure that some of 

the Members saw, as I did, a program called “Close Up” on television a couple of weeks ago in which 

Professor J.K. Galbraith, the author of the book “The Affluent Society”, appeared. He made a significant 

statement. He said in effect that on this continent we have become the victims of advertising propaganda 

to the extent that if an individual or a few individuals build a plant to manufacture an automobile with a 

longer tail-fin, he is hailed as a public benefactor, but when the people themselves, through their 

government, build a hospital or supply themselves with electric power or some other commodity or 

service which they require, it is immediately labelled bureaucracy, or even worse – socialism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the time is coming when people are not going to be frightened by words. We are 

not going to apologize for the fact that there must be some place in our society for public enterprises 

owned by the people and operated by the people. 

 

I want to deal with some of the benefits which this province has received from the public enterprises 

which have been set up. I want to start with electric power because before we can talk about 

development in Saskatchewan we had to have abundant sources of power and cheap fuel as quickly as 

possible for this province. By the end of 1958 the Saskatchewan Power Corporation had invested over 

$200,000,000. That is a tremendous investment – something of which the people of this province can be 

proud. If anyone had told us 14 years ago that we could find this amount of money for this important 

field of public enterprise, we would have thought it fantastic. But the fact is, it has been done. We have 

in that period of time increased power consumption in Saskatchewan 5 times; we have increased our 

generating capacity 3 times. The annual increase in power consumption across Canada is 10.5% - in 

Saskatchewan it‟s 18.5%. Part of this is due to the fact that we were so far behind to begin with but are 

now making very rapid strides. The Power Corporation in 1945 had 24,000 customers. In 1958 it had 

154,000 customers – more than 6 times as many customers. This has meant a tremendous program of 

generating capacity installation. The great thermal plants at Estevan and at Saskatoon are well known, 

and smaller plants have also been installed. The South Saskatchewan Dam, of course, will supply power 

but that will not be for some years. As was announced in the Speech from the Throne, we propose to 

begin this year working on the production of hydro-electric power at Squaw Rapids on the 

Saskatchewan River. This project will in all probability come into operation before the South 

Saskatchewan Dam is producing power. There are other sites on the Saskatchewan River which have a 

power potential. We are therefore moving very rapidly toward being able to serve the power needs of 

this province. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition yesterday talked about how much cheaper power was in Manitoba. Of 

course this is understandable. When I was living in Manitoba 35 years ago they already were building 

their great power stations when building materials cost only a fraction of what they are today. But 35 

years ago we had the misfortune of having a Liberal Government in Saskatchewan. They weren‟t 

building power stations under public ownership. They were allowing little companies to come in and put 

up small uneconomic generating systems. There was no publicly owned, integrated power system. Now 

that Manitoba is beginning to put up thermal plants itself, it is finding 



 

February 18, 1959 

 

 

5 

that its costs are just the same as Saskatchewan‟s. As a matter of fact, as has been announced in the 

Speech from the Throne, it is now proposed that an inter-connecting link between the Manitoba system 

and the Saskatchewan system be built. I can assure you that the Manitoba system would not be buying 

Saskatchewan power if our prices were exorbitant. 

 

I think one of the greatest contributions which power has made to this province is the fact that it has 

brought the benefits of electric power to some 50,000 farmers at a cost of some $50,000,000, half of 

which is paid by the Power Corporation and half by the farmers themselves. The Leader of the 

Opposition yesterday cited this as an example of discrimination. Power to 50,000 farmers at a cost of 

$50,000,000 means about $1,000 per farm on the average. Of this $1,000 average amount the farmer 

puts up $500 and the Power Corporation puts up $500. But when the Power Corporation puts power into 

an urban home in a town, a hamlet or a village, the cost is $150. The Power Corporation puts up $500 

for every farm customer and $150 for every urban customer. If that is discriminatory treatment, Mr. 

Speaker, it is the kind of discrimination the farmers would have liked to receive when the Liberal Party 

was in office in this province. 

 

Another great field of public enterprise has been the distribution of natural gas. 

 

I do want, on behalf of the Power Corporation, to apologize to my friend, the Leader of the Opposition, 

for the fact that they put gas in his home without his consent. I can only assume that this was a 

professional courtesy that one gas distribution concern would want to do for another. 

 

Mr. McDonald: - It was much appreciated. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown (Minister i/c Sask. Power Corporation): - It was richly deserved? 

 

Premier Douglas: - Mr. Speaker, a few years ago members of this government did everything in their 

power to persuade Mr. St. Laurent and his government to have the Trans-Canada Pipeline publicly 

owned, or failing that to allow the province through which it would pass to build and own that section of 

the line within their borders. If anything has now demonstrated the validity of our proposal it is what has 

happened since that time. There was a story in the press last Friday night of the “$15,000,000 Gravy 

Train in Ontario” relating to the distribution of gas. Rows have gone on in Quebec over the distribution 

of gas. What has happened in the city of Winnipeg? The gas company there set a price of $1.06 mcf. 

After it had gone through several boards and commissions they were finally forced to reduce it to 90 

cents. The average price of gas in Saskatchewan works out at about 70 cents per mcf. It costs one cent to 

take 1,000 cubic feet of gas 100 miles and transporting it 400 miles to Winnipeg would cost about 4 

cents. Add that to the 70 cents. If you compare this 74 cents with the 90 cents, it means that the people 

of Winnipeg are going to pay 20% more for their gas than the people of Saskatchewan. In a great 

concentrated area like Winnipeg, which can serve most Manitoba customers from one distribution 

system, the price actually ought to be less. 

 

I wonder if we have ever stopped to consider what this gas distribution has meant in savings to the 

people of this province. In our own home 



 

February 18, 1959 

 

 

6 

last year we estimated that gas saved us approximately $170. Last year we had a very mild winter. 

Therefore take the average minimum savings which were estimated for space heating alone. This 

amounted to $60 per customer. With nearly 50,000 customers now using Saskatchewan gas this amounts 

to about $3,000,000. It is estimated that for hot water heating and cooking and the operation of other 

appliances the saving is probably another million dollars. Already the consumers of this product are 

saving somewhere between $3,000,000 and $4,000,000 as a result of gas being handled on a public 

ownership basis. 

 

We may mention another public enterprise. You cannot build up an economy unless you have adequate 

means of communication. The Telephone Corporation, which this year is celebrating its 50th 

anniversary, has done an amazing job. The people of Saskatchewan now have an investment of 

$63,000,000 in this enterprise. In 1945 there were 48,000 telephones installed; today there are 159,000, 

or three times as many. I think it is rather interesting that there have been more than twice as many 

telephones installed in the last 14 years than there were in the previous 36 years. Last year alone the 

Telephone Corporation installed some 12,000 telephones and the construction of the micro wave line, 

which brought the benefits of television to the different areas of the province, is something which I think 

has been of great benefit to our people. 

 

Let me ask you to look at some of the other public enterprises for a moment; and I am referring now to 

some of the Crown Corporations other than Power, Gas and Telephones. There has been a good deal of 

gibing at these Crown Corporations, gibing which will not stand up if you take the trouble to examine 

the facts. For instance, let us take the production of sodium sulphate. Since 1945 sodium sulphate 

production in this province has trebled and a good bit of this is due to the fact that it has been produced 

by a Crown Corporation, but a good bit of it is the production of brick and tile by a Saskatchewan 

Crown Corporation. When I was in Winnipeg last fall I was impressed with the rows of public buildings 

and business blocks that are being constructed from Saskatchewan brick and Saskatchewan tile. There is 

one entire area there which is now being called Estevan Row because almost every building in it has 

been built with Estevan brick. 

 

The Government Insurance Office is not only giving to our people cheaper insurance, it has compelled 

the insurance companies to reduce their rates. Even then it has turned over to the public treasury since it 

started $3,000,000 which has been available to give to our people health, welfare and educational 

services. 

 

These Crown Corporations, which have been criticized so much, have a good record. The financial 

statements will be tabled. At this time not all of them have been audited, so I will use round figures 

which can easily be checked when the financial statements are tabled. The only one of these Crown 

Corporations which had any loss in 1958 – and it was a very small loss – was the Saskatchewan 

Government Airways. All the other Crown Corporations show a surplus. They will show a surplus in 

round figures for 1958 of 



 

February 18, 1959 

 

 

7 

$1,250,000 on a $9,000,000 investment, or a return of over 14% on the money invested. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): - That‟s an excessive profit, isn‟t it? 

 

Premier Douglas: - When you add to that Power and Telephone, after interest has been deducted for 

these latter two, they will show a surplus of $5,750,000. They have a payroll of $21,000,000 and provide 

employment for 5,466 persons. I say that this is a record in which the people of this province can take 

pride and it demonstrates that public enterprise can play a useful part in the social and economic 

development of a province. 

 

Another essential to economic development in any area is, of course, transportation. We must have 

roads. The people must be able to get around. Transportation enters into the cost of everything we ship 

and everything we buy. Therefore it is important that we have a proper transportation system. Great 

progress has been made since the war in building up a highway system and, in more recent years, in 

building up a municipal grid road system. I think it is rather interesting to look at he figures, Mr. 

Speaker. In the 39 years before this government came into power the total amount spent on highways 

and roads by previous governments was $89,500,000, $32,000,000 of which hadn‟t been paid for. We 

were still owing it in the form of bonds that had been floated to pay for roads. Since the present 

government came in we paid off $7,000,000 of this $32,000,000 debt. In addition we have spent, on 

highways and northern roads, $206,500,000. We have spent more than twice as much in 14 years as was 

spent in the previous 39 years. In addition to that we have spent almost $28,000,000 on municipal roads 

and bridges, making a grand total on municipal and provincial roads and bridges in the 14 year period of 

$234,500,000. I might point out, Mr. Speaker, that while we would always like to spend more – there is 

always a demand for more expenditure on highways – the fact is that last year we spent $7,000,000 more 

on roads and highways than we took in taxes from those who drive on the roads and on the highways. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition complained yesterday about the lack of financial assistance to 

municipalities. Well, I want to just make this passing observation. In the matter of assistance to 

municipalities for roads and bridges, last year alone we paid out more to the municipalities than the 

Liberal government did in the whole ten years it was in office from 1934 to 1944. 

 

Let me now turn to another field of social ownership which is contributing greatly to the development of 

Saskatchewan. I refer to the co-operative enterprises which have played such an important part in our 

development. Co-operative ownership is simply another name by which people do things themselves. 

Instead of doing it through their government, whether it‟s federal, provincial or municipal, they do it by 

voluntary association coming together to work for their mutual interests. 

 

Mr. Loptson: - I suppose you want to take credit for that too. 

 

Premier Douglas: - There has been a tremendous growth in the co-operative movement in this province 

since the end of the war. Co-operative membership in 1944-45 was 299,000. Last year it was 704,000. 



 

February 18, 1959 

 

 

8 

The assets in that period of time have gone up from $71,000,000 to $271,000,000, and the volume of 

business done by co-operatives in the province has gone up in that period from $199,000,000 to last 

year‟s figure of $560,000,000. This, Mr. Speaker, is a record of which the people of this province can be 

proud. I am exceptionally proud myself that this has become the banner co-operative province of 

Canada. 

 

I am somewhat surprised at some of the reaction when the government, in keeping with its policy, 

entered into a partnership arrangement with the co-operatives to take certain Crown reserves in oil fields 

and operate them with the co-operatives so that the consumers in this province could get the benefits of 

the resources produced here. These after all belong to the people. There was a tremendous outcry from 

the Sifton press and from the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce and even from my friend, the 

Leader of the Opposition, who objected most strenuously to this partnership arrangement. I find this 

difficult to understand. If a company whose headquarters were in Montreal or in New Jersey or in 

London, England came in here, we would put on a banquet to welcome them for coming and developing 

our resources. But when the people of Saskatchewan themselves, out of their hard-earned dollars, are 

prepared to develop their own resources so as to get the benefit of them, it is called a very bad deal, and 

we are told that we are following a policy which is different from the policy being followed in other 

provinces. Mr. Speaker, we were not elected to follow the policies being pursued in other provinces. We 

were elected to serve the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan and to see that the resources 

owned by them were, as far as possible, developed in their interests. 

 

I believe that the co-operatives can continue to play an important role in our development. It has been 

estimated that the co-operatives need to operate about 20% to 30% of our entire economy in order to be 

an effective check against gigantic monopolies and to be an effective balance wheel in a just and free 

country. We still have a long way to go. 

 

Across Canada we probably present 1% to 3% of the total economy, and in Saskatchewan – probably 

10% or 11%. This is a field, Mr. Speaker, to which we must give more and more support as a 

government and as a people. 

 

Now let me mention the part which has been played by private enterprise in the economic development 

of our province. For years the Liberal Party and their press have tried to convince the public that there 

would be no investment in Saskatchewan if we had a C.C.F. government. That hasn‟t proved to be the 

case. Public and private investment in Saskatchewan in 1948 was $241,000,000. In 1958 – ten years 

later – it had gone up to $626,000,000. During the past ten years the oil companies alone have invested 

$753,000,000 in exploration and development programs in this province. I have the statistics here. 

However, I don‟t think there is much sense in tossing around all kinds of statistics. People know what is 

going on. They know that there are urban communities in Saskatchewan whose populations have 

doubled in the last 14 years. They see signs of activity everywhere they go. As a matter of fact, I can‟t 

do better than call a witness. I call as a witness the Regina Leader-Post. Nobody except the member 

from Melville (Mr. Gardiner) will think that‟s a C.C.F. periodical. 



 

February 18, 1959 

 

 

9 

This is what the Regina Leader-Post said in an editorial in its issue of January 3rd, 1959: 

 

“. . . Generally speaking, 1958 was a good year. Economically, Saskatchewan appears to have held its 

own against two adverse factors, the short grain crop and the national recession. Statistics still are 

tentative. But present indications point to a gross commodity production for the year which will be 

approximately the same as the record high of $1,521,000,000 in 1956. 

 

This is an achievement to crow about in the face of the decline in the value of the gross agricultural 

production to about half a billion dollars compared with $800,000,000 n 1952 when grain crops were 

bountiful and the prices were riding high. For two years – in 1957 and 1958 – when the value of 

agricultural production was down, the provincial economy remained on an even keel. 

 

The explanation, of course, is that non-agricultural production has forged ahead to take up the slack. 

The province is not as dependent as it once was on the vagaries of the agricultural economy. No longer 

is it a case of “boom or bust” depending on the fluctuations of the fortunes of grain farming, and 

mainly wheat. As recently as 1952, agriculture accounted for just about 65 per cent of the province‟s 

gross commodity production. The tables last year were completely reversed, with major non-

agricultural industries accounting for around 65 per cent, and agriculture about 35 per cent . . .” 

 

In the same week the Leader-Post had another editorial. It was dated December 31st, 1958. I will just 

quote a short part of it. 

 

“. . . However, a glance back over 1958 reveals that new secondary industries and extensions to 

existing ones which were started or which went into production represent a capital outlay of 

approximately $45,000,000. This does not include the potash mine near Saskatoon which started 

production in November, nor does it include any petroleum developments except the $11,000,000 

plant near Steelman, which commenced the processing of casinghead gas and the $8,000,000 

extensions to oil refineries in the province . . . 

 

Enterprises which started production this year, or are scheduled to do so next year, will turn out such a 

wide variety of products as: flexible plastic pipe, trailers, building board from wheatstraw and wood, 

hardboard, plywood and veneers, corrugated paper containers, shotgun shells, refined ball clays and 

kaolins, insecticides, ceramics, cooking and salad oils and coke . . . 



 

February 18, 1959 

 

 

10 

That, Mr. Speaker, is put together much more concisely than I could do and I think that every fair-

minded person will agree that there has been a tremendous amount of industrial development and 

increased manufacturing in the province. One must also realize that since 1945 agriculture has not gone 

back. Agricultural production has gone up from $336,000,000 to $500,000,000 last year. But non-

agricultural production has gone up from $231,000,000 to the staggering figure of $944,000,000. 

 

A good part of this was increased mineral production which has shown amazing growth since 1945. In 

1945, our total mineral production was in the neighbourhood of $22,300,000. Preliminary figures from 

D.B.S. show that last year it was $214,000,000 or almost ten times as much. In the past ten years we 

have climbed from the sixth largest mineral producers in Canada to the fourth largest. First we passed 

Manitoba. Last year we passed British Columbia. Today, only Ontario, Quebec and Alberta have a 

larger mineral production than Saskatchewan. 

Our oil and gas production in 1958 was close to $100,000,000. Our coal production has doubled since 

1945 and we moved from the sixth largest coal producer to the fourth. We passed Nova Scotia a few 

years ago and last year we passed British Columbia. Our metal production, which includes copper, zinc 

and uranium, has gone from $18,000,000 in 1945 to $88,000,000 last year. 

 

Mr. Loptson: - I don‟t believe you. 

 

Premier Douglas: - No amount of quibbling about the difference in value and how many pounds and 

how many ounces were produced is going to explain the difference between the $18,000,000 and 

$88,000,000. That, Mr. Speaker, is increased wealth production. 

 

The same thing is true with reference to manufacturing. The value of manufactured products in 1945 

was $167,000,000. By 1957 it had gone up to $311,000,000. Here the Opposition said the other day that 

prices account for the difference and that if prices were taken into account, manufacturing is actually 

down. If you look at the records, you will find the price index for manufactured products in that period 

of time went up 67%. If you increase $167,000,000 by 67% you are still a long way short of 

$326,000,000. Construction is always a good barometer of economic activity. We find in regard to 

construction that in 1945 we had 4,078 employed; lat year we had 27,285 employed. The value of 

construction has gone up from $17,000,000 to $372,000,000 in that same period of time. 

 

Retail sales is also a good mark of people‟s wellbeing. In 1945 retail sales were $279,000,000; last year 

they were $885,000,000 or an increase of 217%. The price index is that period has gone up by one 68 

per cent. 



 

February 18, 1959 

 

 

11 

These developments, over the past ten years particularly, give to us great hope for even greater 

developments in the next ten years. I want to make mention of two or three of them. I would refer first 

of all to the South Saskatchewan Dam which is going to have great benefits for agriculture by making 

possible more diversified farming. It will provide an abundant supply of water which will make possible 

industrial development, recreation sites and, of course, the generation of power. 

 

The new potash mine and plant which has just gone into production near Saskatoon will be followed 

shortly by the operation at Esterhazy. These two will produce from $20,000,000 to $25,000,000 worth of 

potash per year. With the activity which is going on in this field it is quite conceivable that 

Saskatchewan can become one of the important potash centres of the world. 

 

The steel rolling mill, estimated to cost some $15,000,000 and on which construction has already begun, 

will produce about $14,000,000 of steel a year or about 100,000 tons annually. It is of tremendous 

importance because of the other secondary industries which will undoubtedly gravitate to it. I am sure 

everyone must have been interested, as I was, in the CBC newscast that came over TV from Toronto a 

couple of weeks ago showing pictures of the drilling of iron ore deposits in the Nipawin-Choiceland 

area. It is too soon yet to make any prognostication but certainly all the signs so far are encouraging. 

When you realize that there is no great iron ore body in either Western Canada or the western part of the 

United States, you see what this could mean in terms of an iron and steel industry for Saskatchewan. I 

think the future is bright indeed. 

 

I would refer also to the opening up of the north. As the Speech from the Throne said, some 2,500 miles 

of road have been built in the mineral and forest areas of the north. Agreements have been entered into 

with the federal government to build a road from Prince Albert to Flin Flon, from Lac La Ronge to 

Uranium City, from Buffalo Narrows to La Loche and other roads in that area. This will help to open up 

a whole new treasure house for development in our province. A great deal, of course, remains to be 

done; we have only made a good running start. Mention was made yesterday of a pulp and paper 

industry. I want to say categorically that there has not been any reluctance on anyone‟s part to come into 

the province because investors will not put up the money. There are very real transportation and freight 

rates problems. We are confident that these can be overcome. 

 

Another thing we are going to need is railways into that north country. We will continue to put all the 

pressure we can on the railway companies to go ahead with railways in the north country. We will even 

offer to assist if that becomes necessary. 

 

The government has now undertaken a survey of our economic potential. We have been fortunate in 

securing the services of three groups. The Stanford Research Institute of Stanford University in the 

United States is working with the Economic Research Corporation, connected with McGill University. 

These two groups will make an appraisal of our economic development to date and they will give us 

some indication of what areas need to have 



 

February 18, 1959 

 

 

12 

priority in order that our economic development may move forward on a balanced and even front and on 

a coordinated basis. We are also bringing into this survey Sandwell and Company, who are forestry 

consultants from Vancouver, to give particular attention to the whole matter of the utilization of forest 

products. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have spent a good bit of time on this matter of economic and industrial development. But 

I want to point out that in the opinion of this government and the party it represents, economic 

development is not merely for the purpose of producing wealth and giving employment to those who 

labour and return to those who invest. It is something much more important. This development must also 

make possible better educational opportunities, more amenities of life and a greater measure of security 

of the sick, the aged and the unfortunate. What has this economic and industrial development meant? 

What has it meant for the average citizen? This development has given revenue to the government which 

has enabled us to provide greater services. For instance, take resource development alone. Our resource 

development brought to the government in royalties and so on in 1945, less than $1,500,000. Last year it 

brought in over $23,000,000. This means extra money with which we can help to pay more school 

grants and to provide better hospital services and better social welfare services. 

 

Consider for a moment the Hospital Plan. It is estimated that the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan 

next year will probably cost $33,000,000. That is as much money as the entire provincial budget was 

less than 20 years ago. Throughout all the 12 years that this Plan has been in operation the people of this 

province have never, through their taxes, paid for the cost of their hospitalization. Part of every hospital 

bill has come out of the resource development. That is why it has been possible to finance it on a very 

low per capita tax and on a one cent sales tax on a limited number of commodities. I think, Mr. Speaker, 

that the people of this province have reason to be proud of their Hospital Plan. I remember when we 

started it on the 1st of January, 1947. I remember how it was maligned as being regimentation. But the 

fact remains that today almost every province in Canada is copying this same Plan. The difference is 

they are only coming in 11 or 12 years later. This Hospital Plan, Mr. Speaker, is still the best of its kind 

in Canada. We still have more hospital beds per thousand than any other province. We still have a higher 

utilization rate. As has been announced in the Speech from the Throne, we will now proceed to add out-

patient care just as quickly as staff and facilities can be provided by the different hospitals. I trust that, as 

our resource development goes on and as we get more revenue, this principle of prepaid health services 

will be expanded, not only to cover hospital care but eventually to cover all the health services that 

people require. 

 

This development has made possible increased assistance for education. My friends opposite may talk 

about us not giving enough assistance to local government. But the fact is that when we came into office 

the provincial government was paying less than $3,000,000 a year in school grants. Last year we paid 

$20,000,000 in school grants to primary and secondary schools. What is even more significant is that at 

that time the provincial government‟s contribution to primary and secondary education constituted 



 

February 18, 1959 

 

 

13 

21 per cent of the bill. Last year our contribution represented 40 per cent of the bill. 

 

I am sure that the University students who are here will be interested in the fact that the University, for 

which the provincial government must accept sole responsibility, in the year 1944-45, received a 

contribution of $550,000 from the provincial government. Last year we contributed $2,500,000. In all 

the years from the time the University was founded in 1909 up until 1944 previous governments 

invested $4,167,000. More than five times as much capital investment has been made in the past 14 

years than was made in the previous 36 years. 

 

I would like to pay special tribute to the communities of Saskatchewan and to the Department of Social 

Welfare for the senior citizens housing units that have been established. I have visited most of them. 

There are 56 of them now in operation and 26 more either under construction or in various stages of 

planning. There are 3,000 elderly people who now can be provided for an eventually 4,000 people will 

have suitable housing accommodations. This is a record, Mr. Speaker, that cannot be matched by any 

other province in Canada in relation to their population. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as our economic development goes on and as it increases in its tempo there are many other 

services which will and must be provided. As the Speech from the Throne has mentioned, we propose a 

water survey because eventually we must get sewer and water into every small community of this 

province. We are also interested in the question of farm homes. The end of the rural electrification 

program is coming in sight. We should be able to complete it in the next few years. We would now like 

to work on a program that would make it possible for people to having running water and flush toilets in 

farm homes on a basis similar to the rural electrification program. 

 

We are also thinking in terms of recreation programs. That is why you are being asked to vote money for 

the purchase of land for parks, for picnic sites and for camping sites. We think, of course, that 

recreational facilities are essential to a modern community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me now turn to what is to me the most important question of all and that is the plight of 

agriculture in our present unplanned economy. The farmer today is the plaything of blind, impersonal 

economic forces over which he has no control and against which he cannot compete single-handed. The 

farmers of this country and of this province particularly have three main problems. Those problems are 

(1) the cost-price squeeze, (2) vertical integration, and (3) surpluses. Let me spend just a few minutes on 

each of them. 

 

First of all I would like to say a word about the cost-price squeeze. The cost-price squeeze, as everyone 

knows, arises out of the fact that the farmer has to produce in a protected market and he must sell in an 

open market. He must produce in a market where everything he needs is bought behind tariff walls at 

prices set by someone else. But when he goes to sell his commodities – particularly wheat – he must sell 

it on a world 



 

February 18, 1959 

 

 

14 

market where again he has no control over the price which he will receive. The results, Mr. Speaker, 

have been disastrous. Take 1946 to 1956 as a base period and consider the average return for agriculture. 

I want to stress this for sometimes I hear people say that is just the Saskatchewan farmer who is having a 

bad time or it is just the wheat farmer who is having a bad time. Take agriculture for all of Canada and 

what do we find? We find in 1957 and again in 1958, compared to that ten year period from 1946 to 

1956, that the farmer‟s cash income was up 10.26 per cent, but his net income – is the money he has left 

in his pocket after he has paid his expenses – was down 11.14 per cent. Take Saskatchewan, where it is 

worse. Our cash income was up 6.14 per cent but our net income was down 44.38 per cent. Consider this 

in terms of purchasing power. Again I take all of Canada. In terms of purchasing power in 1957 and 

1958, the farmer‟s cash income was down 7.3 per cent and his net income was down 34 per cent. For 

Saskatchewan his cash income was down 11.45 per cent and his net income was down 53.34 per cent. 

This is an appalling situation! If you take the 1951 to 1958 years as a base period, we find that our farm 

costs in Canada are up 12.6 per cent and our farm prices down 18.5 per cent. Take eastern Canada. I use 

this because sometimes people say just the western farmer is doing all the complaining. They have never 

been to a meeting of the Canadian Federation of Agriculture or they wouldn‟t say that. The eastern 

farmer finds that in that same period from 1951 to 1958 his farm costs went up 11.3 per cent and his 

farm prices went down 15 per cent. Western Canada of course is worse. In the west in that eight year 

period our farm costs went up 13.8 per cent and our farm prices went down 23 per cent. 

 

I noticed in the paper the day before yesterday that Mr. Irwin Studer, the former Liberal Member of 

Parliament, had quite a diatribe against the farmers who are asking for deficiency payments and who are 

proposing to send a delegation to Ottawa. I was surprised to read that he said that if the wheat farmers of 

Western Canada are in such dire straits why do they not diversify and produce commodities that are not 

in surplus. Where has Mr. Studer been? In the last five years the farmers of Saskatchewan have reduced 

their wheat acreage by 21 per cent. They have taken 3,700,000 acres out of wheat. Last year we had the 

highest livestock population in our history and the highest livestock marketing in our history. Nobody 

can blame the farmer. He has done everything he can to diversify his economy. Mr. Studer goes on to 

criticize the idea of the delegation. He wonders why the farmers of the west do not go down and 

persuade the farmers from the east to work out a national policy that they can take to Ottawa. I wonder if 

he has taken the trouble to check the proceedings of the Canadian Federation of Agriculture which met 

in the City of Saskatoon within the last few weeks. He would find that the Canadian Federation of 

Agriculture has gone on record as being solidly in favour of parity prices and endorsing the request of 

the grain producers of Western Canada for deficiency payments. 

 

Let me turn to the other problem which faces the farmers. This is the problem of vertical integration and 

contract farming. I started these remarks by saying that we don‟t believe that people‟s destiny should be 

determined alone by economic law and economic forces. We believe that the family farm has social 

values. We don‟t believe it should be destroyed merely because some other system is said to be more 

efficient. Yet in spite of everything the fact remains that vertical integration and contract farming set the 



 

February 18, 1959 

 

 

15 

whole structure of farming in this country. Already in the United States 90 per cent of all broilers are 

produced on a contract farm basis, as is a tremendous amount of poultry and eggs, a good bit of their 

hog production and now the fattening of cattle. I was surprised when I was in Ontario a few months ago 

to find that this is becoming quite prevalent. Some of it has even started this last year in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The process is simple. A feed company comes to a group of farmers – usually young farmers – and they 

say: “We‟ll set you up. We‟ll lend you the money to put up your buildings. We‟ll supply you with feed.” 

A packing company comes and says: “We‟ll supply you with young pigs or sows and we‟ll supply you 

with chicks.” The farmer under this arrangement spends his time feeding somebody else‟s feed to 

somebody else‟s hogs. When he has them raised, the company comes and ships them off and processes 

them. He is paid for the job of carrying somebody else‟s feed over to a trough so somebody else‟s hogs 

can eat. It is an amazing thing to me, Mr. Speaker, that some of the people who talk most about the 

horror of collective farms stand idly by and watch the development of corporation farms which, in my 

opinion, aren‟t very much better. 

 

This is a trend which is extremely serious. It is not a new trend. I can remember when I was a boy 

listening to my grandfather tell of what happened when the industrial revolution came to the Highlands 

of Scotland. Away back in the middle of the 19th century the people of the Highlands made their living 

as small farmers or artisans. Most of them were weavers who wove cloth in their own little homes. The 

farmers brought their produce into town and sold it in the market place; the weavers brought their cloth 

in to the market place and sold it. Then came the industrial revolution with its steam power, machines 

and factories. You know the story, Mr. Speaker, as does every Canadian. The great landlords cancelled 

the leases of the crofters and thousands of these small farmers migrated to Canada. Lord Selkirk brought 

them over. They came over and settled in the counties of Bruce and Gray in Ontario and in parts of 

Nova Scotia. They were driven off the land. The weavers, now no longer able to compete with the 

machines, flocked to the cities. They filled the slums and tried to sell their labour. It was one of the most 

painful economic adjustments in history and it was rife with human suffering and human misery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us make no mistake about it – the same industrial revolution is now going to hit 

agriculture. You cannot stop progress but you can direct it and you can minimize human suffering. You 

can direct progress so that it will have social objectives. This we must do. In my opinion, the only way 

to do it is for the farmers, through co-operatives, through co-operative marketing boards and through 

government marketing boards, to take over more and more of the control of the processing, packaging 

and marketing of their own products. At one time the farmer got practically all the money that came 

from the sale of his products. He took his products into the town and he sold them or he peddled them 

from door to door. What happens today? In the year 1956 the food consumers of Canada paid 

$3,000,000,000 for their food. Of this amount $1,400,000,000 went to the farmers and $1,600,000,000 

went to those who processed, shipped and sold that food. In other words, the farmer got 45 cents out of 

the consumer‟s dollar. If this vertical integration and contract farming goes on, the 



 

February 18, 1959 

 

 

16 

farmers will get even less than 45 cents out of the consumer‟s dollar. Unless the farmer is able to reach 

out and have some control of the processing, packaging and marketing of his own product this is going 

to be the result. This it seems to me, is the great challenge which now faces us here in Western Canada if 

we are to preserve the family farms and prevent them from becoming merely factories owned by 

packing companies and feed companies. 

 

We will turn now to the last of the problems that I wanted to deal with and that is the matter of 

surpluses. Surpluses in an unplanned economy have become the bogey man. I was surprised at some of 

the developments at the recent Conference of Agricultural Ministers in Canada with the Federal Minister 

of Agriculture. The Federal Minister warned the Ministers – and through them the farmers of Canada – 

that if they didn‟t hold down production he would find it necessary to reduce support prices. Mr. 

Speaker, asking farmers and Ministers of Agriculture to hold down production in a world that is half 

hungry, surely, Mr. Speaker, is the very essence of social insanity. 

 

Dr. Eugene Staley, who is a senior international research economist at Stanford University says this: 

 

“Despite all the vaunted technological and economic progress of modern times, there are probably 

more poverty-stricken people in the world today than there were 50 years ago.” 

 

The figures published by the United Nations show that our per capita production of food in 1958 was 

less than it was in 1939. We are producing more food. But population has grown faster than our food 

supply and we are actually producing less food per person in the world today than we were 20 years ago. 

 

The Food and Agriculture Organization in their bulletin from Rome said this: 

 

“Consumption of food in countries representing about one-half of the world‟s population fell below or 

barely reached, the minimum energy requirements of 2,200 calories per person per day.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, surely only an unplanned economy which has lost sight of human values and human 

perspective could produce the situation that we have in this country today. Over half a million people are 

unemployed. Farmers are unable to get their cost of production and they are being told by the Federal 

Minister of Agriculture that they ought to curtail production. Surely there can be no justification in this 

day and generation for having 538,000 able bodied people walking the streets of Canada when there are 

scores of things that need to be done such as the building of hospitals, schools, recreation centres and 

more roads, and resources which need to be developed. Human labour is going to waste. Unemployment 

has already cost us in the past two years about $2,000,000,000 worth of goods that could have been 

produced but were not. 



 

February 18, 1959 

 

 

17 

How can we possibly justify saying to those who produce food which is essential to life that they ought 

to curtail their production. How can we look upon surpluses as being a tragedy in a world where, 

according to the Food and Agricultural Organization, half the people barely reach or fall below a 

minimum diet of 2,200 calories per day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this nation has a responsibility. Canada spent last year in assistance to underprivileged and 

undernourished nations $3 for every $100 we spent on armaments for defence. Surely the time has come 

for a great act of faith. Surely the time has come when we ought to put our faith in constructive things 

rather than destructive things. Surely the time has come when we ought to be using surpluses to help 

build good will and to help to establish friendship among the nations of the world. These things are the 

foundations of peace. I am prepared to concede that you probably cannot go unarmed as long as you 

have dictators and irresponsible megalomaniacs loose in the world. But the fact remains that all history 

has proven that armaments have simply led to more armaments. They have never solved the problem. 

They have either led inevitably to war or to the economic collapse of the nations who have had to spend 

40, 50 and 60 per cent of their national income on armaments. Surely the time has come when instead of 

saying to the farmers: “You have done a great service to mankind; we welcome your production; we will 

pay you the cost of production plus at least a decent standard of living.” Instead of buying up more 

armaments we could buy up food and help feed hungry people wherever they may be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if ever the world and if ever this nation needed the vision of a Co-operative 

Commonwealth it is now. I am suggesting that we will never be free from the problems of 

unemployment, of agricultural dislocation, of surpluses and of war until we have changed this 

competitive dog-eat-dog society into a co-operative society in which we plan all our human efforts in 

order to build an economy in which people can live together in peace and in prosperity. 

 

This year 1959, Mr. Speaker, as you and I know, being fellow Scots, is the 200th anniversary of the birth 

of Robbie Burns, the national poet of Scotland. I can think of no finer way to conclude my remarks than 

to remind you of what he said: 

 

“Then let us pray that come it may 

(As come it will for a‟ that), 

 

That Man to Man, the world o‟er, 

Shall brothers be for a‟ that.” 



 

February 18, 1959 

 

 

18 

Mr. A.P. Weber (Meadow Lake): - Mr. Speaker, I am sorry the Mover of Motion for the Speech from 

the Throne is not in his seat this afternoon. However, I would still like to congratulate him as Mover and 

the able way he presented his case to the members of this Legislature. I would also like to pass on my 

congratulations to the hon. member from Kindersley (Mr. Johnson), who so ably Seconded it. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I must say that I have had a new experience in this House. The Premier of this 

province addressed the gathering here for approximately 1½ hours and during that 1½ hours, there was 

very little interruption on the part of my friends, the Liberals. I don‟t know, Mr. Speaker, whether there 

was so little in his speech that they couldn‟t find anything to argue with, or whether it was just a 

repetition of things that have been said so often before, that they were resting. However, after listening 

to the Premier‟s few words in extolling the many benefits that the farmers of this country would derive 

by being united through the C.C.F. in a political party joined up with the Canadian Labour Congress in a 

new political party who so far, he has failed to identify. 

 

I would like to say that in my opinion, the Premier is a very versatile man. Not only is he is Minister of 

this Government, he is also a Minister of the Gospel – but now, of all things, he is trying to become a 

„match-maker‟. He is trying to create a romance between our farmers and our labour organizations, and I 

certainly cannot feature this as being a „love-match‟ by any stretch of imagination. 

 

I do not believe that farmers and labour are too much concerned with tying themselves to any political 

party – because we have found through experience that C.C.F., due to infiltration into the farmers union, 

have almost caused that organization to fall apart. I can‟t imagine amore incompatible union than that of 

farmer and labour. These groups have neither common interests, nor common objectives to work for. 

Therefore, I think this is not a time to consider a union between those two groups into a political party. 

Furthermore, I don‟t see that farmers like to have any organization to which they belong as farmers, 

being told what way or how they should vote and I think that they will show their objections to this idea 

in an uncertain manner. 

 

However, I am not going to say much this afternoon. I would like to say at this time, I was very pleased 

with some of the remarks the Premier made, in connection with farm problems. I know that we all 

realize that this problem is very, very important to us and that we should make every effort to do what 

we can to help solve it. 

 

With these few words, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

Mr. Speaker: - Before putting the Motion, may I remind all members that we are jointly hosts of our 

guests from the University of 



 

February 18, 1959 

 

 

19 

Saskatchewan and I understand the dinner hour is set for 5:30 p.m. 

 

It is moved that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the House to adopt the Motion. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:25 o‟clock p.m. 


