



















































Hansard: April 14, 1959


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session – Thirteenth Legislature 

42nd Day 

 

Tuesday, April 14, 1959 
 

The House met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

CORRECTION OF PRESS REPORT 

 

Premier Douglas: Mr. Speaker, I wish to refer to a quotation in regard to a pulp mill proposed near Flin 

Flon. In the story there is a statement which, I am sure is a typographical error; but in view of the fact 

that the discussion last night was in Committee of Supply, and no record is kept, I thought perhaps I 

should put this statement on the record. The quotation to which I refer says: 

 

“Answering a question by L.N. Nicholson (S.C.) Nipawin, Premier Douglas said: „Terms had been 

arrived at regarding an amount of money the Government would make from the operation. He said this 

would be contained in any agreement the Government made with the Committee‟.” 

 

I think the Committee will remember that what I said was just the opposite. I said that the terms had not 

been arrived at regarding the amount of money the Government would make from the operation. It is 

just simply a typographical error. In other words, nothing has been left out; but in order that the record 

may be kept straight, I am drawing this to the attention of the House. 

 

CONGRATULATIONS TO QU’APPELLE DIOCESE 

 

Premier Douglas: Mr. Speaker, I would like to raise one matter which will only take a moment, and 

that is that as most hon. members know, the Anglican Church in the Diocese of Qu‟Appelle are 

celebrating their 75th anniversary. This is a very historic occasion, and I thought the Legislature, in 

drawing near the close of this Session, would want to place on record our recognition of this important 

occasion, our appreciation of the work done by the Church of England, and our good wishes for their 

continued success. 

 

Might I just make these few remarks. The Anglican Church began its work in the Canadian West in 

1820, when the Rev. John Wesley, 



 

April 14, 1959 

 

 

2 

a Church of England Clergyman arrived to administer to some 500 Scottish settlers. At that time, until 

the year 1849, the work of the Church of England was carried on mainly through the English Church 

Missionary Society. In 1949, the Diocese of Rupert‟s Land, including all the area belonging to the 

Hudson‟s Bay Company from the Red River to the Rockies, was formed under Bishop Anson. The 

beginning of settlement in the early 1880‟s brought problems of expansion to the church. These were by 

a policy of decentralization. The ecclesiastical province of Rupert‟s Land was dived into dioceses, one 

of these was the Diocese of Qu‟Appelle, set up in 1884. 

 

This Diocese takes in all of the Saskatchewan south of the line crossing the province roughly 10 miles 

north of Nokomis, Kenaston and Rosetown, and reaches some 60 miles into Alberta. When first set up 

the Diocese was a vast, lonely stretch of prairie, 93,000 square miles in extent, and there were two 

churches – one in Regina, and one in Moose Jaw and there were three clergymen. The pioneer bishop 

was Bishop Anson, who served from 1884 to 1911, followed by Bishop Burn from 1892 to 1896; then 

Bishop Grisdale from 1896 to 1911; then Bishop Harding from 1911 to 1924; then Bishop Knowles 

from 1935 to 1949, and the present bishop is Bishop Michael Coleman. 

 

The early churches in the diocese – first of all, St. Paul‟s Pro-Cathedral in Regina, which was 

established in 1882, and then St. John‟s Church in Moose Jaw, 1883, All Saint‟s, Katepwa, 1884, St. 

John the Evangelist, at Fort Qu‟Appelle in 1884; St. Alban‟s at Moosomin, 1884; All Saint‟s, 

Cannington Manor, 1884, St. Michael‟s and All Angels, Grenfell,, 18854, St. Peter‟s at Qu‟Appelle, 

1885; St. Andrews Indian Reserve, 1885; St. Mary‟s at Maple Creek, 1885, St. Boniface, Medicine Hat, 

1885, and St. Mary‟s at Whitewood, in 1881. Some of the institutions of the diocese which have 

contributed to the life of the people are St. Chad‟s College, the Qu‟Appelle Diocesan School for Girls, 

and St. Cuthbert‟s House. 

 

It is interesting to note that the Bishop of Qu‟Appelle did not always reside in Regina. Lord Grassie, 

who was the father of the Lady Willingdon, built the Bishop‟s Court in Indian Head in the early Nineties 

as a residence for the Bishop, and it was used as such until 1911, when Bishop Harding moved the 

residence to Regina. The first cathedral of the Diocese was St. Peter‟s in Qu‟Appelle, and it was in St. 

Peter‟s that the 50th Anniversary of the Diocese was celebrated. St. Paul‟s, Regina, became the Pro-

Cathedral of the Diocese in 1944. 

 

I think it is worth while having this on the record, because this is an important part of the historical 

background of Saskatchewan, and the part which one of the churches has played in the spiritual and 

moral and social life of our people. I would, therefore, like to move, Mr. Speaker, by consent of the 

House, seconded by the hon. Leader of the Opposition: 

 

“That this Assembly desires to express its warm congratulations to the Diocese of Qu‟Appelle on the 

celebration of its 75th Anniversary, records its sincere commendation and appreciation of the 

inestimable 



 

April 14, 1959 

 

 

3 

contribution made, through its agency, to the spiritual, social and cultural life not only of the 

community it has served so faithfully and well over the years, but also of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, and extends its best wishes for the continued success of the Diocese in all its 

endeavours.” 

 

“Further, this Assembly desires to pay tribute to the qualities of leadership and of devout service of 

those, its titular heads, who have, since the days of Bishop Anson, so ably directed the affairs of the 

Diocese and inspired its good works.” 

 

Leave having been granted, the motion was agreed to unanimously. 

 

PAYMENT TO MRS. HENRY BEGRAND 

 

Premier Douglas: Mr. Speaker, if I may have your indulgence for a moment, it has been customary at 

other sessions to have a motion of the Legislature passed, in order that any member who has passed 

away during the sitting of the Legislature, that his or her indemnity may be paid to the surviving party. I 

would, therefore, by leave of the Assembly, like to move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Fines: 

 

“That this Assembly recommend to the Government that the necessary steps be taken, under Section 

52 of The Legislative Assembly Act, to provide that the full indemnity and allowances which would, 

in happier circumstances have been payable to the late Mr. Henry Begrand at the close of the present 

session, be made payable to the widow of the late Member for the Constituency of Kinistino, Mrs. 

Henry Begrand, of Hoey, Saskatchewan, or to such other person as may be designated by the 

Lieutenant-Governor in Council.” 

 

Leave having been granted, the motion was agreed to unanimously. 

 

At 5:40 o‟clock p.m., His Honour the Administrator, having entered the Chamber, took his seat upon the 

Throne, and having given Assent to the Bills present to him, said: 

 



 

April 14, 1959 

 

 

4 

MR. SPEAKER, MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY: 

 

It is my duty to relieve you of further attendance at the Legislative Assembly. In doing so, I wish to 

thank you and congratulate you upon the work you have done. I wish also to express my confidence that 

the approval of the programs and plans presented to you will continue to provide the services necessary 

to the growth and development of our province. 

 

You have made provision for schools in the province to receive additional grants. The scholarship 

program which you have approved will assist many students to obtain further education. 

 

The legislation you have passed establishing a system of farm credits will afford additional assistance to 

young farmers to become established in agriculture. 

 

The legislation you have passed to establish a South Saskatchewan River Development Commission will 

enable the Province to provide for the orderly development of this great irrigation and power project. 

 

It is gratifying to observe the further development of the industrial potential of our province. Your 

decision to enact The Interprovincial Steel Corporation Limited Assistance Act 1959 has contributed to 

the establishment of a steel mill in Saskatchewan. It is anticipated that this important basic industry will 

encourage other related industries to come to our province. 

 

You have provided for the transfer of provincially owned fish marketing and trading services to the 

people in Northern Saskatchewan to operate as co-operatives. 

 

Your decision to authorize the Government to institute a new system of providing social aid will assist 

municipalities by providing for a more equitable distribution of the share of the costs involved. 

 

You have approved legislation which will relieve the cities of the cost of housing surveys and will 

reduce the cities‟ contribution for low-rental housing. 

 

Your decision to abolish ex parte interim injunctions in labour dispute cases, to amend The Fair 

Employment Practices Act and to amend The Workmen‟s Compensation (Accident Fund) Act will 

provide further protection to workers. 

 

The legislation you have passed embodying recommendations of the Liquor Sales Outlets Inquiry 

Committee provides communities in our province with the opportunity of deciding, on the basis of local 

option, whether additional liquor outlets are desired. 

 



 

April 14, 1959 

 

 

5 

You have enacted legislation which will implement certain of the recommendations contained in the 

Report of the Royal Commission on Certain Mineral Transactions. 

 

No reference to the work of this Session would be complete without mention being made of the work of 

the Legislative Committees. The members of these Committees have applied themselves diligently to 

the matters referred to them by the Legislative Assembly. 

 

I am pleased to note that you took time during this Session to extend suitable honours to the Richardson 

Rink, 1959 Dominion Curling Champions. 

 

I thank you for the provision you have made to meet the further requirements of the Public Service and 

assure you that the sum of money voted will be used economically, prudently and in the public interest. 

 

We look forward with much pleasure and anticipation to the forthcoming Royal Visit to Saskatchewan. 

Plans are being made which will enable the citizens of our province to greet Her Gracious Majesty The 

Queen and His Royal Highness, the Prince Philip in various communities. 

 

In taking leave of you, I desire to thank you for the manner in which you have devoted your energies to 

the activities of the Session and wish you the full blessing of Providence as you return again to your 

respective homes. 

 

The Hon. Mr. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale), Acting Provincial Secretary, then said: 

 

MR. SPEAKER AND MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY: 

 

It is the will and pleasure of His Honour the Administrator that this Legislative Assembly be prorogued 

until it pleases His Honour to summon the same for the dispatch of business, and the Legislative 

Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 


