



















































Hansard: April 02, 1959


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session – Thirteenth Legislature 

34th Day 

 

Thursday, April 2, 1959 
 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

LIQUOR LICENSING COMMISSION 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded 

with, I have an announcement that will be of interest to all members. I have reference to the appointment 

of three prominent Saskatchewan citizens to the newly constituted Provincial Liquor Licensing 

Commission. The people appointed were: Mr. George B. Stewart, who will be the Chairman of the new 

Commission; Mr. R.L. Stutt, who will be Vice-Chairman; with the Rev. T.E.J. Gibbon as the third 

member. The new Liquor Licensing Act has also been proclaimed effective as of Wednesday, April 1st. 

 

I might say, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Stewart, the Chairman, has been engaged in the liquor trade for most 

of his life. He was born in Scotland where he was employed in the wholesale and retail liquor business 

until 1925, when he came to Canada. He joined the Liquor Board in 1927, and, except for the period of 

four years when he served in the Royal Canadian Air Force, he has been with the Liquor Board since 

that time. 

 

Mr. Stutt has been an employee of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool for 29 years. He was educated at 

Regina College and the University of Manitoba, and served overseas with the Canadian forces in the 

First World War. At the present time he is the superintendent of the Wheat Pool country organization 

department. He is also President of the Co-operative Life Insurance Company, a director of the co-

operative Fire and Casualty Company, and a director of Community Studies for the Canadian 

Association of Adult Education. He is a director of the National Farm Radio Forum, a member of the 

Saskatchewan Education Council and a member of the University of Saskatchewan Board of Governors. 

He was the first President of Canadian Co-operative Credit Society, and is a past director of the 

Saskatchewan Co-operative Credit Society. 

 

The third member, the Rev. T.E.J. Gibbon, has been the General Director for the Saskatchewan 

Temperance Federation for three years. He is a 



 

April 2, 1959 

 

 

2 

graduate of the Saskatchewan, Alberta, and Manitoba School of Alcohol Education, and a graduate of 

Yale School of Alcohol Studies. Rev. Gibbon served in the Canadian Army on active service for six 

years, and served a further 11 years as a reserve officer. He received the Canadian Forces decoration in 

1956, and holds the rank of Major. For two years before coming to Saskatchewan, he served as Field 

Secretary for the Manitoba Temperance Alliance. Until recently he was Senior Reserve Chaplain in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Gibbon holds a Master’s Degree in Theology, and is a fellow of the Institute of 

Scientific Studies. 

 

I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that all members of the Legislature trust that this new Licensing Commission 

will carry out their duties in a manner in which I am sure we all hope they will. 

 

Mr. A.L.S. Brown (Bengough): Would the hon. Minister state who will replace Mr. Stewart on the 

Liquor Board. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: Yes, Mr. Lyle Moyer who has been on the executive of the staff, has been the chief 

accountant for 10 or twelve years, and is an employee of the Government for over 20 years. He has been 

chief accountant since 1947, and has acted as chairman during any absence of the Board’s chairman. Mr. 

Moyer joined the staff of the Provincial Auditor in July, 1937. He was four and a half years with the 

R.C.A.F. and then came back to the staff of the Provincial Auditor. He assisted in setting up the 

Provincial Government Budget Bureau, and served as administrative analyst in that agency. At the 

present time he is President of the Dominion Association of Liquor Board Accountants, and the Institute 

of Radio Engineers, the United Services Institute, No. 600 Wing R.C.A.F. Association. He has been 

very active in air cadet work for the past seven years. I have worked with Mr. Moyer, and I am sure he 

will carry on his duties with distinction to himself and the people of this province. 

 

SECOND READING 

 

CARLYLE LAKE RESORT 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. McIntosh: 

 

That Bill No. 106 – An Act respecting The Summer Resort Village of Carlyle Lake Resort, be now 

read the second time. 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh (Minister of Municipal Affairs): Mr. Speaker, there has now been a council 

formed known as the Village Council of Carlyle Lake. This particular bill is for the purpose of giving to 

this council some powers that are not now in The Village Act. These special powers are necessary 

because the village of Carlyle Lake is located on an Indian Reserve, and, therefore, it becomes necessary 

for the village council to enter into certain agreements and certain arrangements with the Department of 

Indian Affairs. Therefore, I move second reading of this Bill. 



 

April 2, 1959 

 

 

3 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington): I may be a little bit behind in this thing, and maybe something else has 

transpired since I have spoken to the Minister about it; but my understanding was the town of Carlyle 

had a continuing agreement with the Indian Department which rents that particular part. Has that been 

disposed of now, since the village is going to deal directly with the Indian Department? 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: Yes, that is my understanding. The agreement between the town of Carlyle and the 

Department of Indian Affairs expired December 31st last, but in that Agreement was a clause whereby 

the town of Carlyle would have first opportunity on a renewal. The Department of Indian Affairs 

informs us that they have entered into an Agreement with the town of Carlyle whereby the agreement 

has expired; they are not taking advantage of the extension clause. 

 

(Assembly in Committee of the Whole) 

 

The House adjourned at 10:00 o’clock p.m., without question put. 

 


