



















































Hansard: April 03, 1959


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session – Thirteenth Legislature 

35th Day 

 

Friday, April 3, 1959 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

LAND TITLES ACT 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Walker: 

 

That Bill No. 108 – An Act to amend The Land Titles Act, be now read the second time. 

 

Hon. R.A. Walker (Attorney General): Mr. Speaker, the only principle involved in this bill is one 

altering the procedure for appeals against decisions of Registrars of Land Titles offices. 

 

As the present Act stands, any person who disagrees with a registrar to the proper interpretation of the 

law in connection with registration of a document, has the right to appeal to the Master of Titles and 

then has the right to appeal from there to the courts. 

 

It is proposed to eliminate the second step – that is, the appeal to the Master of Titles – and to provide 

some time, after the appeal from the registrar to the court, for the Master of Titles to review the decision 

of the local registrar with a view to considering whether or not the decision ought to be amended in 

compliance with the claim of the appellant. 

 

This recommendation, I may say, is the result of a submission by the Law Society through the Law 

Reform Committee, and it was aimed to simplify procedure dealing with decisions of registrars in Land 

Titles offices. 

 

Any other principles involved I think can be quite adequately dealt with in Committee of the Whole. 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read a second time. 

 

The motion for second reading was agreed to and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the 

next sitting. 

 



 

April 3, 1959 

 

 

2 

ATTACHMENT OF DEBTS 
 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Walker: 

 

That Bill No. 109 – An Act to amend The Attachment of Debts Act, be now read the second time. 

 

Hon. R.A. Walker (Attorney General): Mr. Speaker, The Attachment of Debts Act by which 

garnishee proceedings are taken, also applies to claims by a wife for alimony or maintenance against her 

husband. The Act provides in a general way that the wife holding a judgment or order against her 

husband may file a notice of attachment with the husband’s employer, and any money that is then held 

by the employer and owing to the husband must be paid into court, or paid to the account of the wife. 

 

This means, of course, that the wife, in order to attach her husband’s salary must file the notice with the 

employer in accordance with the form set out in The Attachment of Debts Act; that is, she must file the 

claim within a few days of the time at which the money is due to the husband, or the employee. It 

means, also, that she must file a notice every month if he is paid by the month, or every week, if he is 

paid by the week, a separate notice of attachment for each week. This almost defeats the convenience 

and easy operation of the Act for the benefit of wives who are entitled to alimony or maintenance. 

 

It is proposed by this Bill to provide that a different form of attachment notice shall be used in the case 

of alimony or maintenance claims, and this notice shall be binding indefinitely, unless it is withdrawn or 

unless it is cancelled by an order of the court. It means that a the order will remain binding throughout 

the entire time that the husband is employed by that same employer. 

 

This, we feel, may make it easier for deserted wives or divorced wives who have an order against their 

husbands for maintenance or alimony, to recover under that order. Much complaint comes to the 

Government that this Act is really not of very much use to wives as it presently stands. We hope that by 

this method they will be better able to receive what the court has ordered they are entitled to. 

 

With these few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

The motion for second reading was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the 

next sitting. 

 



 

April 3, 1959 

 

 

3 

COMPANIES WINDING UP ACT 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Walker: 

 

That Bill No. 110 – An Act to amend The Companies Winding Up Act, be now read the second time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker (Attorney General): Mr. Speaker, The Companies Winding Up Act is an Act which 

permits creditors or shareholders under certain circumstances to apply to the courts to have a company 

put into receivership and wound up, with the assets divided among the shareholders and creditors. Due 

to what I believe is a deficiency in the wording of the section this right did not, or was not, enjoyed by 

shareholders who had paid up their shares in full, but only applied to shareholders who still had some of 

their capital contributions unpaid. 

 

There seems to be no reasons why a shareholder who has paid up his shares in full ought to be in a 

different position from a shareholder who has paid only a certain part of the contribution that he is 

obligated to make to the capital of the company, because, if a shareholder who has not paid for his 

shares in full has the right to apply to the courts on the grounds that he may be called upon to contribute 

the rest of his capital, then the same right ought to extend to the person who has contributed his capital, 

and who may be running the risk or losing it as the result of the activities of the company. 

 

This section proposed to remove that discrimination in regard to the shareholders. 

 

I move second reading of this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The motion for second reading was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the 

next sitting. 

 

COMMUNITY PLANNING ACT 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. McIntosh: 

 

That Bill No. 111 – An Act to amend The Community Planning Act, 1957, be now read the second 

time. 

 

Hon. L.F. McIntosh (Minister of Municipal Affairs): Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 111 is An Act to amend 

The Community Planning Act. There are practically no new principles associated with the proposed 

amendment, but I think I would like to make this statement – that community planning, zoning and land 

use are comparatively new to many of our communities in the province of Saskatchewan, and there is a 

substantial increased interest being taken in planning. Consequently, there appear to 



 

April 3, 1959 

 

 

4 

be some sections that require, in the opinion of those who are now making use of The Community 

Planning Act, a greater measure of clarification. 

 

There is also the question of interim development control. That is, during the period of time when a 

community planning commission that is set up by an urban community, or even a rural community, are 

finalizing their over-all plans, there is provision made for interim development pending the finalizing of 

the plan, and it is felt advisable to clarify that section dealing with that interim development. I think we 

can all appreciate that has become more apparent, particularly if the length of time to finalize an over-all 

plan is disadvantageous to the establishment of certain types of businesses or industries in the general 

area. The provisions are made to clarify interim development control. 

 

Then trailer camps, or trailer homes, are also becoming more pronounced in recent years, and it was felt, 

by those who are interested in the Act, that provision should be made whereby control over the location 

of trailer camps within a zoning area should be left to the council, to decide on the location. 

 

I think probably the principal change here is to limit land use authorization. That has been suggested on 

two counts. One, is you get into a community where there is a boom on, such as potash development, oil 

or gas development, those communities may wish to make use, temporarily, of certain land for the 

benefit of those who are there on a temporary basis. The second and probably the more important, is in 

connection with the South Saskatchewan River Development. It is anticipated that there will be moving 

into the rural areas the site of the dam, people who are associated with the construction of the dam, and 

also people who might wish to serve those who are associated with the construction of the dam, and it is 

going to become necessary to exercise some control over the setting up of those types of services and 

those types of communities. This will probably be on a temporary basis. It may only last a few years in 

some cases; in other cases it may last eight or ten years, but it will be essential and important that there 

be limits put on the use of land under The Community Planning Act for purposes such as I have 

mentioned. 

 

With those remarks, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. McDonald: Who has control now of trailer camps and trailer courts? 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: The municipalities has it now. In other words, the municipality has the power, be 

it a city or town or village or rural municipality, to designate an area in which a trailer camp should be 

set up. They also have the power to set up a municipal trailer camp. But a community might be setting 

out an area for zoning purposes, and in the interim development they wish the right to control the 

location of a trailer camp in the general area. 

 



 

April 3, 1959 

 

 

5 

Mr. Coderre: Mr. Speaker, may I ask a further question of the Minister. What application has this Act 

to communities which may be situated within resort areas or near resort areas, where there has been 

quite a bit of development going on and so on. 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh: That is a very interesting question. We find a number of summer resorts where 

cottages have sprung up on undivided land. In other words, to a large extent they have squatted there, 

with the permission, of course, of the owner; but the land has not be subdivided. We are hoping, and 

moving towards asking, that the land be subdivided at the summer resorts to enable the municipality to 

exercise control, under The Community Planning Act over the development of those areas. At the 

present time we have about four or five summer resorts under review. The municipality in which they 

are located has jurisdiction over the planning, and they would probably ask The Community Planning 

Branch to assist them in the laying out of the plan as set out under The Community Planning Act. 

 

The motion for second reading was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the 

next sitting. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:55 o’clock p.m., on motion of the Hon. Mr. Fines. 


