



















































Hansard: February 16, 1959


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session – Thirteenth Legislature 

3rd Day 

Monday, February 16, 1959 

The House met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

Mr. A.L.S. Brown (Bengough): - Mr. Speaker, in rising to move the Address in Reply to the Speech 

from the Throne, I realize it is not so much of an honour to me personally, but it is a great honour a 

privilege to the people in my constituency who are deeply gratified that once again I have this honour. 

 

In considering the Speech from the Throne I think we should look at it in a constructive manner, and we 

should give our analysis of it as to whether we feel that within this Speech from the Throne, which 

outlines the legislative program of this Government, it meets the required objectives of the people of this 

province. Firstly, does it involve what lies within the constitution and ability of this Government and of 

this Legislature; and secondly, does it do for the people of the province of Saskatchewan all that is 

within the financial limitations of this province. I think that a careful analysis of this program which has 

been outlined in the Speech from the Throne will indicate clearly and definitely that it does meet these 

two objectives, and, therefore, in moving this Address in Reply I hope that nothing I say here, this 

afternoon, will precipitate an argument, and that we will be able to consider the Speech from the Throne 

in a congenial and a constructive manner. 

 

Throughout the past number of years, in outlining the legislative program to this Legislature, the 

Government has placed some emphasis, I feel, on three main items – health, welfare and education. 

These are factors which concern each and every one of us, and it is gratifying to note that in this 

legislative program which they have outlined to us, once again they are continuing to place emphasis on 

those three important factors. 

 

We can refer to the Speech from the Throne, in which they outline that they propose continuing the 

program which they started a number of years ago, in trying to make it possible to improve the 

educational system of this province. I would draw attention to a paragraph in which they state that 

substantial increases in operating grants be provided, and I hope that, in making these increased grants 

available, they will follow the policy which they established a number of years ago, that they will use 

the increased amounts of money available to make it possible to create a more equitable standard of 

education in this province; that they will use this money to raise the standard of education 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

 

2 

in those areas and to those children who, through no fault of their own, are unable to meet the financial 

obligations so far as education is concerned. 

 

I note further that they are suggesting to us that there shall be created within the Government a 

University scholarship program to supplement that which I feel has done an enormous amount of good 

to the children of this province. This is not, as I understand it from reading the Speech from the Throne, 

to replace but rather to supplement financial assistance which is made available to the students of our 

province. This financial assistance will, I trust, be give to students on the basis of need, and on the basis 

of their academic qualifications. 

 

Turning to the other field of welfare in which much progress has been made, turning to that field in 

which we in the province of Saskatchewan, under the leadership of this Government, have pioneered in 

many new fields – and I refer to the health program which this Government has introduced, and which I 

note they intend to extend. I draw your attention, Mr. Speaker, to one sentence in their remarks insofar 

as health is concerned, when His Honour said to us: “My Government has reduced the personal tax 

payments for hospital services.” The actual reduction in itself may not have been too great; it may not 

have relieved too great a financial burden at the time, but I am satisfied that we all agree that the amount 

of money which we have paid for our hospital services in this province was indeed small, and for which 

we did indeed receive a great deal of return. But I think the interesting thing that has taken place in the 

last year was that the Government has been able to include a new system of health services, without cost 

to the beneficiaries, irrespective of their ability to pay. You will recall, Mr. Speaker, that in the past 

twelve to fifteen years there has been created in this province additional health services by which we 

have given to those people who are least able to pay, and those in real need, a free and complete total 

health service. I refer to our old age pensioners, who qualify under the Supplementary Allowance, and 

qualify under the new system. This is the group in this province who have the least ability to pay, and 

certainly in most instances are in need of these health services. 

 

In this province there has been established, in addition to that, a complete and total free health service 

for those who are in great need, and also those who often require prolonged treatment in hospitals. I 

refer to such cases as mental illness and cancer treatment, which is provided free by this province, a field 

in which this province has pioneered. Now, by this action which the Government took this year, they 

have placed another group in that same category, and that is the children under 18 years of age. We in 

Saskatchewan are now providing complete hospital services without cost to them, and irrespective of 

their ability to pay. We note from the Speech from the Throne that they propose to extend the services 

which are provided in the Hospital Plan. They will extend it to take in certain types of out-patient 

services, including minor surgical operations. Once again, this is a great step forward. 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

3 

 

I think this Government and this province must take a great deal of credit for the fact that they have 

pioneered in this very important field, pioneered to the point where the Government of Canada and the 

people of Canada have recognized the importance of health not only for the people of Saskatchewan, but 

for the people of Canada as a whole, with the net result that we have seen, here in Canada last year, the 

first step of what could be a National Health Insurance scheme covering all the people of Canada. It is 

true that it certainly hasn‟t gone far enough, but with the leadership that this province has been able to 

give the rest of Canada in this field of health, I feel satisfied that much progress will be made in the 

future. I suggest that all the people of Canada will be enjoying the type of health services which we in 

Saskatchewan are enjoying, and that, further, they will be extended to include a complete medical 

program. 

 

I might mention, that, in the field of welfare, we in this province and this Government have given much 

leadership, and it is gratifying to note that in the legislative program which has been outlined today, they 

have proposed to extend that program and to continue in a manner in which we will be able to better 

help those people who are unable to take care of themselves, in many cases due to no fault of their own. 

I say that once again in this legislative program, the emphasis is being placed on those three great 

welfare matters – health, welfare and education. 

 

In undertaking to provide these welfare services, it is essential that we have an economic base on which 

we can work. It is essential that we have the greatest potential productivity in this province, and while 

Saskatchewan has, in the past number of years, been basically an agricultural province and will continue 

to remain so for a number of years yet, I think it is also essential that this Government undertake in 

Saskatchewan a diversified economy. I think, in reading the legislative program, we must be convinced 

that leadership is being given in this direction. If we are going to have a diversified economy, if we are 

going to have industrial development take place in this province, there are three essentialities which we 

must have. We must have an abundant source of power; we must have an effective and efficient 

transportation system, and we must have a large body of water by which these industries can be 

developed – a large body of water and a constant and definite source of water. In all of these three fields, 

progress has been made in the past year, and in all of three fields the legislative program indicates that 

they intend to make expansions. In the past number of years, and last year in particular, there has been 

an enormous expansion in our power potentialities. The development and building which has taken 

place in Estevan, and the Boundary Dam which is being developed here, will be a source of power 

which can be used for industrial development and for industrial purposes. The same thing can be said of 

the Queen Elizabeth Station in Saskatoon. 

 

Coupled with this (and which is essential), there must be developed a transmission system by which this 

power can be brought to the places in which it is being used, thereby finding that heavy industry 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

 

4 

can be developed and located at practically any point in the province. We are rapidly developing a 

source of power and a distribution of power in this province, which will make it possible to have the 

industrial development more quickly. The same thing is true in respect to our conservation system in this 

province. We have developed a highway system which is rapidly becoming more efficient and more 

effective in serving not only the people of this province, but at the same time serving potential 

possibility of industrial development. 

 

You will note, Mr. Speaker, that, in the Speech from the Throne, reference is made to the signing of the 

Federal agreement which is many years overdue, an agreement by which, through the co-operation of 

the Provincial Government and the Federal Government, there is being built on the South Saskatchewan 

River a project which will create the necessary body of water, again not only for the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, but at the same time will make it possible for these industries to come in. In 

addition to that it will be also possible to have created in the centre of the province of Saskatchewan a 

source of power, which will once again be reflected in a great industrial development in this province. 

 

It would appear to me, therefore, that there are some definite and concrete proposals for expanding our 

economy in an industrial sense, an expansion which will unquestionably do much for our economy, and 

which, I suggest, is essential if we are going to enjoy the highest possible standard of living; if we are 

going to be able to enjoy to the fullest possible extent those services I have mentioned – health, welfare 

and education. This has not just happened by chance. Much of this has been the result of the direction 

which this Government has been able to give our economy; it has been the result of the encouragement 

which this Government has been able to give industry to establish itself in Saskatchewan. 

 

It is interesting to note that in 1958, 65 per cent of our commodity production was from a non-

agricultural segment. This is a great change from what it was 12 or 15 years ago. It is also interesting to 

note that in 1958, there were $326 million of production and manufacturing, an increase of 4.8 over 

1957. That in itself may not be too significant, but it is when you realize that only in the province of 

Saskatchewan of all the provinces in Canada was there an increase in the number of people employed in 

manufacturing. This, I suggest, has been the result of the encouragement and the leadership which has 

been given these industries to establish themselves in this province. I think you only have to make 

reference to one or two industries which have established here in this province. The main basis of 

operation of those industries which have come into Saskatchewan is in other provinces or in some 

instances in the United States. But on that we might use as an illustration of the type of industry that is 

being established in Saskatchewan, is the steel plant which is proposed to be established here in the city 

of Regina, in which there will be some $16 million invested in the plant itself, which will have 

approximately a $1 million payroll, and which will employ approximately 175 employees. This 

indicates that we are having developed in this province those types of industry which are primary 

industries and which are, in fact, related to the agricultural industry in this province. 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

5 

 

Another illustration which might be taken, another new industry which has been established in this 

province, is that of the potash plant which has begun operations outside Saskatoon. Once again it is 

interesting to note that this is the first potash plant in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

Returning for a moment to those industries other than manufacturing, development of which is equally 

essential to our economy and to our social standard in this province. I would refer to the development of 

our natural resources, particularly in the field of mineral resources. Over the past number of years, once 

again, I suggest, due to the leadership given by this Government for the purpose of development of our 

natural resources, we have seen a constant and ever-increasing development of our production not only 

as far as dollar value is concerned, but also as far as quantity is concerned. 

 

I do not propose to go over all the list, but taking metallics, and non-metallics, we find that back in 1945, 

there was produced in this province, $18 million; in 1957, $72 million, and in 1958 it is estimated it will 

be up to $88 million for metallics. The total for non-metallics in 1945 was only $884,000. By 1957 it 

had risen to $3,748,000, and in 1958 again it had risen to an estimated $3,810,000. In the field of fuel, 

we have also seen a rise; take natural gas, for example. In 1945, $16,000 worth of natural gas had been 

produced, or 169 million cubic feet of production. By 1957, this had increased to $1,095,000. In 1958 it 

had increased to $1,575,000. Petroleum: in 1945 we produced 16,000 barrels, or a3 value of $17,900; in 

1957, it increased to 36 million barrels, or a total of $75 million; in 1958, an increase up to 45,000,000 

barrels with a total value of $97 million. Construction material in 1945 totalled $1,629,000; in 1957, $7 

million, and in 195, $8 million. 

 

I realize that I have given a number of figures which, taken by themselves, may not mean too much, but 

the point I wish to make is that there has been a steady increase since 1945 up until 1957, and, in spite of 

the fact that there was a so-called recession in Canada during the year 1958 in every field of our mineral 

production, there has been an increase. When we take the total mineral production in 1945, it was $22 

million; in 1957, up to $167 million, and in 1958, $204 million. I think this is a commendable record, 

and one for which, I think, the Government has a right to take considerable credit. 

 

It is not only the fact that we have had this increased production which is significant to me. It has been 

the fact that, during this period of time we, the people of the province of Saskatchewan have been 

getting our right and proper share of this increased production. It is most gratifying to me to note that, in 

the year 1958 the Government continued their policy to do all within their power to see that the people 

of Saskatchewan benefited by the increased development of our natural resources. It is gratifying to me 

to note that they have continued their policy of these farm-out agreements with Consumer‟s Co-

operatives. When 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

 

6 

I think of some of the remarks that were made in regard to this farm-out deal, which the Government 

and the Co-op had undertaken, it put my mind back to the original agreement and the first time that this 

was done. There were some people at that time who said that actions such as this by the Government 

would drive the oil companies out of this province. The figures which I have just given would indicate 

that they have not been driven out of this province by actions such as this, but rather that they have 

increased their development in this province. 

 

Once again this indicates to me that the Government is following this policy deliberately and 

intentionally, so that we, the people of this province, can get as much as possible out of our natural 

development. In fact what has happened, in my opinion, with steel, and he agreements with the 

Federated Co-operatives, is that we are doing in this province as many of us hoped, and that is to see 

production in this province increase. I think there is no indication of other means by which it can be 

done, but that it can be done through the medium which the Government is following up. 

 

Not only is that my opinion, Mr. Speaker, but the resolution which was passed at the Federal Co-op 

meeting, I think, would indicate that the people associated with the Co-op movement at the present time 

are indeed grateful for the policies which this Government is following in handling our natural resources 

in that way. So in the past 12 years we have seen an expansion of our industries in this province; we 

have seen an expansion of development of our natural resources. 

 

May I just for a moment turn to the other side of the picture, which is, as I have suggested, our basic 

industry of agriculture. While I said regarding development in respect to our manufacturing that 

Saskatchewan was the only province which expanded its manufacturing in terms of the number of 

people employed, the gross production from manufacturing and other industries did expand in this 

province and we have had a mineral development expansion in the last few years, the picture is not quite 

so rosy as far as the agricultural economy is concerned, and because agriculture is a vital part of our 

economy, I think I would be remiss in my duty if I did not make some reference to the agricultural 

picture in Saskatchewan. 

 

The agricultural economy in Saskatchewan is not segregated and separate from the whole Canadian 

agricultural economy. What is true in Saskatchewan is equally true with respect to the whole picture in 

the other provinces of Canada. Figures can be quoted which would indicate that our gross production in 

terms of dollars, as far as agriculture is concerned, has either remained static in Canada or has gone up 

during the past year. We can take our total farm cash income and on that basis there has been an increase 

in dollar value – an increase from $2,591,000,000 to $2,700,000,000, as our total cash income in terms 

of gross income for 1958; but if we translate that into net farm income in Canada we find that the 

increase has not been nearly as great. While it is true there has been an increase in net farm income it has 

not been, as I say, very significant. But here, I 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

7 

 

think, is the important thing. We have to translate this cash income of the agricultural industry back into 

its purchasing power; in other words, we have to deflate the 1958 dollar down to a point where you can 

compare it on an equitable basis with other years. If we do it on that basis, taking Canada as a whole, we 

find that the deflated net income – that is the amount of money which we have, or the Canadian farmer 

has, to live on; if we deflate it back to the 1946 dollar, as an example, using 1946 as a base, we find that 

in 1946 the net income for all the farmers in Canada was $742 million; in 1958, it was $492 million. I 

have said that the situation is not particularly peculiar to Saskatchewan. These figures indicate that the 

agricultural industry right across Canada is in a precarious position. 

 

Let us go back to Saskatchewan for a moment and look at it on the same basis as we have looked at the 

Canadian figures. Once again we find that between 1957 and 1958 there was an increase in the cash 

income of the farmers of Saskatchewan as a result of increased marketing of grain, and secondly, of an 

increased marketing of livestock, particularly of cattle. There was an increase from $538 million in 

1957, to $605 million in 1958. That was in terms of 1958 dollars, and that was the gross income. In 

terms of net income we find that there was also an increase in 1958, from $186 million to $225 million; 

but once again this has to be translated into what is the actual purchasing power of those dollars, and 

once again I will take the same two years as I did before. In 1946, the purchasing power of the farmers‟ 

income was $187 million; in 1958, it was $93 million. In other words, the purchasing power of the 

Saskatchewan farmer dropped by 50 per cent from 1946 to 1958. 

 

I think it is significant that, in spite of the fact that we had increased markets in 1955, in spite of the fact 

that we had a relatively high level as far as cattle prices were concerned, 1958 was the third lowest year 

as far as actual purchasing power of farm income is concerned. There were only two other years in 

which the actual purchasing power was lower than it was in 1958, and those were the years 1954 and 

1957. 

 

With this background, I think we must realize that something must be done with respect to the 

agricultural industry, if it is to avoid compete and utter bankruptcy. This is possibly even more true 

when we relate it to what is our largest branch of our agricultural industry in Saskatchewan, and that is 

the production of wheat. As we are all well aware, much of the land in the province of Saskatchewan in 

many of the areas of the province is suitable largely for grain production and in the main for the 

production of wheat. Because of that fact, the production of wheat is an important factor in our 

agricultural economy, and when we relate these figures to the wheat-producing areas of this province 

they become even more significant. When we stop and realize that, in the last three years, there has been 

a drop not only in the purchasing power but in the actual price of approximately 35 cents a bushel on our 

wheat over the average of the eight previous 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

 

8 

years, it indicates, in my mind, that that particular branch of our industry is indeed in a precarious 

position. A drop of 35 cents a bushel means an enormous drain upon the cash income; it means a drain 

upon, and will affect naturally, the net farm income. I think what is even more significant is the fact that 

during this period of years there has been a drastic decline in the purchasing power of the dollars due to 

the inflationary period in which we have been operating. This has affected all branches of our economy, 

but I suggest to you that it has been more significant in the agricultural industry and particularly in the 

wheat industry in this province. Inflation has resulted in view of the fact that we have either had a fixed 

price or a decline in our wheat economy over the last number of years, and this has meant that, in some 

instances the purchasing power of a bushel of wheat has declined drastically. We can use as an 

illustration (and I think it is a true illustration) a 12-foot combine which we could purchase back in 1946 

with 2,000 bushels of wheat. Today, to buy a comparable combine it takes 5,000 bushels of wheat, 

which means that the purchasing power of a bushel of wheat has declined, in that instance, by some 250 

per cent. 

 

This inflation in our agricultural economy has compelled the farmers of this province to believe that, if 

they are going to get anything like an equitable adjustment in their farming operations, if they are going 

to place agriculture in a position where it can continue to operate efficiently and effectively, if they are 

going to place agriculture in a position where it can continue to produce the necessary foodstuffs not 

only for the people of Canada but for the world as a whole, some concrete and immediate action has to 

be taken. The net result of this is, as you are well aware, Mr. Speaker, that there is being organized in 

this province, supported by the organizations from our neighbouring provinces, a mass delegation to 

present their case to the Parliament of Canada and through this meeting they hope to obtain some 

economic justice not only for themselves but for the whole Saskatchewan economy, and which would 

have, in fact, an impact upon our Canadian economy as a whole. 

 

This is something that has been realized by not only the farmers but also by other people over the past 

number of years. They have continued to seek to have this industry placed out of the position of the 

„poor relation‟ to other industries in Saskatchewan and in Canada. Some may wonder why I refer to this 

at this time. I realize that, as far as agriculture is concerned, it is outside the jurisdiction of this 

Legislature and outside the jurisdiction of this Government. I realize that it is in the field of Federal 

jurisdiction, and that is where most, if not all, of these problems must be solved. At the same time we 

here in the province of Saskatchewan have some responsibility towards the agricultural industry not only 

because it is the basic industry in this province, but because we have a responsibility and certain 

jurisdiction over the production. 

 

It is gratifying to note the reference that has been made in our agricultural industry in the Speech from 

the Throne. This Government has indicated the desirability of doing something, as far as is within its 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

9 

 

jurisdiction, for our basic industry. One of the things which can, and I hope will, have far-reaching 

effects is where the Speech from the Throne suggests that legislation will be introduced to assist the co-

operatives in setting up a system of farm credit to help young farmers become established in agriculture. 

We in Saskatchewan, possibly more so than in other provinces of Canada, are facing the problem of 

perpetuating agricultural production on the one hand and at the same time making it possible for the 

industry to carry on from one generation to the other. Thinking in terms of a farm credit policy I am 

convinced that it is in the Federal jurisdiction that this should largely lie. They have the resources at 

their disposal, and they can unify a form of farm credit policy which would be applicable to all of 

Canada, and, as well, make it applicable to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I do not suggest to the Government that in any way they should assume the responsibility that rightly 

belongs to the Federal Government; but since the Federal Government so far has not seen fit to 

inaugurate a national farm credit policy, ten I am indeed glad to see that this Government is undertaking 

to do what they can in that field, limited though it might be, and limited as it will have to be within the 

financial resources of this province. The Government of this province has always been interested in this 

whole question of trying to save the life of the agricultural industry. I can recall the Rural Development 

Conference that was held a little over a year ago, right in this Chamber. Here were representatives of 

farm organizations and other organizations of this province meeting together with local governing 

bodies and the provincial government. We were dealing with the various problems that have been facing 

us in this province over the past few years. It was indicated by the resolutions that were presented that 

the first essentiality is a fair and equitable national farm policy, if we are to save the agricultural industry 

from complete and total bankruptcy. 

 

This Government indicates in the Speech from the Throne that it is prepared to go even further than the 

extension of farm credit; it is indicated in the Speech from the Throne that this Government is willing to 

sit down with the Federal Government and work out a scheme to try to control some of the hazards of 

our agricultural industry. They refer to a comprehensive form of crop insurance to protect the individual 

farmer against those factors over which he has no control. These are not necessarily emergency solutions 

to meet temporary problems, or temporary solutions to meet emergency problems; these are part and 

parcel of a national agricultural policy – something which we here, as a legislature, can participate in 

and which I suggest this Government has some responsibility for. I am indeed pleased and proud to see 

that they are attempting to play their part in improving the agricultural industry and in putting some 

security and stability into that industry. 

 

There are those who will accuse the Government of not doing as much as they might be capable of 

doing, but I am suggesting that, over the past number of years, they have undertaken to do all that they 

can possibly do, under their constitutional ability, towards assisting the agricultural industry in this 

province. 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

 

10 

I suggest that the program outlined in the Speech from the Throne does undertake to continue the 

program that was started some 15 years ago. It undertakes to fulfil and develop within this province an 

economy which will make it possible for the people of the province of Saskatchewan to better control 

and formulate their own business. I feel that this program is a challenge to ourselves and a challenge to 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I am, therefore, pleased to move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by Mr. Johnson (Kerrobert-Kindersley): 

 

“That an humble address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor as follows: 

 

TO HIS HONOUR THE HONOURABLE FRANK LINDSAY BASTEDO 

 

Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR: 

 

We, Her Majesty‟s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, in Session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious Speech which 

Your Honour has been pleased to address to us at the opening of the present Session.” 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

11 

 

Mr. Eldon Johnson (Kerrobert-Kindersley): Mr. Speaker, the honour of seconding the Address in 

Reply to the Speech from the Throne is one intended to be bestowed upon the constituency of Kerrobert-

Kindersley, which I am proud to represent in this Legislature. 

 

Before proceeding I would like to congratulate the Member for Bengough (Mr. A.L.S. Brown) on his 

excellent presentation. I agree with the Member for Bengough that we should properly assess the Speech 

from the Throne in the light of past development and in the light of future change and progress. I think 

we should assess the Speech from the Throne, which is essentially a program for the coming year and 

the future, in the light of present needs and changes. 

 

In that respect, we might ask ourselves, what changes are taking place; what matters must we consider in 

the Legislature in order that we may enact properly for the future. I think that one of the most important 

changes that is taking place is that in the standard of living which we hope to have. We see many 

changes take place since this province was first populated. Among these, as the Member for Bengough 

has indicated, some of the most important changes and concepts in the standard of living are education: 

we prefer to have the best possible school facilities for the education of our children. Further, as the 

Member for Bengough has indicated, we desire to have the best possible facilities in order that we may 

continue health services for health. Also there are changes in what we wish in the line of travel and 

transportation. Towards this end, we need continually better roads and continually better vehicles. 

 

We might also list several other things that increase our enjoyment of living – such as entertainment. A 

few years ago, we would never have conceived the possibility that, in our living room, we would be able 

to see a picture upon a screen, as we are presently able to do today. I do not suggest that I myself fancy 

this method of entertainment, but nevertheless, it exists, it is something new, it is something we have to 

accept as being here. 

 

In speaking in terms of processes to change, there have been immense changes in our technology. 

Technology is often a blind force with apparently aimless direction but, nevertheless, technology is 

advancing so that our standard of living is certainly improved and is improved in many ways. Among 

these is the effect in reducing manual labour. We see the continual effect of muscular energy being 

replaced by other means. This indeed, is the age of the fossil fuels. It is fortunate indeed that we have 

such fuels in our province for transportation and heating. The Power Corporation has been able to do 

this – has been able to use the fossil fuels to provide us with electrical energy as well as to convey 

natural gas to our homes and factories in order that they may be heated and have energy. 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

 

12 

In reducing labour, the effect of advancing technology is most marked in the most highly industrialized 

areas;; but on all fronts the effect of technology is to reduce the hours that it is necessary for any person 

to work, and each person becomes a more effective worker. Even though we can agree that technology 

is making life in general more easy, more pleasant, there are difficulties. Technology is advancing in all 

fields, but part of the difficulty is that it is not advancing equally in each one. Some of our automotive 

industries found that, today with modern equipment, one man can do what it took possibly a hundred 

men to do, say, 20 years ago. 

 

Thus, as a farmer (and the Member for Bengough is also a farmer) we can ask ourselves what is the 

effect of advancing technology on agriculture? We can see a similar effect. Technology is also a 

continually disrupting effect in the field of agriculture. It is disrupting in this respect, because in 

comparing the work that a man can do today he can possible do two or three times as much as he could 

do in the field 20 years ago. Furthermore, one man can be more productive than two or three 20 years 

ago. I do not think I am exaggerating in these ratios. 

 

I would further add that in my constituency there are farmers who are planning to produce a thousand 

hogs per year, employing the labour of one or two men and modern technological methods. This effect, 

as I mentioned, is disrupting, because as one person can do more work, the farm that he can usefully 

work is increased and it seems like a paradox that in the province of Saskatchewan, which is one of the 

world‟s last agricultural territorial frontiers, it seems like a paradox that there are many farmers in this 

vast area, who do not have adequate resources with which to provide themselves with a satisfactory 

standard of living, for farming is one of the most highly competitive industries, and each farmer is 

competing for his very existence. 

 

We owe thanks to our Department of Agriculture for the very extensive Agricultural Representative 

Service with which they have provided us. As a farmer, I know there is hardly a month or a week that 

goes by, that I do not have some problem with which my agricultural representative cannot give me 

valuable assistance. This service has also been increased by the addition of three Farm Management 

representatives. This is in cognizance of the understanding of the growing need for better farm 

management practices. Farmers in general, because of the vagaries of climate, change in yield and 

prices, have often tended to neglect the benefits that can be obtained by better bookkeeping, by better 

farm management practices, and I foresee in the future a vast extension of farm management assistance. 

Take, for example, the Kindersley Larger School Unit. They have employed an agricultural supervisor 

who is undertaking several farm management programs. He is teaching farm management in school as 

well as taking farm management classes directly to the farmers. 

 

In referring to the classes at school, I think they are important for two main reasons. The first one could 

be listed as being the general desirability of education students to be better farm managers; 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

13 

 

and furthermore, there is a broader implication. As I mentioned, Saskatchewan does not provide 

adequate resources for all of its farmers, and there is a general change in our agricultural economy 

towards fewer farmers when students are able to take a farm management course in the high schools. 

They are able to decide at an early age whether the resources at their disposal will be satisfactory to 

provide them with the standard of living which they aspire to have. If not, the student can decide to seek 

other occupation, for we have to admit that the only time in a person‟s life that he is really flexible is 

when he is young and still attending educational institutions. 

 

In referring to the work done by Mr. Clarke with the practical farmers, I would like to refer you to the 

Vocational Agricultural Farm Management Association of Kindersley. The farmers in this association, 

who number 76, keep accurate records for classification purposes. They are divided as follows: a small 

farmer is he who has an acreage at his disposal of up to 480; a medium small farmer, 481 to 720; 

medium large, 721 to 960, and large farms are those having an acreage of over 960. 

 

The accurate records and inventories which these farmers have kept indicate that, for the year 1957, 

which was a somewhat better than average year in our district, of the small farms only 30 per cent 

realized the cost of production, if a wage of $3,000 for the operator was allowed. Similarly, the 

proportion for a medium small farm was 44 per cent; medium large, 45 per cent, and for the large farm 

63 per cent. These proportions of these farms achieved the cost of production, if an operator‟s wage of 

$3,000 was allowed. These farmers are of at least average competency, and I think that these results 

have great significance. Firstly, they indicate a stronger position under relatively larger farms and, 

secondly, they indicate that farmers have great reason for apprehension of the future if the disparity 

between the income which they are able to obtain and the prices of the products which they must buy is 

steadily increased. 

 

The Member for Bengough indicated the changes that are taking place in industrialization n this 

province. Certainly these changes have vast significance to all the people concerned, and it is certainly 

of significance that, as mentioned in the Speech from the Throne, last year 65 per cent of the value of 

products produced in Saskatchewan were non-agricultural. I think it is fair to state that agriculture will 

continue to be for some time, the largest single industry, but nevertheless, it is encouraging to see the 

steady development of other industries and of other resources. 

 

As the Member for Bengough has mentioned, one of the most important requirements is that of health. I 

would like to comment briefly on the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan, because it has been of 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

 

14 

far-reaching importance. I think we should realize that, to date, it is likely that a number of people 

equivalent to twice the population of this province have been admitted to hospital under the 

Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan. The figures which I have, for 1947 to 1957 inclusive, number 

1,745,398, and I think it is likely that, to date, a number equivalent to twice the people of this province 

have been treated under this plan. Now, even though there have been great accomplishments in the field 

of health, no one in this Government, or the Party which supports it, feel that all the goals have been 

attained. As for myself, I would like to comment on two fields in which we need further study, further 

extension. 

 

Firstly, I think you will agree that health can be said to not exist in a person unless it is complete, and for 

that reason I think that the health of many of our rural people is not complete because they do not have 

adequate dental care. To make a comparison to the city of Toronto with a population which is somewhat 

less than that of the province of Saskatchewan, Toronto has 750 dentists as compared with 200 in 

Saskatchewan. This is a problem confronting the people of the province. 

 

Furthermore, this province is undergoing rapid change. I would like to comment further that the 

Municipal Doctors schemes, which was initiated some thirty years ago, are in need of revision, as I find 

in my constituency people are travelling more. As part of their standard of living, people are expecting 

more of the specialized services which can only be obtained outside of the constituency. Also I find 

treatment overlapping between equally meritorious schemes, and this complex operate the detriment of 

both such scheme. I would like to see some study given in the future to this problem. 

 

The Member for Bengough has indicated in his valuable address, of the need for transportation to be 

able to move about easily in this broad province. The magnitude of the highway problem in this 

province can possibly be better understood if you recall that the province has over 8,179 miles of 

highway, of which approximately 22 per cent is black topped or oiled – or using this figure in another 

way and using it comparatively, we find that Saskatchewan has approximately 107.8 persons per mile of 

highway. This may be compared with Alberta with 199.5 and Manitoba with 207.5 persons per mile of 

highway. The significance here is that it is more difficult in this province to maintain the standard of 

highway that we aspire to have, and yet, the fact that we do have a highway system which enables us to 

move about quickly, safely and comfortably, is an immense credit to the Minister of Highways and his 

staff of engineers and technicians, and all the maintenance and other workers in the Department of 

Highways. 

 

The Government, in recognition of a need to travel, has also initiated a grid road program by which it 

was proposed to construct, in co-operation with the municipalities, 12,000 miles in high standard roads. 

This will provide a mile of grid road for every 8.6 farm families. 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

15 

 

The acceptance of this program is indicated by the high number of municipalities which have 

participated, and is further indicated by the fact that 3,449 miles of highway has, to date, been graded 

and 2,872 miles have been completed, including gravel. This extensive construction has been obtained at 

an expenditure by the Grid Road Assistance Authority of over $10,000,000. Its agreement to share 50 

per cent of the costs has well been exceeded. 

 

I would also like to further indicate that many of the benefits obtained by this province have been 

obtained even at the same time that our net debt has been reduced. Our net debt for the province has 

been reduced to less than ¼ of its maximum value. The implication of this, of course, is that the 

province‟s credit rating has been vastly improved, and further, it minimizes the dead weight of interest 

payments. For this position of financial integrity we must give recognition to the astute financing of the 

Provincial Treasurer (Hon. Mr. Fines). 

 

The past is the stepping stone for the future. I have indicated that the accomplishments of the present 

Government indicates that the present is sound and we must move forward to build for the future. 

 

Mr. George Peabody, American philanthropist, is quoted as having said: “Education is a debt due from 

the present to the future generations.” 

 

This Government can truthfully be said to be paying our debt to the future through its educational 

program. This is indicated by the announcement in the Speech from the Throne that “substantial 

increases in operating grants will be provided,” and, furthermore, “further assistance in the financing of 

capital expenditures are being planned.” These statements will be greeted with whole-hearted 

appreciation by our school boards and taxpayers. 

 

Certainly there is no better way of building confidently for the future than by increasing the facilities for 

learning and research. Many of our high school graduates will desire to have further education, and I am 

certain that these will look forward to the statement in the Speech from the Throne and I quote: “The 

Government is proposing a University Scholarship program to supplement the extensive assistance 

through the Student Aid Fund.” 

 

Having been a student and instructor at our university, I know, this will vastly assist young people to 

attend our University. I believe it is of merit in itself that young people should be allowed and 

encouraged to use their minds for learning and research to the maximum extent and, I believe, our aim 

should continually be toward eliminating all financial barriers. The progress of this province will 

continue to be advanced through the efforts of our University and its graduates. 

 

Many, in locations far beyond the borders of Saskatchewan, will share the sentiment of appreciation 

expressed in the Speech from the 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

 

16 

Throne for the work done by, and the leadership of, the retiring President, Dr. W.P. Thompson, and 

many will likewise share the expression of good fortune at having so eminent a scientist and so capable 

a successor as Dr. J.W.T. Spinks, Dean of the College of Graduate Studies and Head of the Department 

of Chemistry. As reported in the Star-Phoenix: “Dr. Spinks is an internationally recognized authority on 

atomic energy and was a Canadian delegate to the Geneva conference on the peaceful uses of atomic 

energy in both 1955 and 1958. He is probably best known for his pioneering research work on the 

application of radioactive tracers in agriculture. Many of his articles on the peaceful uses of atomic 

energy have been written for non-scientists and have appeared in newspapers and magazines. These 

articles show that his vigour as a research scientist is tempered by a deep concern for the effects of 

science and scientific research on mankind. In the citation for the presentation of an honorary doctor of 

laws degree from Carleton University, in Ottawa, in May 1958, he was termed “a scientist in the greatest 

humanistic tradition.” 

 

As a former member of the College of Engineering, I would also like to draw the attention of this 

Legislature to the appointment of a new Dean to the College of Engineering. I might add that 

Saskatchewan engineers are providing valuable services in the province of Saskatchewan and have won 

recognition far beyond the borders of Saskatchewan. The position of their college will be enhanced by 

the good fortune of obtaining the services of Dr. Arthur Porter, who is replacing the former Dean, the 

popular I.M. Frazer. Dr. Porter is an honours graduate from the University of Manchester, and is an 

authority on automatic control systems in industry and on the development of large scale computers. In 

announcing the appointment, President Thompson said that the University was very fortunate to have 

secured a man of such outstanding achievements to occupy the post of great and growing importance. 

 

The Speech from the Throne draws our attention to the fact that this year celebrates the Golden Jubilee 

of our University. The controversy regarding the location of the University will have long since been 

forgotten, but the effects of the University tend to grow and brighten with the passage of time. Many are 

its distinguished graduates, and many are the benefits which have accrued to the people of Canada and 

Saskatchewan because of the dedication of its professors and research scientists. But all the people of 

Saskatchewan are pleased that it was Dr. Harold Johns of our University who was largely responsible 

for the development of the cobalt bomb for the treatment and cure of cancer. And every farmer has 

benefited from the work done by the agronomists in developing and selecting new varieties and strains 

of cereals, grasses and legumes. 

 

Our University has not only given instruction to the students within its walls, but has taken information 

directly to the farmer. Possibly not many of us here recollect the early efforts of extension to better 

farming trains, but none of us who have ever known Professor Hardy will ever forget his tireless energy 

and his enthusiasm in taking the most up-to-date knowledge to all the farmers. 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

17 

 

It is in the light of such accomplishments that the significance for the future of the statement in the 

Speech from the Throne will be viewed, and I quote: 

 

“To an already impressive campus is being added a College of Arts Building and Biology 

Building and an Animal Husbandry Building. Last year saw the completion of the Saskatchewan 

Research Council Building and the Cancer and Medical Research Building.” 

 

It may be of interest to this Legislature for me to indicate the buildings which have been added to the 

campus since 1944. They are: Medical College Building, Soils and Dairy Building, School of 

Agriculture, Betatron Building, Grain Elevator, New Power House, Murray Memorial Library, new 

Piggery, Medical Research Building, Maintenance Building, Saskatchewan Research Council 

Laboratory, Nurses‟ Residence, and, of course, the University Hospital. This impressive list of 

construction has been obtained at an expenditure of over $23 million. The announcement in the Speech 

of the proposed construction of new buildings will, I am certain, be met with full-hearted approval by 

University students and faculty, and such buildings are another important way of building for the future 

of the Province. 

 

This Government has recognized that not all people have interests directing them to the University, and 

it has recognized that, if our progress is to continue and advance evenly, there is a need for people with 

many different skills. Toward this end, contracts of nearly $2 million have been awarded for the 

construction of the Saskatchewan Technical Institute. This institute will give courses in auto body 

repairs, welding, radio and television repairs, and courses for engineering and agricultural technicians. It 

can fairly be anticipated that this institute in Moose Jaw will be of immense aid to a great number of 

students and, consequently, to the province as a whole. 

 

Many from this Legislature attended the ceremony last summer of the opening of the Saskatchewan 

Research Council Laboratory and will appreciate its valuable contributions. The Saskatchewan Research 

Council has been assigned the solving of problems of agriculture and other industries in the province, 

and has studied such important projects as: the effect of the addition of rapeseed oil to lubricants, seed 

cleaning, feed utilization in hogs, the processing of uranium ores, and highway building foundations. 

The list of projects undertaken by this organization is already impressive. It is, therefore, of great 

interest that “a comprehensive technical survey of water resources as related to the growing problems of 

municipal water supply” will be undertaken by the Saskatchewan Research Council. Our communities 

are already provided with electricity, most of them with gas, and yet indeed, in many of these their 

satisfactory and adequate water supplies is one of our pressing problems, and I think it is with a great 

deal of satisfactory anticipation the people view this announcement. 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

 

18 

As well as fundamental interest in learning and research, our Government has taken an active and 

progressive part in the care for the needy. This is manifested in the Speech from the Throne by the 

directive: 

 

“You will be asked to improve a new Social Aid Act which will provide for greater financial 

assistance to municipalities and a more equitable distribution of the municipal share of social aid 

costs between the municipalities.” 

 

This statement will certainly be viewed with interest and appreciation by the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The continuing interest of this Government to care for the aged is also indicated by this statement: 

 

“A conference of interested persons will be held early this year to discuss the problems of 

providing further programs and facilities for the care of the aged and those suffering long-term 

illnesses.” 

 

I know that my own community is better for the existence of Sunset Lodge, a home to care for the aged. 

As indicated in the Speech from the Throne there are 55 others which have also similarly benefited. The 

gauge of any society can truly be said to be indicated by the kindness and care with which it treats its 

aged and less fortunate members. 

 

Of all the provinces in Canada, Saskatchewan has taken by far the greatest interest in Co-operatives. 

This is indicated by the proportion of business done by Co-ops which average 3 per cent for Canada, but 

is 11 per cent for Saskatchewan. With firm confidence in democracy, people in Saskatchewan believe 

they should hold and operate the agencies which buy and sell for them and they have organized many 

Consumer Co-ops as well as the well-known and extensive marketing agency, the Pool Elevator system. 

Co-operatives have been very greatly assisted by the Department of Co-operation of Saskatchewan, 

which is Canada‟s only Department of Co-operation directly responsible to a Minister. 

 

It is of interest to the co-operatively minded people of Saskatchewan that study is being continued on the 

development of co-operation, and, furthermore, that it is being proposed to transfer the Fish Marketing 

and Trading Services to the people of the north who are using them. 

 

This Government, further to its interests in these other fields, also deserves congratulations for the active 

interest taken in the Indian population of the province. The conference held this past summer with 

Chiefs and Councillors should prove to be a valuable step toward materially helping these people who 

have been crowded into areas with resources far too meagre for their sustenance; and yet, we of the 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

19 

 

white race have not helped them sufficiently so that they can be satisfactorily integrated into our modern 

society. No society can feel proud unless every one of its able citizens can be usefully employed and 

receives compensation adequate to provide his family with comfort and dignity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne is a program for the coming year and the future, which we can 

all proudly endorse, and therefore, I am very pleased to second the motion. 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

 

20 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): - Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the Member for 

Bengough (Mr. A.L.S. Brown), if I may – I did not want to interfere with the speeches of the mover or 

seconder, and I would at this time like to ask a question for information from the Member for Bengough: 

you used the figure of $325 million when referring to manufacturing, and I would like to know what 

connection, to what means did you use that figure? What does the $326 million refer to? 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): - $325 million? 

 

Mr. McDonald: - Yes. 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): - That was the total manufacturing production, total value of goods produced. 

 

Mr. McDonald: - Thank you, very much. 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

21 

 

Mr. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): - At this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to extend my 

congratulations to the mover and seconder of the Address in Reply. I realize that the material from 

which they had to prepare their addresses was very meagre, and I cannot use such glowing words in 

describing the Speech from the Throne as the mover and seconder have used this afternoon. 

 

I note in the Speech from the Throne we have a considerable volume of words dealing with activities 

within the province over the last year, but very little forecast of legislation to take care of the problems, 

as we see them, that exists within the province of Saskatchewan today, problems that are the 

responsibility of the Provincial Government and, in our opinion, are within the financial means of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But before I go into my main remarks for the afternoon, I want also to bring to the attention of the 

Members of the House that we have a Member in our midst who, this year is sitting in his 25th
 

consecutive session in this legislature. He has served for a quarter of a century the people of Arm River 

constituency and the people of the province of Saskatchewan, and I am sure that all Members of the 

House at this time would like to extend their congratulations for the past efforts of the Member for Arm 

River (Mr. Danielson), and I am sure all Members would want to join with me in wishing him well in 

his endeavours in the future. 

 

Mr. Danielson: - Pretty lucky. Wait till next election! 

 

Mr. McDonald: - The mover of the Address, this afternoon, mentioned the policies and programs of the 

Provincial Government with respect to health, welfare and education. I too would like to give credit 

where credit is due, and thank the Government for some of their activities on behalf of the people of this 

province through the educational facilities that are available, the welfare program that are available and 

also the educational system that we have in Saskatchewan today. I only wish that the hon. members had 

thought back to the promises of the present administration to the people of this province with respect to 

health, welfare and education. We are a long way from having implemented the program that was laid 

down by the present administration. 

 

Some 14 years ago (14 years is a long time) you will recall, Mr. Speaker, that at that time it was not a 

matter of increasing educational grants to the municipalities, or at least to the local school districts. At 

that time we were told by no less a personage than the gentleman who is now Premier, that this problem 

of education was a provincial responsibility and that, if he was elected Premier of this province his 

government would accept that constitutional power and they would be responsible for education. He 

said the time was long past due when the municipalities ought to be held responsible for programs that 

were not their responsibility under Canada‟s constitution. It wasn‟t a matter of increasing 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

 

22 

school grants; it was a matter of taking over the responsibility for education in this province. Now it is a 

long time – 14 years later that we are told there is going to be an increase in school grants. I am pleased 

that an increase in school grants has been announced; it is long past due. We are now, I presume, going 

to arrive about half way to the point that the Premier outlined 14 years ago. We are going to be about 

half way home. 

 

Some of the people on the other side of the House don‟t seem to remember what their Leader said, back 

on February 16, 1943, which is a long time ago; that is almost half way back to 1919, the date that some 

of you people like to refer to once in a while. I want to read to you what the Premier said to you at that 

time, and I hope that these people will get a copy so that they will know the program which they 

outlined fifteen years ago, and they are not half way towards implementing that program at this date. 

 

This is the first thing they were going to do: 

 

“The first thing a C.C.F. Government would do would be to recognize education as a 

responsibility of the Provincial Government. There has been a tendency on the part of provincial 

governments to pass the buck to the municipalities and the local school boards for maintaining 

educational facilities. 

 

“The time has come when we must recognize that n less than Canada‟s constitution places the 

responsibility for education and teaching our children squarely upon the Provincial Government, 

and it cannot be passed on to any other body.” 

 

I agree with that statement. 

 

Mr. Gardiner (Melville): - Brave words! 

 

Mr. McDonald: - They were brave words from a brave little man seeking the support of the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan. He has had that support for fifteen years, and he is now half way through 

the program that was outlined in 1943. Progress! It is stagnation of the worst kind! It reminds me of a 

TV program that I watch one in a while – Red Skelton. A week or so ago he said, “For the last 12 years I 

have been chasing women, but for the last two years I can‟t remember why.” That is about the attitude 

of this Government: for 15 years they have been chasing education and now they don‟t know why they 

have been chasing it. 

 

Let us turn to health. I, too, am pleased that the Federal Government of this country has finally seen fit 

to bring in a National Hospitalization program for the whole of Canada, and through that program – that 

is, if the provinces of Canada want to participate in the 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

23 

 

program that is available to them; and the result of that program has meant that, in Saskatchewan, we 

will this year receive something in the neighbourhood of $12 million from our national Government to 

help out with a program that has been in existence for some considerable time in Saskatchewan. But 

here again, we have not arrived anywhere near completing the program which was announced by my 

friend opposite, not at the last Session, nor at the last election, not 10 year ago, not 15 years ago, but 

away back in 1942. And again, the gentleman that is now Premier announced to all and sundry that 

complete medical services could be provided for $8 per head. 

 

Premier Douglas: - Would my hon. friend q uote where he got that figure, that fantastic statement? 

 

Mr. McDonald: - Yes, it is a fantastic statement, and you made it! And if my hon. friend will remain in 

his seat, I will tell him. 

 

Premier Douglas: - Except that I did not make it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: - Order! 

 

Mr. McDonald: - It is a fantastic statement, and you made it. I can tell you when you made it, and I will 

tell you another occasion when you asked me to produce the statement, and you didn‟t have the courage 

to stand up and recognize it. That was during the Session of 1954, during the debate on the Budget, 

when I made the same statement as I made here this afternoon, and I will quote to you what you said. 

You said: “No such statement had ever been made.” Well, the following day I produced in this 

Legislature the statement. The statement was made at Chaplin on December 14, 1942, and it was 

recorded in the „Moose Jaw Times Herald.‟ 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: - A Liberal paper! 

 

Mr. McDonald: - The „Moose Jaw Times Herald‟ was made available to the Premier on that occasion, 

and he did not even take the bother of reading the newspaper. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): Naturally! 

 

Mr. McDonald: - Now I suppose he denies that he said it. 

 

Premier Douglas: - I certainly didn‟t say it, and you know it. 

 

Mr. McDonald: - If he doesn‟t like these old statements of his – I would be glad to read them all, but it 

would be a long session, because there are many thousands of them. As a matter of fact, there is a book 

about three times as big as this, outlining the promises of the C.C.F. Government . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: - Who is it put out by? 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

 

24 

Mr. McDonald: - . . . that have never been fulfilled. It is put out by the C.C.F. Party. You can get a copy 

from „The Commonwealth‟ if you want it. But to go on from there to the mistakes that were made here, 

this afternoon in the speeches of my hon. friends opposite, they are about as far away from the actual 

facts of what is going on in this province as the statements of the Premier were 15 years ago. 

 

My hon. friends opposite are indicating to us (and it is a fact) that we are endeavouring to build up an 

abundant supply of power within the province of Saskatchewan in order to be helpful in attracting 

industry to our province; but the thing that they have overlooked, is that we not only need an abundance 

of power, we need some cheap source of power. 

 

Mr. Brown (Bengough): - The Liberals have it. 

 

Mr. McDonald: - What has happened? Here in the province of Saskatchewan we are competing with 

our two neighbouring provinces especially, when we are talking about industrial development. They 

have a similar climate, similar natural resources, similar people, and, as a matter of fact, the resources 

are almost identical to our own, with the exceptions we have been fortunate enough to have apparently 

large bodies of uranium oxide in our province and, to my knowledge, they do not exist in our 

neighbouring provinces. However, we are facing a very severe problem as far as power is concerned, 

because of the fact that, in the province of Manitoba to the east of us, electrical energy is about 70 per 

cent cheaper than it is in Saskatchewan. Manitoba has a cheap source of power, namely, electricity. In 

Alberta, the province to the west of us, they too have a cheap source of power, natural gas. Their rates 

are about 50 per cent less than those in the province of Saskatchewan. So I say, it is not good enough 

only to build up an abundant supply of power, unless that power can be made available at competitive 

rates with our neighbouring provinces. 

 

Also there was some reference to transportation. Again, I think if we are going to compete with our 

neighbouring provinces as far as transportation is concerned, we must get into step with our 

neighbouring provinces as far as load limits for the trucking industry is concerned. We are losing 

considerable sums of money because truckers are being forced to go around the province of 

Saskatchewan. I know we have a tremendous road problem in this province, because we have such a 

huge highway system. Nobody recognizes that fact more than I do. Nobody recognizes the fact more 

than I do that it is difficult to build a road under the climatic conditions which we have in this province, 

and to build it in such a manner that it will withstand our weather and heavy load limits. But I do believe 

that it would benefit our province, benefit the transportation system of the prairie provinces as a whole, 

if we were able to get more into line with our neighbouring provinces as far as weight limits are 

concerned. 

 

Now I will indicate to you why I asked my friend from Bengough (Mr. Brown) to what he referred this 

$326 million on manufacturing, 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

25 

 

or in what connection he used it. I don‟t know where he got any of the figures he used this afternoon. He 

certainly didn‟t get them from the Dominion Bureau of Statistics. There are only three sources that he 

could have humanly possibly used. One would be „The Commonwealth‟, another would be „The 

Saskatchewan News‟, and the other would be an old speech of the Premier‟s in the papers, because no 

authentic set of figures within the Dominion of Canada would prove or indicate, or even come close to, 

what the hon. member tried to indicate in this House. Never in my life have I seen such a distortion of 

figures. 

 

My hon. friend says that we have some $326 million from manufacturing this year. The figures I am 

going to use are taken from the Preliminary Statement of Manufacturing for the year 1957 (which is the 

last year available) of the Dominion Bureau of Statistics, page 10, 11 and 12. From those figures I find, 

of all factory shipments from the province of Saskatchewan last year (which is 1957), it was 

$303,268,000. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: - The last year is 1958. 

 

Mr. McDonald: - 1957 is the last year for which figures are available . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: - Available to you. 

 

Mr. McDonald: - The Attorney General, of all people, ought to know that. Available to anybody! The 

D.B.S. has not made figures available. You can shake your head until it falls off, because you, too, are 

wrong, as far as D.B.S. is concerned. 

 

Premier Douglas: - At least I‟d miss my head if it fell off! 

 

Mr. McDonald: - I doubt that. I don‟t know why you would. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: - You might be the only one! 

 

Mr. McDonald: - You‟d be the only one that would miss it, that‟s for sure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what does this figure mean? If you are going to quote a figure like that, I think you should 

compare it with what is going on in our neighbouring provinces. I‟m not going to go to the big industrial 

centres of Canada, or the big manufacturing centres. I will go to Manitoba and Alberta. What are the 

figures for Manitoba? The value of factory shipments out of that province for the same year was not 

$303 million, but $673 million. Again there is quite a difference between $303 million and $673 million. 

Or, if you want to go to the province of Alberta, the value of shipments for the same products for that 

province for the same period were $762 million. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: - Have you got 1944 there? 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

 

26 

Mr. McDonald: - If you want to go back to 1944, I will do that. The figure in 1944 (and I‟ll bet you‟ll 

be sorry you ever mentioned it) was $175 million. Now, my hon. friend from Bengough, when he was 

talking about agriculture said he wanted to paint a true picture. Therefore it is necessary to convert this 

to constant-dollar value. All right, let‟s take the value of manufactured products – the $175 million in 

1944, and the $303 million in 1957 – and bring them down to constant-dollar value. Had we kept pace 

with the shipments out of this province in 1944 in constant-dollar value, the shipments this year should 

have been $322.48 million. 

 

Premier Douglas: - On what commodity index basis is that? 

 

Mr. McDonald: - This is on D.B.S. Did you ever hear of it? You must have lost that head you were 

talking about a moment ago. Now, how do we arrive at this? Again, you can get these figures from 

public documents. If we take the value of 1944, which is $175 million, and multiply it by the index for 

1957, which is 237.9, and divide it by the index of 1944, which was 129.1, then we find that value, this 

year, without any new additions, from 1944 to 1957, the value this year would have been $322 million 

rather than $303 million. I ask you, is that progress? 

 

What about the investments in manufacturing? What is the record here? The record in (and here I do 

have the figures for 1958) that we are near $17.4 million in manufacturing for the year 1958, which is a 

drop of about $2 million from the previous year. In Manitoba there wasn‟t a drop: they had $43.5 

million in 1957, and $50.1 million in 1958. There was no drop in Alberta: in 1957, they had $68.2 

million, and in 1958, $86.8 million. Some people have been going about trying to indicate that 

Saskatchewan was the only place in Canada that this depression was not affecting. Well, apparently it 

did not affect Alberta and Manitoba half as much as it did Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: - What are you advocating, Social Credit? 

 

Mr. McDonald: - We had a drop, whereas our two neighbouring provinces went ahead by leaps and 

bounds. All right, let us turn now to the number of people employed in the manufacturing industry. 

Again, where my friend got his figures I do not know, but they are not correct, according to the October, 

1958, D.B.S., pages 22 and 23. The number employed in manufacturing industries in Saskatchewan as at 

October 1, 1958, was 10,406. That is fewer people than were employed in that same industry in 1944 

even. It is fewer than were employed in 1946. In 1946, we had 11,957 people employed in the 

manufacturing industry in this province; last October, 10,406. Those are the official and authentic 

figures as produced by the Dominion Bureau of Statistics. 

 

Again, let us compare these figures with our neighbouring provinces. I do not think anyone can 

complain about comparing them with our 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

27 

 

neighbouring provinces. If I were to go to the industrial centres of Canada, such as British Columbia, 

Quebec, Ontario, and make comparisons, I do not think that would be fair, but I do think it is fair to go 

to our neighbouring provinces for comparison. How many people were employed in Manitoba in the 

manufacturing industry on October 1st last? Not 10,000, but 38,000! We are worse off than we were 

before this Government came into power, as far as the number of people employed in manufacturing is 

concerned. 

 

In the past, when I have mentioned these figures, the Premier has complained. He said that it is not fair 

to compare the people employed in manufacturing, and perhaps he was right. He has said that we should 

compare the number of employees in all industries. All right. I am prepared to do that, and I am prepared 

to give the list of industries that I am going to use, and if anybody else can think of some more, I will 

add those in. But we will take the number of employees in forestry; we will take the number of 

employees in mining, manufacturing, construction, public utilities, trade, finance, insurance, real estate, 

certain groups of service industries – hotels, restaurants, laundries, dry-cleaning establishments, 

recreational and business services, and other firms with 15 employees, or over. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): - Including Crown Corporations! 

 

Mr. McDonald: - Yes, including Crown Corporations. In all of the businesses which fall within these 

categories, on October 1st last we employed 72,500 people. How many were employed in Manitoba at 

the same date? 135,597. How many were employed in Alberta? 162,437. Now, is that progress? If that is 

leadership, then it is Socialist leadership. 

 

Now we can go on to another mistake that was made by my hon. friend when he was talking about the 

production of minerals, natural gas and what have you, in Saskatchewan. It was a strange thing that 

when the administration opposite is referring to the production in any one of these commodities, they 

take the value of production and they can find an increase in that production over the past 10 or 15 

years. But if they would put it on a tonnage or ounce basis, they would find that, as far as base metals 

are concerned, never in any one year since this Government came into power have they produced the 

quantities that were produced prior to their coming into power. 

 

Opposition Members: - Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: - They say, if you want to take the dollar value, well, then, yes, there is an increase, 

because the dollar value of most products has been up over the last several years. 

 

Now there are many other matters that one could correct at this time, but hope to have the opportunity of 

bringing some of the other problems to the attention of this Legislature tomorrow. Some of the 



 

February 16, 1959 

 

 

28 

statements of my friends opposite, the mover and seconder, I can certainly agree with, and I hope to 

indicate that when I speak tomorrow. I do think we have a serious problem confronting at least one or 

two segments of our agricultural population, and I hope to have something to say about that when I 

speak tomorrow. 

 

With those few words, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 4:35 o‟clock p.m.
 


