



















































Hansard: February 19, 1959


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session – Thirteenth Legislature 

6th Day 

Thursday, February 19, 1959 

The House met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

CORRECTION OF PRESS REPORT 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Leader of the Official Opposition): - Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day 

are proceeded with, I would like to make a correction in the report of my speech which appeared in the 

„Leader-Post‟ of February 18th, on Page 5. It says I referred to the fact that the Provincial Treasurer 

(Hon. Mr. Fines) was now a millionaire, and it is further reported in the press that I said this in 

connection with a certain transaction that had taken place with respect to the steel mill in Regina. 

 

I am not sure what I said, Mr. Speaker, and if it was what I said, it is certainly not what I intended to say, 

and I would like to make that correction at this time. 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

Debate on Address-in-Reply 

 

The Assembly resumed from Wednesday, February 19, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 

Mr. Brown (Bengough) for the Address-in-Reply, and the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. 

McDonald: 

 

Mr. A.P. Weber (Meadow Lake): - Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to state how pleased I am 

with the prospects of the forthcoming visit to Saskatchewan of her Gracious Majesty The Queen, and 

His Royal Highness The Prince, and I sincerely hope that their visit will be very enjoyable while in our 

province. 

 

Yesterday, upon closing the debate, I congratulated the mover and seconder on their speeches and I 

noticed that the mover, the hon. member for Bengough (Mr. A.L.S. Brown) was not in his seat. He is not 

there again today, so I will still congratulate him although I cannot do it personally. 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): - He must be playing hookey. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): - I think it is only fair to the hon. member for Bengough, to 

point out that he was in bed all day yesterday. His absence isn‟t because of any desire to be absent. 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
2 

Mr. Weber: - I wasn‟t referring to his absence as being deliberate. I noticed his absence because I 

wanted to congratulate him; that was all. 

 

However, it was evident, in my opinion, that the Speech from the Throne did not contain much 

worthwhile material for consideration, because the mover of the motion, throughout his speech, devoted 

over 1/2 of his time to talking of the farm situation. Then he rounded out his speech b saying that the 

farm problem was definitely a Federal responsibility and a Federal issue. Every member of this House, I 

am sure, realizes the plight of the farmer and agrees that something must be done to correct this 

condition; but merely bemoaning this fact does not, in my opinion, help him to get out of his dilemma. 

 

The Government apparently feels they are unable to do anything about the agricultural situation and the 

complete problem should be dealt with by our Federal Government. However, I do not agree with this 

line of thinking. I believe that this Government can do a great deal and should do a great deal, in keeping 

the operating costs of our farmers as low as possible. 

 

Let us look at the picture of what this Government has contributed to the over-all situation of the farmer 

in the past 12 years. I feel that this Government is not doing enough to lessen the burden of taxes 

saddled upon our people. I believe that the time has arrived when our whole system of taxation should 

be reviewed and revised. Our municipal taxpayers are no longer able to carry the load of increasing 

taxation. Therefore, other means of financial help must be sought. It is my opinion that the Federal and 

Provincial Governments should devise some means whereby the tax burden of our municipal taxpayers 

be recognized, and a joint effort be made to assist them in lowering this tax burden. 

 

I feel, also, that there should be a redistribution of the tax dollar between various forms of government. 

Through its agreement with the Provincial Government, the Federal Government passes back to the 

provinces, in the form of grants, sums of money that should be distributed by the province to local 

governing bodies. I feel that our Government has not done its share in passing sufficient amounts of this 

money that they received from the Federal Government, back to our local Governments. 

 

For the past 15 years, the cost of education has also been a major factor in the upsurge of our municipal 

taxes. This increased burden of education costs should definitely be borne by our senior government. I 

feel that the Government of this province is not assuming its fair share of the costs of education. For 

instance, in the province to the west of us, the government has advanced approximately 60 per cent of 

the cost of the education for their taxpayers, whereas we, in the Province of Saskatchewan, give less 

than 40 per cent back in the form of grants. 

 

I have here a chart, Mr. Speaker, by which I will try to illustrate just what increase in taxation has taken 

place over the 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
3 

past 12 years. Explaining this, I would like to say that I took the over-all rural-municipal tax figures for 

the years 1945, 1950 and 1957, as the over-all picture could have changed quite a bit during that time in 

various areas, I have picked a particular municipality in approximately the centre of the agricultural part 

of Saskatchewan, to compare the situation with the over-all picture of the tax structure in this province. 

 

This is just one case that I am going to mention in regard to what this Government can do to assist the 

farmers‟ burden; but there are many others. 

 

I would like to show here that, in 1945, which apparently seems to be „D-Day‟ as far as figures are 

concerned in this Government, we find that the total rural municipal taxes for that year was $11,443,000. 

I am just going to use round figures on these because it would be too confusing otherwise. Then in the 

years 1945 to 1950, taxes increased from $11,443,000 to $19,889,000, or an increase of over $8 million 

in a five-year period. From the period 1945 to 1957, however, we find that it had risen to $37,418,000 

or, comparing that to the 1945 taxes, an increase of $26,974,000. 

 

To break this down into what happens in a municipality, I picked out a municipality in which I know the 

circumstances slightly, and I thought that that would be a basis of what the general municipal situation 

would be throughout the province. I find that in 1945, the municipal taxes for that municipality were 

$24,000; in 1950, they had risen or doubled to $48,000, which means that, in a five-year period between 

1945 and 1950, there was a $24,742 increase, and in the 12-year period, between 1945 and 1957, it was 

$181,218. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: - What municipality? 

 

Mr. Weber: - I will give you the name of the municipality. I do not want to mention it at this time over 

the air. I have the number and everything here. 

 

Now we come into the school tax picture. We find that, in 1945, school taxes in that same municipality 

amounted to $13,579. In 1950, the school taxes rose to $29,902, an increase of $16,323. Over the 12-

year period, we find that the total school tax was $55,763, or an increase in the 12 years of $42,183. I 

would like to point out, at this time, that this municipality hasn‟t had any improvements that I can see to 

warrant such an increase in taxes. They had two gravelled highways in the thirties in that municipality, 

and they still only have the same two highways. Those same two highways are still gravel today, so the 

highway costs certainly had no bearing in this particular municipality. 

 

The schools wee also in fair shape; most of them were in good shape. Possibly, I can understand, with 

the larger 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
4 

units, he operating costs increasing, but I can‟t quite reconcile those figures with what I think they 

should be. I would like to point out that taxation of this kind could be the straw that broke the camel‟s 

back. 

 

In comparing the taxes for the past 12 years, we find that the economy of the country hasn‟t warranted 

this kind of increase. We find that this does not only pertain to rural municipalities, but we also find that 

urban municipalities are having a very difficult time in meeting the tax burden. A person does not have 

to go any further than the city of Regina to find out what has taken place over the last ten years in the 

increase of taxation in that city. 

 

I also note from the Speech from the Throne that the words “economic farm unit” were mentioned. Now 

people you meet throughout the country, be they farmers or far experts, when you speak of economic 

farm units don‟t seem to know what is meant. I have come to the conclusion that there is only one 

economic farm unit, and that is the farmer himself, because, if we look throughout the country (and I 

imagine in every constituency you‟ll see the same applies), you will see a farmer on a 1/4 section, or 

possible a 1/2 section of land, who is making a real success of it and where his neighbours, who have 

possibly more land and just as good land, are in financial difficulties. I will admit that many of these 

farmers who are on a smaller unit have possibly not the opportunities they would have if they were on 

larger units, but most of those that are successful have good homes and are enjoying life. I feel that, 

today, we have too many self-styled farm experts running around the country confusing our farmers with 

some of their impractical ideas. I believe that farmers should look to recognized sources of information 

such as our University of Saskatchewan or the Department of Agriculture, dealing either directly with 

the Department of Agriculture or through the Ag. Reps. in their areas. 

 

Another thing I find I just can‟t quite agree with today, is some of these support prices that we are 

clamouring for, and have received in many instances. At the present time, there are over 20 agricultural 

items that have a floor price or a support price. We find that every time we put a support price or a 

guaranteed price on a product, there are some groups or individuals who are in a position whereby they 

can produce this commodity both efficiently and economically, and having a guaranteed price to work 

on, are not concerned financially nor are they limited in their volume of production. Others, who are not 

so well equipped are only making a token effort to stay in production and are continuously in 

difficulties. We find those who are in difficulties asking for financial support elsewhere. 

 

We all know that western farm costs have increased by about 50 per cent over the past ten years, while 

the price of wheat has dropped approximately 20 per cent. I feel that the deficiency payment requested 

by our grain growers from the Federal Government, at the very best can be only a stop-gap. It can only 

relieve temporarily the needs of our farmers. As far as I an concerned, there must be a more concrete 

plan 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
5 

for the future to relieve the situation they are in today. I would like to say, though, that I am in full 

accord with the „Farmers‟ March‟ to the East, for this reason – I doubt very much if they get what they 

are asking for, but even if they get part of it, I would be happy to see them get it. But if they have done 

nothing else, they will have at least brought the plight of our people in agriculture to the attention of the 

people throughout Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan, when electing us to this Legislature, had confidence in our 

ability and integrity, and expected us to enact laws for their benefit and protection. To me it seems that 

our elected representatives have failed to a considerable extent in carrying out this responsibility. Many 

of our politicians today are fence-sitters, so to speak, or they climb on the band-wagon of every pressure 

group that appears before them. In fact some of them even run for cover when they are approached by 

some of the pressure groups. I believe that it is about time we take stock of what we think is right, and 

take our stand for what is most beneficial for our country. 

   

With your permission, Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote a little sentence here, by Benjamin Franklin, 

because this may apply to me, this afternoon: 

 

“My rule, in which I have always found satisfaction, is never to turn aside in public affairs through 

views of private interest, but to go straight forward in doing what appears to me right at the time, 

leaving the consequences with Providence.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it would be folly to underestimate the problems to be faced, for in the end the problem 

must be confronted with courage and determination. I believe that those are two factors that should enter 

into the decisions of every member of this Legislature. 

 

Today, we are embarking on one of the greatest projects in the history of Saskatchewan and that is the 

South Saskatchewan River Development. This is one of the major and most important steps that this 

province has ever undertaken, and it will require much hard work and planning until it is completed. It 

will also require co-operation from Government and other groups, so that, when this project is 

completed, it will not become a burden to future generations by “paying through the nose” for the 

construction of this project. It is our responsibility to see that this project is completed without too much 

interference from outside sources; at present, it seems to me that the vultures are sitting on the fence 

waiting to pounce upon their prey. I am now referring to foreign controlled labour unions operating in 

this province. I would like 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
6 

particularly to refer to the gangster, Hoffa-controlled, foreign-controlled, Teamsters‟ Union, which 

before we were getting any work done on the dam, appeared in our province and tried to organize our 

labour union into joining teamsters‟ union, which is, as you know, a Hoffa-controlled union. 

 

I would like to say that at no time did I notice any objection on the part of the Government of the 

Province of Saskatchewan to even investigate the action of this teamsters‟ union, let alone try to prevent 

them from organizing our people. I say, „keep internationally-controlled‟ unions out of Saskatchewan! I 

am all for unions. I believe that unions are very important. But they should be Canadian unions and 

Canadian-controlled unions. Surely somewhere along the line, we have men smart enough in this 

country to assume the responsibility of handling our labour situation. I know myself (I have been a 

worker nearly all my life) I have some idea of what labour was confronted with years ago. I am certainly 

wholeheartedly in support of labour unions, but I am not in support of foreign-controlled labour unions. 

 

Just this morning, I noticed an item in „The Leader-Post‟ saying that Hoffa wants to get back into the 

A.F.L., C.I.O., from which he was kicked out. He was kicked out of those unions – and what are we 

doing? He couldn‟t operate over there to any extent, so he figured here was a very lucrative field, and 

came across into Saskatchewan. We here, did nothing about it and, as far as I know, he has a free hand 

in his organizational work in this province. There is no reason in my mind for this foreign-controlled 

union coming into this province. We have strong Canadian labour unions, and I believe that the Province 

of Saskatchewan should put through legislation whereby any union operating in this province should be 

affiliated with a Canadian-owned and Canadian-operated union. 

 

I would also like to say that we are fortunate here in this country. We are living in a country where we 

have surpluses and resources which many other countries lack, but for the development of these 

resources for our people, we must have sensible legislation. I just mention the labour union as one side 

of this picture. I am now going to take the other side of the picture. We have in this country not only 

American-controlled labour unions, but we also have American-controlled industries. Far be it from me 

to object to foreign capital coming into this country to help in our development. As long as they conform 

to our laws and our customs, I am fully in support of having them here. But it seems to me that, in many 

cases, these foreign-owned and controlled industries, along with their foreign-controlled unions, come 

into Saskatchewan, and they do the „washing of their dirty linen‟ in our territory. 

 

I would like to illustrate what influence American parent companies pay in actions of their industries in 

Canada. Most of you have heard, and very likely remember, the items concerning the Aluminum 

Company of Canada, a subsidiary company of Aluminum Limited, the majority, 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
7 

of course, owned by the United States. This company declined, last fall, to bid on an order for 2,000 tons 

of aluminium for „Red‟ China. The U.S. could not legally object to a deal, but Alcan voluntarily held off 

in fear of possible trade repercussions, and, commented an official, “We couldn‟t jeopardize a $100 

million U.S. market for the sake of $1 million one-shot sale.” 

 

Then again we take “Ford‟s-to-China” controversy which took place, last fall, and brought to light a 

U.S. order to Ford‟s Canadian subsidiary, to forget about he possible sale of 1,000 cars to the Reds 

because U.S. law would be violated if the Canadian-made product was delivered. There are many more 

instances like that where foreign capital does interfere with Canadian economy. 

 

I have a few more things I would like to mention, and I am in a bit of a hurry, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I 

would say that I was very pleased this summer that the Tourist and Information Department took a 

group of M.L.A.s and members into the northern part of Saskatchewan to have a look at our country in 

the north. Most of those who were on this trip will agree with me that there is a pressing need for 

something to be done for the people residing in those areas. I would at this time like to point out that the 

population in the northern, or I might say the northwestern part, of the province has been increasing 

from year to year, whereas their earning ability has been decreasing, because of this natural increase in 

population. They have only certain areas in which they can make their living, and naturally, the more 

people who have to make their living off that same area, the smaller the amount they receive will be. 

 

I would also like to point out that there is no banking facilities in our northern administration areas, and 

any of the people residing up in that part of the country, if they have receiving money from the sale of 

fish, fur or timber, or any other income, have no place to put that money for safe-keeping. As you know 

– it applies to most of us – if we have lots of money in our pocket it does create a feeling that it can be 

more easily spent than drawn out of a savings bank. I would, therefore, suggest to this Government, that 

they give serious consideration to setting up a Co-op Credit Union Savings Bank in northern 

administration areas, that these banks be handled through their Co-ops, or if no Co-op should be in that 

particular area, then the Hudson‟s Bay post or any other suitable outlet that is established there now, 

would do. 

 

I was reading The Health News Letter the other day – and this is something I mentioned in the 

Legislature two years ago – about the conditions of some of those people up in the north. I am glad to 

see that the Government is doing something about it, but this is just a test case, as far as I can see. I 

would like to see them do more extensive work in this regard, for the children in the north. I noticed in 

the Health News Letter of February 15th, under “Study of Nutrition of Children in Isolated Northern 

Communities", it said: 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
8 

“A careful examination of children by two specialists in pediatrics shows that the children were not 

actually starving. The levels of Vitamin A and C in the blood were below normal. Skin, throat and ear 

infection were common. Bad teeth were the rule. On the average, both girls and boys were below 

normal height, and the girls were below par in weight.” 

 

I haven‟t time to go on with this today, but I would like to draw to the attention of the Government the 

dire need of doing more for those people in the north. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I cannot see by the Speech from the Throne that there is too much in it to help our 

people in agriculture, which as our Premier mentioned in his speech was still the major economy of our 

province. Therefore, I cannot support the motion. 

 

Mr. James Gibson (Morse): - Mr. Speaker, I first wish to congratulate the member for Bengough (Mr. 

A.L.S. Brown) and the member for Kerrobert-Kindersley (Mr. Johnson) for the able manner in which 

they moved and seconded the Address-in-Reply. I am sorry that the member for Bengough isn‟t in his 

seat; he has been „under the weather‟ for quite a few days now. He was here in the House just a short 

time ago, and he had to admit that he should be in bed. He has had quite an attack of the „flu‟ and that‟s 

the reason, Mr. Speaker, he isn‟t in his seat at this moment. 

 

I haven‟t got the time to begin to answer the hon. member from Meadow Lake (Mr. Weber). He was 

speaking about increased taxes, and he didn‟t know why this had come about; but I might say briefly 

that, of course, inflation has had a great deal to do with it; increased services has had a great deal to do 

with it, although the hon. member pointed out that he didn‟t think they had any increased services. He 

mentioned a gravelled highway that he has in his constituency. He said they had this gravelled highway 

back in the „30s. Well that could be. However, I do know that this Government has been called upon to 

pave a number of the gravelled highways that were built back in the „30s, and every cent, every dollar 

spent on the building of those highways back in the „30s was borrowed. No fund was set up to take care 

of those debentures as they became due and this Government is now being called upon to meet this 

obligation. 

 

Govt. Members: - Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Gibson: - My hon. friend also spoke about the South Saskatchewan River Dam. When he got 

through speaking about it I was unable to learn whether or not he is in favour of the project. I was going 

to mention the dam, Mr. Speaker, and I hope that when I get through you will understand that I am in 

favour of this development. 

 

I am very pleased to see that a start has been made 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
9 

on the construction of the South Saskatchewan River Development project. It‟s some 21 years since Mr. 

M.J. Coldwell first pressed upon the Federal Government in Ottawa the urgency of making an 

immediate start on the building of this dam, and I sincerely congratulate this Government for the 

persistent fight that it has carried on over the past 14 years, in an endeavour to get the Federal 

Government to co-operate with them in the building of this project on a cost-share plan comparable to 

that provided in the other provinces of Canada. It might be said that we should not have signed an 

agreement that did not provide the same measure of Federal assistance as that provided for other 

provinces. The fact is, of course, we had no choice in the matter. We just had to sign. We couldn‟t afford 

to take the chance of having to wait another 14 or 21 years for a start to be made on this important 

project. 

 

If our cities are to continue to grow and our industries to expand as they have over the past 14 years, 

then we just had to have a more plentiful supply of water, and we have to have it ready and available at 

the earliest possible date. As one gentleman so aptly put it: “We must turn the muddy waters of the 

mighty Saskatchewan into a flow of gold that will build a citadel of wealth and security.” Premier 

Douglas, in his New Year‟s message to the people of Saskatchewan said: “1958 will be remembered as 

the year our engineers were commissioned to get on with the building of a dam on the South 

Saskatchewan River. With the completion of this dam, we will command new resources with which to 

further broaden our developing economy.” Again, last summer, while addressing a large gathering of 

intellectuals in Saskatoon, the Premier predicted that 40 years from now, the people of Saskatchewan 

would look back to the construction of the dam as an event second only to the election of a C.C.F. 

Government in this province. 

 

Govt. Members: - Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Gibson: - Because of its location, the dam is of particular importance to the residents of the Morse 

constituency. The main dam, 205 feet high and 16,700 feet across, will be located some 20 miles west of 

Elbow, and the second dam, to be named the Summit Dam, will be located in the valley 12 miles 

southeast of Elbow. The purpose of this Summit Dam is to control the flow of water in the Qu‟Appelle 

system and thereby controlling the supply of water for the cities of Moose Jaw and Regina. I think it is 

true to say that when this am is completed, these cities will, for the first time in their existence be 

assured of a year-around adequate water supply. The two dams will create a lake some 135 miles long, 

and some 65 miles of the shore line of this lake will serve as the northwest boundary of Morse 

constituency. 

 

While the immediate plans do not call for irrigation to take place within the constituency with so many 

miles of adjoining shore-line, there is every possibility that in time irrigation will be provided. However, 

the humidity created by such a large body of water is almost 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
10 

certain to increase the rainfall and thereby benefiting crops and pastures in the surrounding area. I 

understand the reservoir level is to be kept fairly constant, not varying more than a foot or two at any 

time, and no doubt, when these levels are known and marked, numerous picnic sites will spring into 

being. Speaking of camp sites, Mr. Speaker, I invite all hon. members to visit a new but ideal camping 

and picnic site situated one mile south of the Trans-Canada Highway and 20 miles west of Moose Jaw, 

mid-way between Caron and Mortlach. Last spring, a number of people from the rural municipalities of 

Caron and Mortlach, including church groups, 4-H Clubs, young peoples‟ groups, and Caron Branch of 

the Canadian Legion, businessmen and others formed an association named the “Besant Park 

Association”, and they proceeded immediately to develop this excellent park site. They were able to get 

some assistance from Parks Branch, and fortunately the park is situated on Crown land. When the 

Minister of Agriculture (Hon. Mr. Nollet) learned that the 4-H Clubs were, in the course of their 

activities, going to make use of this park, it wasn‟t difficult to persuade him to make the land available. 

 

There is just enough game in this park, such as deer, pheasants, prairie chickens, beaver, etc., to make it 

very interesting for visitors, and the soil is quite sandy. A spring-fed creek runs the year around across 

the entire length of the park and, too, we have our dugout spring-fed wading pool. The water comes in 

from the bottom and the surplus overflows out one end. We had many cars from widely scattered parts 

of Canada and United States visit this park, last summer. We had one car all the way from Switzerland, 

and it stayed several days. According to our caretaker in the park, most of the people who visited the 

park remarked on the fact that they had enjoyed their visit very much, and some of them stayed two an 

three days. A number of us have received letters since, from people from far distant points, telling us 

how much they enjoyed their stay in the park. They even sent Christmas cards to some members of the 

Association. 

 

I mentioned this park, Mr. Speaker, firstly because I wish to advertise it and, secondly, because situated 

as it is near the Trans-Canada Highway at a point where suitable camping sites are few and far between, 

I am hopeful that, under the Government‟s program as mentioned in the Speech from the Throne, and 

this is what it says: 

 

“to provide more camping and picnic facilities along our major tourist highways”; 

 

I am hopeful that the Minister will be able to assist in the further development of this park in 1959. 

 

Another event of particular importance to the constituency and to the economy of the province took 

place on September 22nd last, when the official opening of a new office building of Saskatchewan 

Minerals sodium sulphate plant, at Chaplin, marked the anniversary of 10 years 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
11 

of successful operation of this plant. Construction of a million-dollar plant to extract and process this 

valuable mineral was completed in 1948. Incidentally, Saskatchewan is the only province where sodium 

sulphate is found in commercial quantities, and this 18-mile-square lake at the plant is estimated to 

contain some 15 million tons of sodium sulphate. Sodium sulphate is used extensively in the pulp, paper 

and glass industries and, to a lesser degree, in the manufacture of synthetic detergents, textile dye-baths, 

heavy chemicals, pharmaceuticals and fertilizers. The machine shop at the plant, with its capable 

operators and modern equipment, makes the plant almost self-sufficient so far as repairs to the 

equipment is concerned. 

 

With the coming of natural gas to Chaplin, the factory has undergone great changes. The evaporators 

and driers are now fired with natural gas, and the quantity of gas burned in a 24-hour period is about 3 

million feet, a quantity considerably higher than that used in the city of Moose Jaw, exclusive of power 

and training school use. Our evaporators, protected by patent owned by The Saskatchewan Minerals, are 

one of the most efficient dehydrating plant units of equipment in existence. Exhaust fans with a capacity 

of some 25,000 feet per minute, take steam from the evaporators and driers from a furnace heat of about 

2,000 degrees and bring about a reduction to about 200 degrees. About 800 tons of water – 116,000 

gallons – is removed from the salt in a 24-hour operation. 

 

The population of Chaplin has grown from 150 persons in 1947 to nearly 500 persons in 1958. Chaplin‟s 

growth, and the healthy economic status of the village (now almost a town is due, in large measure, to 

the $2 million paid out in wages to the employees of the plant, since 1948. In all, sodium sulphate 

valued at $9½ million has been sold, resulting in a profit of $1,163,000 and, in addition, $435,000 has 

been paid in royalties to the Provincial Treasury. 

 

In closing, I would like to make brief reference to the Government‟s natural gas policy. First, I wish to 

congratulate the Minister for the speed and efficiency with which he has made this clean and economical 

fuel available to so many people, and for his initiative in building the Success-to-Regina gas line as soon 

as he did. Completion of this line has meant that gas was available sooner, and at a more economical 

cost, than otherwise would have been possible. This natural gas pipe line passes through the Morse 

constituency and it follows closely the main line of the CPR railroad, making it practical and convenient 

to serve the towns and villages en route. So far, the towns of Herbert, Morse, Chaplin, Parkbeg and 

Mortlach have been served, and I am hopeful, since it is so practical to serve other points along this line, 

that at least some of them will be served in 1959. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I shall support the motion. 

 

Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon City): - Mr. Speaker, I find there are many items in the Speech from the 

Throne which, I believe, will be of very particular interest to the constituency which 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
12 

I represent, because the City of Saskatoon is in the centre of a large wheat belt, and the one thing, of 

course, that is most important and would be of the greatest benefit to it, as a large shopping and 

distribution centre, would be a stable farm economy. It was very gratifying to me to see so many people 

from different sections of society attending at a very marvellous meeting in the Bessborough Hotel, and 

I believe they were sincere in backing the farmers in their desire to get a better deal. I believe more and 

more people are coming to understand that if farmers have cash in their pockets they will buy the things 

they need, and will be of benefit to all concerned. 

 

1958 was a very phenomenal year for the city of Saskatoon. Construction permits reached an all-time 

high of almost $37 million, compared to $21,700,000 in 1957. I am not going to mention the public 

buildings. Mention has been made of the Queen Elizabeth plant, and I do want to say there was one 

public building opened last spring. It is often said that the longer you have to wait for something the 

more it is appreciated when you receive it, and I think that is only right in regard to those who had to 

struggle and suffer in our inadequate Court House in Saskatoon. They really have a nice functional 

building, one that will serve the needs of the Saskatoon area for a long while, and I wish to thank the 

Public Works Department for that very fine building. 

 

The member from Kerrobert-Kindersley (Mr. Johnson) took us on a conducted tour, the other day, of the 

new building on the University campus. All I wish to say is, I hope as many people, as citizens of this 

province, will find it possible to visit their University this year, the 50th Anniversary, and I am sure 

those seeing the University for the layout of the campus, but as they visit inside the building, and notice 

the high standard set by the faculty, I am sure they will find it compares favourably with any like 

institution in Canada. I am very pleased to see that the Government, in the Throne Speech, is going to 

make it possible for more of our young people, through scholarships, to attend this fine institution. 

 

The potash plant is now almost in full production, and the nice wage bill will mean a great deal to the 

city of Saskatoon. We also have another small but thriving industry in the pre-fabricating plant, 

commonly known as the straw-board plant. They have recently put in some new machinery and are now 

producing a very fine type of board, which is becoming popular in the construction industry. 

 

I am delighted to see, in the Speech from the Throne, provision for low-cost housing. I think this 

inducement for reducing by 5% to the cities the costs for low-cost housing will be received very 

favourably. During the last huge construction program, we had a remarkable increase in development of 

dwellings in Saskatoon. We 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
13 

needed them. But we are coming to the point where we can no longer put off the great need for low-cost 

housing for those in the low-income group, people who are living in third-class accommodation at high 

rents, and who are unable to raise the kind of down payments required today. I sometimes think it is 

very tragic that, n a country like this where we have a surplus supply of the materials that go into the 

building of a home, people are denied the privilege of a decent home where they can raise their families 

under good conditions. I think, whether we like it or not, we will be pushed into subsidized rental 

housing accommodation. I believe the two or three plans that are in effect in this province already are 

proving very popular, at very little or no cost to either the province or the municipality. I am sure this 

particular part of the Throne Speech will be accepted, and I am sure the city of Saskatoon will take 

advantage of it. 

 

Another thing about the construction of homes – it is a very good way of relieving unemployment. I 

don‟t know a better way, because most of the invested dollar remains in the province and finds its way 

back to the pockets of the municipality and of the Provincial Government. 

 

Speaking of unemployment, it is gratifying to know that the city of Saskatoon was one of the first, if not 

the first, to apply for the winter employment program under the share-labour-costs plan, where 50% was 

shared by the Federal Government, and 50% by the Provincial Government. There have been some very 

large projects under way in Saskatoon all winter long. Things that could not have been done a few years 

ago are being done today, keeping people employed. 

 

To give you some idea of the growth of the city of Saskatoon, the population has doubled since 1942. 

We are now well over the 80,000 mark. In fact it is closer to 83,000 of a population. This presents a lot 

of growing pains, and causes tremendous capital expenditures in extension of services. Luckily we have 

a good Community Planning Board that has avoided a lot of the pitfalls. We, of course, have also 

enjoyed the „baby boom‟ that has taken place all across Canada in the last decade, and this has meant a 

tremendous capital expenditure for elementary classrooms and now high school classrooms. 

 

I want to say how appreciative we are of the accelerated school grants last year, and now again proposed 

this year. I am sure it is going to relieve the taxpayer in the city of Saskatoon. It can be truly said that 

once again we have lived up to our promise that, as more money becomes available for education, it will 

be given. It is surprising to me to hear the hon. member for Meadow Lake speak as he did on this 

subject. I would think that the member for Meadow Lake ought to be the last member in this House to 

make derogatory remarks on our school grants. Apparently he doesn‟t know what is going on. 

Apparently he doesn‟t know that in his constituency, the unit in Meadow Lake is receiving over 80 per 

cent of the assigned costs in grants from this Government. 

 

I never heard so much double-talk in my life in regard to the labour question, but it is not worth my time 

to answer the member for Meadow Lake at this time. 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
14 

Mr. McFarland (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): - Go ahead. We‟ll listen! 

 

Mr. Stone: - I was a little disturbed at the unwarranted and malicious attack made by one or two persons 

from the city of Saskatoon against our Government‟s Industrial Development Office. I say they were 

unwarranted because the accusations that the Development Office was favouring Regina against 

Saskatoon was not true. I think that, in Saskatoon, we have a „natural‟ for industry. We have an 

abundance of water, plenty of power, we have enjoyed natural gas for several winters, we have good 

transportation facilities, we have black-top highways leading to all parts of the province. The little 

difficulty may be in freight rates, but I believe they could have been adjusted had proper attempts been 

made. I don‟t think the business men in Regina are any more resourceful than are the business men in 

Saskatoon. I don‟t think they are any more favourable to this Government in Regina than they are in 

Saskatoon; but I think Regina business men realize that industry is going to settle here, and if they are 

going to, Regina might as well have them and get the benefit of it. I understand, also, that some of these 

individuals have benefited by the fact that industry has settled here in Regina. I must voice the opinion 

that there are one or two in Saskatoon who are determined to sabotage industry coming into this 

province. They are determined they will not life a finger as long as this Government is in power, even 

though it means jeopardizing the community which has paid off so well for them. They are determined 

they will get all they can out of this community, and put nothing back. I understand the City Council 

now is considering setting up their own Industrial Development office, taking it away from the Board of 

Trade, and if they do that they will get, I am quite sure, all the co-operation and assistance from our 

Development Office, so that industry might come into Saskatoon. 

 

I still have a little time left, and I would like to congratulate the Minister of Social Welfare (Hon. Mr. 

Bentley) for this new approach to social aid cases. I have had many a headache over these jurisdictional 

disputes, and I am sure that they will be of great benefit to those participants in social aid. I am quite 

sure it will be a great saving of time and paper work to municipalities and to social aid workers. I 

believe it was the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. McDonald) who said that if it proves itself (and I think 

it will) then we can progress and go further along those lines. 

 

I, like many other members, am very appreciative of all the homes that are going up throughout the 

province for the care and housing of our old-age people. We have a very fine one in the city of 

Saskatoon, and this year a hostel will be open for single men. I, too, like the Leader of the Opposition, 

would like to see more geriatric centres, and I am sure the Government will progress along those lines. 

But I think the Minister of Social Welfare would be the first to agree that we have not found all the 

techniques yet for the caring and housing of all our aged people. I had a little personal experience myself 

with these people, and I find it is pretty hard sometimes to do something for some that do not wish to be 

helped, 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
15 

even though we realize they do need help. I am very glad to see a Conference being called of groups of 

people who have given some attention to this particular phase. It is a sad one, though it is badly needed 

all over the province, and I hope from the Conference that some new techniques might be found for the 

caring and housing of our aged people. 

 

I have promised to give my young friend from Souris-Estevan (Mr. Thorson) some time on the air, so, 

Mr. Speaker, I am going to close. I might say I found quite a few items in the Throne Speech which, I 

feel, will be of benefit to my constituency. I mentioned the school grants, the housing arrangement, the 

social aid program and the care for the aged. For those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I am going to support the 

motion. 

 

Mr. Kim Thorson (Souris-Estevan): - Mr. Speaker, may I join with those who have preceded me in 

this debate in congratulating the mover and the seconder to the Address in Reply. I should also like to 

congratulate all of the people who have taken part in this debate. I am sure that all of us value the 

contribution that each member makes to this debate and to other debates in the Assembly. 

 

At the outset of my own remarks I should like to draw the attention of the members to some very 

important developments which are taking place in my constituency of Souris-Estevan and, in particular, 

the developments in which the Government of this province plays a major role. 

 

Members are aware that, last fall, the Steelman Gas Plant went into operation and is now processing the 

flare gas which formerly was burned as it came from the ground through production of the oil in the 

southeastern oil fields, particularly in the Steelman field. I know that the operation of this gas plant has 

meant a great deal, not only to the people of my area and to the people of all the Province, but it has 

given a great deal of satisfaction to the Minister of Mineral Resources and to the people in his 

Department who are particularly concerned with the conservation of the resources we have. Prior to the 

opening of this Plant the flare gas was burned, completely wasted. Now it is being processed so that we 

have ore natural gas and a number of other products, including sulphur, butane, propane and some 

natural gasoline. The fact that we are now producing natural gas from the oil fields of the southeastern 

part of the Province through the Steelman gas plant has made it even more feasible for the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation to bring natural gas to the city of Estevan and to the village of Lampman this past 

year, during 1958. All of us in that southeastern part of the province, particularly in Estevan and 

Lampman, are more than delighted that this natural gas is being distributed to the homes, businesses and 

the industries in our part of the province; and we confidently look forward to the day when natural gas 

pipe lines will be further extended so that natural gas can be brought to a number of other communities 

in the oil fields and in other areas in southeastern Saskatchewan. 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
16 

I think the members are quite aware that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation is a very important 

organization, not only in the Province but particularly in the southeastern part of the Province. Not only 

because it has extended natural gas to Estevan and to Lampman, but because of the very large extension 

in power generating facilities which the Power Corporation has undertaken along the creek where the 

Boundary Dam is located. Members are quite familiar with the importance of this generating capacity to 

meet the needs of power consumption in Saskatchewan, and I think they have, in a general way, more 

idea of the kind of plant that is being built, where coal is used; the energy contained in coal is converted 

into electrical power. We expect this spring to see the first generator of some 66,000 kilowatts in 

operation, and within a year the second generator. 

 

The Speech from the Throne mentions that this year plans will be proceeded with to build a connection 

between the power system in Saskatchewan, and the power system in Manitoba. I do not need to remind 

members that both these power systems are publicly owned on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, 

and the people in Manitoba. I was delighted to see this announcement in the Speech from the Throne, 

first of all because it has a number of advantages not only for Manitoba, but also for Saskatchewan. Both 

systems will now be required to spend less money on stand-by generating capacity, because both of 

them will be interconnected, and as we have known during the past year the power system of 

Saskatchewan – the main distribution lines – were connected, so that now we have the integrated system 

in Saskatchewan. At least two integrated systems, one in Saskatchewan, and one in Manitoba, will now 

be connected to each other when this line is built between Estevan and Brandon. So that both systems, in 

emergencies, will be able to call upon the generating capacity of the other system. 

 

Also, of course, this has a distinct advantage to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, and the people of 

Saskatchewan who own the Corporation, because we will have an immediate market for power 

generated from the Boundary Dam Station. We are quite aware that increases in consumption of 

electricity take place rather gradually, but increases in generating capacity come rather suddenly when a 

new generating plant is put on the line. When the Boundary Dam Plant goes on the line this spring, we 

will have excess capacity for a short time at least. By making this connection to the Manitoba system we 

will have an immediate market for power generated by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. This 

immediate market will, no doubt, defray the cost of building the line, and will help to defray the capital 

cost of building the Boundary Dam Station, and will hasten the day when the investment the people of 

Saskatchewan have made in this generating capacity is returned to them. 

 

Also, of course, the people of Manitoba will derive some very direct benefit by this interprovincial 

power connection, because, as we know, with the increasing freight rates it becomes more and more 

costly to ship a product like coal any distance. Now that the line will be built between the generating 

stations at Estevan and the Manitoba power system at Brandon, the energy which is contained in the coal 

will not have to be transported in the bulky form of coal, but in the form of electrical power. This will 

represent substantial saving to the people of Manitoba. They will be able to buy power from 

Saskatchewan at a rate that is cheaper than it would 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
17 

cost them if they were generating with coal from their thermo plants at Brandon. 

 

But, more than that, Mr. Speaker, aside from the advantages to Saskatchewan and to Manitoba, this 

interconnection of the two power systems has a very direct benefit for the people of the Bienfait-Estevan 

area, because this will mean a larger market for power. A larger market for power will no doubt 

stimulate further increases in coal-mining operations, because coal, of course, is the source of energy 

from which we get the power in Saskatchewan, at least that part of Saskatchewan. I know all the people 

of the Estevan-Bienfait area who, directly or indirectly, depend upon the power generating industry and 

the coal-mining industry, are delighted that this Government, through its publicly-owned Power 

Corporation, is expanding the generating capacity and building this interconnecting line between 

Saskatchewan and Manitoba. 

 

I wanted to say a word about another Crown Corporation which is important in the Estevan area, 

namely, the Saskatchewan Clay Products. I don‟t need to elaborate the many advantages which accrue, 

not only to the people of my constituency, but to all of Saskatchewan, from this Crown Corporation. It 

develops our resources, it provides employment for something like 50 people, it generates a good deal of 

business in the Estevan area and beyond. 

 

I wanted to leave this word with the Members of the Assembly, and the people of the province, that I 

hope that somehow and in some way we will be able to convince the new Federal Government to 

abandon the old policy of the Liberal Government when they were in office, so that Estevan brick can be 

used in the construction of federal buildings throughout the western part of Canada. It is very 

embarrassing to us in Estevan to recall that within the past few years, public buildings built by the 

Federal Government have been constructed in Estevan and Weyburn, and in places within easy reach of 

Estevan, not by bricks from Estevan, but by bricks brought in from Alberta, despite the fact that the 

bricks which are produced by the Saskatchewan Clay Products are equal in quality; in my own opinion 

have a better appearance; and can be produced and laid down on the site at a much lower rate than the 

bricks which are brought in from Alberta. I hope that my hon. friends in the Opposition in this Assembly 

will join with me in trying to convince the Federal Government that it should abandon the old policy of 

the Liberal Government, and take up a new policy, and stop this kind of discrimination against the 

people of Saskatchewan, and particularly the people of my constituency who are directly employed in 

making bricks. 

 

I wanted to say just a word about the Saskatchewan Government Telephones. The hon. members will 

note in the Speech from the Throne mention of the extension in micro-wave service which brings 

television to different parts of the province. Unfortunately, and in the opinion of some, fortunately, we 

don‟t have a local television station in my constituency. But the extension of micro-wave service by 

Saskatchewan Government Telephones has certainly improved the long-distance service between 

Estevan and other points on this continent. This last fall, with the inauguration of the 2-5 dial system in 

the city of Estevan, we can expect even further improvements 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
18 

in the long-distance service to and from Estevan. This is quite important, Mr. Speaker. When the oil 

boom hit the southeastern part of the province, this was one of the things that was a thorn in the side of 

the oil operators. It was very annoying to the people who lived in the southeast part of the province, and 

like so many other services, telephone services were strained much beyond their capacities to serve the 

needs of our people. 

 

I wanted to say a word, too, about the highway construction in the southeast part of Saskatchewan, and 

to extend our appreciation from Souris-Estevan to the Department of Highways for two projects which 

have been undertaken within the past year. I refer, first of all, to the oil surfacing of Highway No. 47, 

south of the city of Estevan, through the Souris Valley towards the Estevan airport and towards the 

Boundary Dam construction site. The traffic, of course, on this route has continued to increase over the 

past few years, and because the route goes through the valley, the dust hazard became more and more 

serious. I was delighted that the Department of Highways has met the need and has now made this route 

a completely dust-free driving surface. 

 

Perhaps even more important was the beginning, during the past year, of reconstruction to a very high 

standard of Highway No. 18, east of Bienfait. This Highway No. 18, which runs from the Manitoba 

border to Estevan and beyond, is a very main artery serving not only the coal industry, but the oil 

industry in the southeastern part of the province. It was built to a standard a few years ago, which was 

quite adequate, but which is not adequate to meet the needs of the increased volume and weight of 

traffic which we are quite conscious of in the southeast part of the province. I am hopeful that the 

Department of Highways will be allocated sufficient funds so that it can continue this program of 

reconstruction of No. 18 highway, both the re-grading to a much higher standard, and, of course, the 

hard-surfacing of the highway. 

 

I want to say just a word about the grid road program, because I know that the ratepayers and the 

municipal councillors in the rural municipalities in the southeast part of the province appreciate very 

much this provincial assistance made available for the construction of the network of grid roads. The 

members who checked through Public Accounts will see that all of the rural municipalities, in the 

southeast, in one year or another, are making use of the provincial assistance which is available. I think 

the ratepayers in my constituency, as in other constituencies throughout the province, are quite aware 

that if the Provincial Government was not assisting, on the average, to the extent of 60 per cent of the 

cost of this municipal grid system, that only two results would be apparent. Either the roads which rural 

people have would be far worse than they are today, and if the roads were brought up to the standards to 

which we have them today, they would have to pay a much larger tax bill than they are paying at 

present. Because the Provincial Government shares with the local governments its increasing revenues 

our roads not only in my part of the province but in other parts of the province, are noticeably much 

better in the rural areas; yet taxes have not increased proportionately to the local property owner. 

 

In this connection, with rural roads, I do want to say there is still a need for further assistance from the 

Provincial Treasury in the matter 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
19 

of constructing and maintaining oil access roads. This is particularly true where oil fields develop in 

such a way that the traffic between them, or to them and from them runs through one municipality (or a 

number of municipalities) whose assessment is not increasing because the oil wells and the pipelines do 

not happen to be located within the boundaries of that particular municipality. While the oil wells and 

the pipelines aren‟t there, and their assessment did not increase, their traffic does increase and they have 

no way of meeting the increased needs of the travelling public because they have no additional 

resources. Because the provincial economy benefits from this oil development, I think there is a very 

sound case to be made for provincial assistance on oil access roads. Some assistance has already been 

made, and I fully expect that more assistance will be made available for these roads. 

 

Oil development in the southeast part of the province still continues; although the pace of drilling has 

slowed down somewhat in the past year, I am not aware of any oil operators becoming pessimistic about 

the future. They are much more concerned about the trade policies, and the possibility of finding 

markets for their oil beyond the borders of Saskatchewan, than they are of the likelihood that no more 

oil can be found in Saskatchewan. I only need to say that production of oil in the southeast part of 

Saskatchewan has increased to the point where we are an undisputed leader in the oil industry in 

Saskatchewan, and we are a major producer in western Canada. 

 

To sum up, Mr. Speaker, I can say this: Economic improvement is noticeable in all parts of southeastern 

Saskatchewan, and no place has felt the benefit and the impact of this kind of economic development 

more than the city of Estevan. In recent years, building and construction records have been set in and 

around the city of Estevan. New businesses and new industries have come in. The most recent, of 

course, is the establishment of a trailer manufacturing plant at the airport near Estevan – a plant which 

will produce mobile homes specifically designed for the western market and for western climatic 

conditions. 

 

Not only new businesses and new industry but employment is also being increased. More and larger 

payrolls are being earned and are being spent in the businesses of Estevan and communities in the 

surrounding area. 

 

I think I can say that more and more the people of Souris-Estevan appreciate the tangible benefits which 

have resulted from this Government‟s far-sighted economic planning, its careful concern for the 

development. We are encouraged and I am sure all of the people of Saskatchewan are encouraged by the 

statements in the Speech from the Throne which indicate that these kind of policies will be continued 

and the development programs will be expanded. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to pass on one or two compliments to the Provincial Department of Agriculture. I 

am very pleased that the Speech from the Throne indicates that the system of grasshopper control 

through chemical sprays will be continued because I know that local rural councillors, who are charged 

at a local level with supervising the control of grasshoppers 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
20 

in our province, very much appreciate the assistance made available from the Department of 

Agriculture; not only the financial assistance in bringing the chemical controls to the place where they 

are needed at cost, but the technical services which are made available by the Department particularly 

through its agricultural representative services. 

 

I want to congratulate the Department of Agriculture for the excellent way in which it met the fodder 

shortage during the past year and for the assurance that this kind of service will be made available when 

it is needed in the future. 

 

When the member for Kerrobert-Kindersley (Mr. E.A. Johnson) seconded the Address in Reply, he 

mentioned how much improvement is being made in the agricultural representative service, in particular 

in the field of farm management. I wish to join with him in extending my appreciation on behalf of the 

farmers in my area to the Department of Agriculture for paying more and more attention to this very 

important area of agriculture in Saskatchewan. 

 

While I am expressing my compliments to the Department of Agriculture, I particularly want to say a 

word of appreciation to the Minister of Agriculture (Hon. I.C. Nollet), in Saskatchewan, because I know 

of no man in this Province who is more alert and more sensitive to the needs of the people who are 

engaged in farming and I know of no man who is quicker to champion their cause, who is more 

energetic and more capable in initiating and in working for programs which benefit the people who 

make their living from the land in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the items in the Speech from the Throne which particularly interested me was the 

indication that during the coming year a water survey or a survey of all water resources will be initiated 

in the Province and in this connection I also want to say a word or two about the South Saskatchewan 

River Dam Project. 

 

The need for water conservation and problems of water shortage are not new in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. Through-out our history, being primarily concerned with agricultural development, we 

have become more and more aware of how important it is to conserve water, and in fact this part of the 

world, so far as agriculture is concerned, like other parts of North America, is known as a place where 

techniques of dry farming must be employed. I think, as well as the conservation of water for 

agriculture, more and more we need to pay attention to other uses for water. I think we need to begin 

now to plan for the day when water and sewage systems will be available in all of the farm homes of the 

Province and in all of the homes in the smaller urban centres of Saskatchewan. I can think of nothing 

that we might do in Saskatchewan that would go further towards improving the standard of living for 

more people in our Province. I think if we examine the problems involved in bringing water and sewage 

facilities to all of the people in the Province, we soon realize that although it would be very costly in the 

financial sense, an even bigger obstacle is the sheer physical problem of finding enough water and in 

finding it is places where it must be used and in bringing it to the people who need it. That‟s why I am 

delighted that the Speech from the Throne indicates how aware the Government of Saskatchewan is of 

this problem and that steps will be taken 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
21 

to survey the water resources we have and from that plans can be formulated to make the best use of 

what water we have. 

 

In this connection I wanted to say a word or two about the Souris River, which, as the hon. members 

will know, runs through the city of Weyburn and through most of my constituency before it crosses the 

international border into North Dakota. I fully expect that in the future greater demands will be made of 

this water system for agricultural purposes, more flood control measures will be necessary, more 

domestic use will be made of the water of the Sours and it will become more and more important for 

industry and recreational purposes. Of course, no one can be impressed with the size of the Souris in 

relation to many of the other rivers of our Province, this continent and the world. It is a very small river 

and even when you add it to its tributary, Long Creek, on which the Boundary Dam is being constructed, 

it is still a very small water system; but it is one of the few water systems we have in southern 

Saskatchewan and I think plans need to be formulated now for a system of dams and dykes and for 

channel clearance so that we can make the very best use of the water we have on the Souris River for all 

of the purposes which I just mentioned. 

 

I fully expected that in the future if the population of our Province continues to grow, if more and more 

industry comes in, if some of the developments which could take place such as the discovery of an iron-

ore deposit, if they do take place, our water resources we will find are more and more inadequate to the 

needs of this Province. When I say that the Souris River is a rather small water system, I emphasize the 

point that it is one of the few water systems we have. And I think it is quite conceivable that in the not 

too distant future if more water is needed in the southeast part of the Province it can be brought there 

from the reservoir created by the South Saskatchewan River Dam. As the member for Morse (Mr. J. 

Gibson) just pointed out, water from this reservoir will already be channelled into the Qu‟Appelle River 

system and will be supplying water for Moose Jaw and Regina; it is not too much further to the Souris 

River and water could be transferred even further through a system of artificial channels or pipe lines. 

 

In connection with water resources, I wanted to commend the Government for its wisdom in its 

announced intention to establish a South Saskatchewan River Development Commission which will be 

charged with the responsibility of coordinating a good deal of the planning and a good deal of the 

programs connected with this multi-purpose River Dam Project. As the construction has already got 

under way, we become more and more aware of the many complex and inter-related problems which are 

certainly arising. We know that local government in the area will certainly be strained and that 

innovations will be needed to meet the needs of local government services. 

 

We need, certainly, plans for all of the many multi-purposes of this project: power, the irrigation, water 

control, recreation, tourism and the industrial uses. But, even more important than the plans for these 

particular uses is the coordination of the various plans and the Commission as I see it will be charged 

with filling this need and bearing the responsibility for coordinating the many plans and the many 

programs that will be undertaken. 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
22 

I wanted to say also how much I appreciate the fact that this Government of this Province entered into 

an agreement to build the South Saskatchewan River Dam. I think this indicates, as so many other things 

which the Government does, how willing it is to develop the resources for the benefit of the people of 

Saskatchewan. I am not surprised that the member for Morse could not be sure whether the member for 

Meadow Lake (Mr. Weber) was in favour of building the South Saskatchewan Dam or not because the 

Social Credit Party, and in Saskatchewan we are aware of some of the road blocks which the Social 

Credit Government of Alberta tried to throw in the way of this South Saskatchewan River Dam Project. 

 

One other comment I wanted to make in connection with the South Saskatchewan River Dam: like the 

policy of the old Liberal Government of discriminating against the people of Saskatchewan in the matter 

fusing bricks produced in Saskatchewan for Federal Government Buildings, and like so many other 

things where you really can‟t tell the difference, when they are in office, between Liberals and 

Conservatives, in the matter of assistance to the Province of Saskatchewan for power development, 

again you can‟t tell the difference between a Liberal Government and a Conservative Government. We 

know that the Liberal Government, when it was in office, began programs and initiated plans to assist 

other provinces in Canada for the development of power facilities. In the Maritimes – substantial 

assistance; in Quebec and Ontario – assistance through the St. Lawrence Seaway Project; in British 

Columbia – assistance on the Columbia River Power Projects; but for Saskatchewan – no assistance 

what ever from the Liberal Government of the day and now the Conservative Government of today 

indicates that they are prepared to follow the same policy. I want to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that this is 

discrimination against Saskatchewan and its people and it is the kind of discrimination which is carried 

on with the same sort of carefree abandon by either Liberals or Conservatives when they are in office in 

Ottawa. 

 

I have been talking about various developments in my part of the Province and in other parts of the 

Province and I could say a good deal more about developments in Saskatchewan, in resources, in 

industrial development, in highway construction, in power expansion and in the distribution of natural 

gas, but I want to turn now from material developments to human developments. If we were only 

concerned with the development of physical and material resources, I for one, would find the prospect 

not very exciting and not the least bit challenging. I believe members on this side House subscribe to the 

philosophy expressed by Edwin Markam when he said, “Nothing is built unless it builds the man”, and 

we are not concerned primarily with the material developments that I have been talking about. We are 

only concerned with them insofar as they improve the human development of all of the people of 

Saskatchewan. I want to say a word or two about how the Government of this Province shows its 

concern for human development; has shown concern in the past; continues to do so, and will continue to 

do so in the future. 

 

Let me say just a word or two about health and welfare programs in this Government. C.C.F. 

Saskatchewan continues to lead in Canada and in North America in publicly organized programs to 

assist people in communities 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
23 

who are less fortunate than the other members of the community. I only need to mention how we have 

pioneered the hospitalization scheme in this Province. Now we are placing more and more emphasis on 

preventative medicine in Saskatchewan, so that we can be saved not only the financial cost but the 

human cost of people becoming sick from diseases that can be controlled. 

 

I think a great deal of credit goes to the Department of Public Health and its officials for making 

available the Salk vaccine for the prevention of the spread of polio in Saskatchewan to the point where 

no cases were reported in the past year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I leave the field of Public Health, I want to make reference to what the member for 

Meadow Lake had to say about health needs of the people of his part of the Province. I was rather 

amused that he should call the attention of the Government to a problem which exists in his constituency 

and offer, as proof that there is a problem, material supplied through a publication of this Government – 

telling the Government what it is already quite aware of. He quoted from the Health News Letter the 

section which indicated that a survey of the nutrition of children in the northern part of the Province 

indicated that while they weren‟t starving, in many cases they were undernourished and suffering from 

malnutrition. But he didn‟t go on and quote all or even other parts of the article in the Health News 

Letter. Just to set the record straight, Mr. Speaker, I would like to read further on in the article where it 

says: 

 

“Since the initial survey, those children have been fed a food supplement at the school under the 

supervision of the teacher. The diet consists of constituted skim milk powder in the form of cream 

soups and cocoa, vitamized biscuits, fruit juice, dried prunes, raisins, cod liver oil. The Department of 

Public Health will study the effects of supplementing the basic local diet with certain protective foods. 

After the supplement has been fed a complete year, the community will be revisited and assessed 

through clinical examinations, various laboratory tests and a repeated dietary review. It is intended that 

this special project will let local people see for themselves how much the health of their children can 

be improved by good nutrition and general community interest in health.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wouldn‟t want the impression, which the member for Meadow Lake tried to leave with 

us, to go uncorrected. The Department of Public Health is quite aware of the problem which he 

mentioned, and what he did not mention was that the Department of Public Health (and other 

Government agencies) is doing something to solve this particular health problem. 

 

In the field of public health, Mr. Speaker, more and more we are becoming aware of the fact that greater 

sections of our population are coming under some kind of pre-paid medical insurance scheme. I noticed 

a headline the other day in which it was indicated that we can expect some kind of prepaid optical 

insurance scheme to be available to certain members of the community. No doubt in the field of dental 

care this same kind of prepaid 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
24 

insurance scheme will be inaugurated. I think more and more people are realizing the wisdom of paying 

a small share of the total costs of medical and hospital services, and if everybody pays a small share, 

there will be enough to take care of the medical and hospital needs of the whole population. I full 

expect, and I intend to work for the day when the next step in the public health field, the next most 

important step will be a publicly sponsored and completely comprehensive pre-paid insurance scheme 

for medical, dental and optical services. 

 

In the field of Social Welfare, Saskatchewan certainly leads the way in its programs of public assistance 

to particularly needy groups in the community. We have a record which is not matched anywhere on this 

continent for a scheme to provide housing for senior citizens and pioneer people. It is made possible, 

and I want to give full credit, not only to the financial assistance from the Provincial Government, but 

made possible through the active participation, co-operation and financial support from local 

governments and from local community organizations. I am confident that, as forecast in the Speech 

from the Throne, a new system of providing social aid will be inaugurated and will result in improved 

administration. As the Member for Saskatoon pointed out, this will make possible much easier systems 

for providing social aid to people who need it, and will do away with all of the complicated red tape 

involved in requiring proof of residence, and charging back to municipalities the cost of social aid for 

people who have left the municipality years before. 

 

The one field in which we have demonstrated our concern for human development, which I am 

particularly interested in, is the field of education. I am delighted with the attention that education in 

Saskatchewan receives from this year‟s Speech from the Throne. Something has already been said about 

our assistance to local school boards for elementary and high school education, our increasing share of 

the operating costs which is borne by the provincial revenues; the increased financial assistance made 

available to local governments for building programs, for the purchase of school buses, and for other 

capital projects. I am sure that more will be said about these strictly financial considerations in the field 

of education, and certainly more will be said when we consider the budget for the coming year. 

 

During the past year we have also been able to note a marked increase in teacher-training programs, and 

in the standards which are set in our teacher-training institutions, to the point where we have more and 

better qualified teachers in Saskatchewan than we have ever had in our history. No one but the blindest 

person, the person who refuses to see, will say that educational services are worse today than in the past. 

Mr. Speaker, they are better almost on every count. More and more people are going to school. More 

and more people stay at school longer. More and more people are taught by better qualified teachers in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I was delighted, too, that the Speech from the Throne indicates that the Provincial Technical Institute 

will be opened this fall. As members know, it is to be located at Moose Jaw. I think this opening of a 

Provincial Technical Institute certainly indicates the concern which the Government of the Province has 

for education, and it reflects the growing need for highly trained technical personnel in the province, and 

that need, of course, is 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
25 

created by the increasing industrial and resource development in Saskatchewan. It is a need which will 

be met by this Government. 

 

Another item in the Speech from the Throne which has meant a good deal to me, because a year ago, I 

recall, moving a resolution, and speaking on the subject of financial assistance to young men and young 

women who are qualified to take higher education. The Speech from the Throne indicates that the 

Provincial Government will give increasing attention to the need of higher education. Large amounts of 

money are made available to carry on the very extensive building program at our Provincial University 

in Saskatoon. Even more significant, I think, is the announcement that this Government will inaugurate a 

scheme of scholarships for young men and women graduating from high school, who are qualified to 

undertake higher education. We are already aware that this Government pioneered in the field of 

publicly-sponsored loan funds for students. The loan fund will be maintained; it has benefited a good 

many people in the past, and will benefit more people in the future. And it will now be supplemented by 

an outright scholarship program. 

 

I don‟t need to go over all the arguments so far as the need for this kind of program is concerned, but I 

do want to make this point at least, that while other provinces, and other people are talking about the 

crisis in higher education, about the dangers of letting other countries and other people outstrip us in the 

training of engineers, social scientists, and scientists of all kinds – while other people are talking about 

these problems, the Government of this province is doing something about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have not tried to cover all the things mentioned in the Speech from the Throne, or all of 

the many development programs of this Government, which have meant so much to so many people in 

Saskatchewan. But I think I have given enough reasons to show rather clearly that I will support the 

Speech from the Throne, and I wish to conclude my remarks by giving just one more reason why I will 

support the Speech from the Throne. That reason, of course, is the speech that was made by the Leader 

of the Opposition (Mr. McDonald) in this debate; a speech which will undoubtedly be followed by 

speeches on the same theme, by other members who sit with him. I have said before that I have a great 

deal of respect for the role which the Opposition can and should take in our parliamentary democracy. If 

I didn‟t have such respect for that kind of role, I wouldn‟t say anything about the Opposition, members 

of the Opposition, not for what they say, but for the position they are in, to say the things they should, if 

they could and they would. The speech of the Leader of the Opposition, which, as I say, I am sure will 

be echoed by other members of the Opposition, indicates that the Liberal Party of the province continues 

to maintain its attitude of 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
26 

irresponsibility; still insists on things like this: services from this Government must be increased, and at 

the same time the financial resources necessary to increase services must be reduced. 

 

I am rather surprised that the members of the Opposition continue on this theme that you can increase 

services and lower taxes. Either they cannot see the fallacy of this kind of reasoning, or else, Mr. 

Speaker, they very much underestimate the intelligence of the voters and the people of this province. I 

think their attitude of irresponsibility condemns them to sit forever in the Opposition. At the same time 

the C.C.F. will continue to write the kind of Speech from the Throne we have under consideration; will 

continue to form governments in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will oppose the amendment; I will support the motion. 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
27 

Mr. D.T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): - Mr. Speaker, I first want to congratulate the speakers 

who have gone before and congratulate the mover and seconder of the Address in Reply to the Speech 

from the Throne, congratulate the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. McDonald) for his very forthright 

speech, and also congratulate the Premier for entertaining us, or giving us a very quiet afternoon, and to 

congratulate the three speakers this afternoon. 

 

I want especially to congratulate the member from Estevan (Mr. Thorson) for the facts that he brought to 

our attention. I am sure that many of the older members of the House must have thought along the same 

lines as the people down in my constituency did, about two weeks ago, when they happened to see him 

and the junior member for Regina (Mrs. Cooper) on a television program. During the course of the 

program (if I remember it correctly), the junior member for Regina was bringing up ways and means to 

distribute goods and merchandising more economically than is done at the present time. She had a few 

reservations at that time as to methods of distribution, and the member for Estevan, being the moderator 

or master of ceremonies, was giving her some information something along the same lines as he was 

doing here, this afternoon. So, being an M.L.A., people in my constituency asked me if I knew these two 

particular members, and I assured them I did. They said, “What did you think of the program?” I said, 

“Well, I didn‟t pay too much attention to it, because we see these things happening in the House every 

Session.” Then I asked them what they thought of it. They said, “You know what it reminded us of? It 

reminded us of „Bringing up Mother!” 

 

I want to deal with some of the statements which he made here, this afternoon. One item which I was 

very interested in that was brought up this afternoon, was in regard to the Estevan brick plant. He 

mentioned that the people of Estevan and the people of Saskatchewan had been discriminated against by 

the Federal Government, because they had not bought bricks from the Estevan plant. I think, probably, 

being the youngest member of the House he was not aware that the provincial C.C.F. Government was 

selling bricks to people in Manitoba cheaper than they were to the people of Saskatchewan; so the 

discrimination in that case was against the people of this province. 

 

Another item he mentioned, this afternoon, was the conditions of the roads in the Estevan and Weyburn 

constituencies. He was quite happy, of course, that the highway had been hard-topped and completed, 

and we are very happy, too. If you recall, last summer, (I‟m sure that some of the Cabinet Ministers will) 

we were invited by some of the oil companies to take a bus tour of the oil fields. I‟m sure the Minister of 

Mineral Resources (Hon. Mr. Brockelbank) recalls. We were quite happy to accept the invitation. Some 

of the other members were there, and the member for Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) and myself drove 

down by car. When we got to Weyburn, the two buses had gone on with the rest of the party, so we 

decided to finish the rest of the trip by cr. It was the first time that I had taken this specific route, and I 

said to the member for Cannington: “How come there is a hard-top highway here and another one right 

beside it?” It was pointed out to me that this happened to be in the Weyburn seat, and the one hard-

topped highway that had been built before one election had all gone to pieces, so after an election they 

had to build another one. I think he is very fortunate to have a system of highways in his seat such as 

that! 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
28 

After we got out to some of the oil fields we had a very delicious lunch and then decided to go out to 

other oil fields. It was drizzling a little bit that day, and we decided to go up one of the so-called „access 

roads‟ to the oil fields. I made the mistake of staying behind the two buses in my own car, and after we 

got part way there, lo and behold! two buses got stuck, and we had all the oil officials, all the 

Government officials stuck on this access road. I can well imagine the problem that the member for 

Estevan has of trying to convince the Government that something should be done to these access roads. 

However, as I said, we got around these two buses, and went around with some of the oil company 

officials to tell officials at the points that were supposed to have been visited, that the tour had been 

called off. 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to mention a few things in regard to my own constituency, 

though there isn‟t too much time, this afternoon. To the people of my constituency, these items are very 

important, because they follow somewhat the lines mentioned by the member for Estevan in his speech. 

 

The first one I want to bring to your attention on behalf of the people of Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley is the 

condition of No. 16 Highway. On two previous occasions in this House, I have brought this to the 

attention of the Government, and so far no reconstruction work has been done. In spite of the fact that it 

has been stated by the Premier that when they took over power in this province they had to pay for some 

of the highways built by previous governments, I would point out that in this case this highway was built 

by the previous government, and to date nothing has been done. We have a section of road that is not 

completed. I think the hon. members are aware of it. It happens to be right in the centre of that highway 

as it leads on into Regina. For the past two years they have seen fit to run surveys, and as the people 

along that highway have brought to my attention the fact that there had been about four or five different 

surveys in places of that route, they wanted to know to what stage highway construction has progressed. 

So I asked for the figure in the House, to clarify my own position and to see if the surveys had been 

complete, and the answer I got just yesterday as to the total amount spent on surveys amounted to 

$16,173. I am sure the people in that part of the district will not disagree with the fact that the surveys 

have been made, provided an early start is made on the building of that highway. The cost is about 

$16,173 for 34 miles. 

 

The other item I want to mention at this time is No. 56 Highway from the junction with the Trans-

Canada Highway to Katepwa Lakes. As all members recall, that highway was built a few years ago. It 

has come to the point where traffic has been very heavy on account of travel to the lakes, especially 

vacation travel, and it has become a dangerous portion of road, especially on weekends. The safety 

factor is now getting to the alarming stage, and I believe that delegations have met with Government 

officials, and have pressed the need for something being done about that portion of the highway. So on 

behalf of the people in that area, and the people who come to Katepwa Lakes during the summer, I 

would be greatly pleased to bring this to the attention of the Government for their earnest consideration 

at an early date. 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
29 

This afternoon, I do not want to deal at too great a length with items from the Speech from the Throne, 

because I hope, Mr. Speaker, with your permission, to beg leave to adjourn the debate and have the 

chance to speak tomorrow. However, I do want to deal with one or two minor items. 

 

As far as I am concerned with the presentation of the Speech from the Throne, or what was in the 

Speech from the Throne, it seemed to me to be one of the deadest, barest speeches ever presented to the 

members of this House. Then, to listen to the Premier‟s remarks in his address the other day, to check 

some of the different points he brought out, there is not too much in it that would be of too much value, 

especially to the agricultural people of this province. But there are a few little items which I think we 

should look into. There are a few little „catch‟ items that may appeal to somebody, if not too much effort 

or too much study has gone into it on their behalf. 

 

There is one item mentioned, and that was the water and sewage systems which they are considering 

installing in farm homes, similar to their rural electrification program. At this time I do not intend to go 

too much into the rural electrification program, but I think that we should look into this item of water 

and sewage for farm homes. As has been pointed out not only this year but other years, we in the 

Opposition, representing most of the feelings of the farmers of this province, have pointed out the 

discrimination of this Government towards the farming segment in this province. I think I saw the 

Premier smile; but I don‟t think the farmers in his own seat are too happy about rural electrification, 

because, if I can remember correctly, it was in his seat that a farmer came out with a shot-gun when 

Power Corporation employees were on his land. If we ask any Power Corporation individual who 

happens to go through the province about the feeling of the farmers, I think they would say the feeling of 

the farmers today is not all that the Government would hope for in regard to electrification. It is quite 

interesting to see this little „catch‟ injected into the Speech from the Throne, hoping to catch farmers‟ 

wives, or the farmers themselves, that sewage and water will be installed similar to the rural 

electrification program. 

 

Another item that I took particular notice of was the item in regard to Co-ops. There is to be an 

extension of co-operatives in this province and I fully agree with the figures that have been presented of 

the tremendous increase in those belonging to Co-ops. However, I would like to point out to the 

Government on behalf not only of the people in my own seat, but people in other constituencies in this 

province who have brought to my attention – and I imagine they have brought it to other members‟ 

attention – the fact that, in some cases, orders have been sent out by certain departments of Government 

to those who are travelling throughout the country, that on any construction work that is being done in 

certain areas, these Government departments have given orders that their men do business with the Co-

ops. I think that possibly an order of that kind would have a reflection in an increase in business being 

done with certain Co-ops. I have no axe to grind with that; but I would like to point out that, as far as I 

am concerned, all my produce is marketed through Co-ops – eggs, milk, grain, livestock, etc. 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
30 

A great deal of my purchasing on the farm is done through Co-ops; but I think we must keep in mind 

that in these towns we have some of our best citizens. We have the Mayors of our towns who are 

probably engaged in private business; we have hardware merchants; we have storekeepers, all engaged 

in private business. They are paying taxes not only to the towns, but taxes also go to the Provincial 

Government. I don‟t think it is a fair policy to discriminate against these people, who have been long-

established merchants in the town, to the advantage of some other organizations. 

 

I note that the present Provincial Government have tried to take a great deal of credit for the 

establishment of Co-ops in this province, but I would point out that probably today, the concept of co-

operation is not the same as it was when the co-operative movement was first originated in 

Saskatchewan. At that time the co-operative movement was outside the realm of politics. I think today, 

the feeling that is being left within the co-operative movement, in some parts of this province at least, is 

that there is too much political pressure being influenced on the co-operatives. I think on behalf of the 

co-operatives that I belong to, in my vision of the co-operative movement, if there is anything that is 

going to destroy co-operative principles faster than anything else, it is to get mixed up in politics. I don‟t 

care whether the Provincial Government or the Federal Government is a Liberal, Conservative 

Government, or whether it is C.C.F. I think the Co-operatives should be kept outside the realm of 

politics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I beg leave this afternoon to adjourn this debate, because I saw in the headlines in the press 

this morning, the Premier tells the House “Save the Family Farms.” So, Mr. Speaker, with your 

permission, I beg leave to adjourn the debate now and tomorrow afternoon I shall show to the people of 

this province how he has tried to exterminate the family farms. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 18 – Fair Employment Practices 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: - Mr. Speaker, as the House is aware we already have Fair Employment Practices 

legislation applying to applications or employment. Where no employment results, and questions are 

asked, in that situation we may not be entitled to invoke the protection of the Act. In order to make 

certain that there will be no doubt about this, we are proposing to add a new section 7 which provides 

that this protection, for this provision, will apply to advertisements, to questionnaires or applications for 

employment, as well as to employment itself. We are hoping to plug a loop-hole which so far hasn‟t 

been used, but which we fear may provide an escape from the provisions of the Act in the future. In 

order that we may sew it up a little tighter we propose to provide this new section. With that 

explanation, Mr. Speaker, I move that the Act be now read a second time. 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
31 

Mrs. Batten (Humboldt): - Mr. Speaker, would this not include the agency distributing the ad? Is that 

the intention? The newspaper, or the radio station, or the owner of the distributing media? “No person 

shall use or circulate any form of application.” Doesn‟t that include the newspaper boy who is making 

the delivery? If that is the intention of the Act, then I just wondered if it really presents a case. I would 

have some hesitation about that. Then, too, I would like to ask if this question is intended to cover 

advertisements, say, for school teachers in separate schools, domestics at homes. How wide could it be 

interpreted? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: - Advertisements for positions as school teachers in separate school are covered by 

an exception in the Act. So far as making newspapers and carrier boys liable, I hesitate to hazard an 

opinion on something which could probably be the source of a very lengthy argument, and perhaps a 

difficult decision by a judge. I would hesitate to answer that at a moment‟s notice. I would, however, 

remind the House that there is, of course, the doctrine of mens rea which would perhaps be raised as 

defence in such a case. It is arguable whether an innocent medium distributing or publishing such a type 

of advertisement would be liable under the Act. However, if it be a question of the intention of the 

person, I would suggest that that would be an extremely relevant factor. However, I would not care to be 

drawn into expressing an opinion one way or the other as to what would be the result. It is a complicated 

legal question which I am sure could not be answered at a moment‟s notice. 

 

Mrs. Batten: - I certainly, as much as anyone in this House, dislike to see discrimination of any kind, 

and certainly it is the privilege of each of us, as citizens in a free country, to be treated equally; but at the 

same time in trying to safeguard these rights, we certainly don‟t wish to make laws that would disrupt 

the ordinary commerce and the ordinary business of the day, especially as the Attorney General has 

pointed out, there has never been any need to invoke this particular law or section in this province. I was 

very pleased to hear that, but I certainly do not feel confident at this time, without a definite opinion 

from the Attorney General on the breadth and width of the section . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: - Order! Order! May I draw to the attention of the House that the matter now being 

discussed is the matter of the second clause. The hon. member has already agreed with the principle of 

the Bill, and the clause, I suggest had better be dealt with in Committee. 

 

Mrs. Batten: - Mr. Speaker, with deference I did not agree. I don‟t think a vote has been taken on it. 

Certainly I . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: - No, but I understood the hon. member to say that she was just as interested as any other 

member of the House, in the purpose of this Bill. 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
32 

Mrs. Batten: - But if the principle is to include everyone who circulates, or uses, that type of 

advertisement, not only the person who institutes it, I doubt whether I could support it. Therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, I was going to ask leave to adjourn the debate on this, so that I could have some further legal 

study, or legal opinion on this subject. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

Bill No. 19 – Limitation of Actions 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker (Attorney General): - Mr. Speaker, hon. members will remember hat, last year and I 

believe the year before, an amendment was made to The Limitations of Actions to extend the statutory 

limit by one year because of some complaints or questions that were raised in connection with mineral 

transactions, particularly. The matter was cogent at the time because there was a very extensive oil play 

in one part of the province, and many people, who had slept upon their rights, felt that they should now 

revise their claims through court remedy. At that time, and extension of the limit was asked for one year. 

It was repeated again last year, and it was recommended by the Royal Commission on Mineral Rights 

that a remedy be taken to rectify any abuses or injustices that may have existed; that there ought to be a 

further extension of one year in the time limitation. If this were not passed, then action would start to 

become outlawed after the 1st of April. In order to keep any actions that are now alive, alive for one 

more year, it is necessary to pass this further extension, bringing it to nine years. 

 

I may say that the Government considers this an extraordinary privilege that is being extended, and the 

kind of thing which the Government is naturally reluctant to do, if the ordinary rules of law are to 

prevail. However, in view of very strong representation on the part of these farmers, the Government is 

prepared to concede that this should be passed, or recommended to the Legislature at this Session. I 

would say now for the benefit of those who may be contemplating legal action that there is no assurance 

that this has become a traditional thing; there is no assurance that it will be recommended by the 

Government to extend it another year. Those who have, or think they have, the right of action ought not 

to delay their action unnecessarily during the coming year. 

 

With that explanation, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington): - Mr. Speaker, I wish to make a few remarks here in general on this Bill. 

I think you are making quite a concession to these people. I would like to point out to you that the 

Government has a very special responsibility for having allowed this thing to happen, and I don‟t think 

they should throw the threat over those people, even if it is going to be cut off for another year, as a 

result of our investigation. It may be said there is no doubt there was fraud in it, and they might 

recommend setting up some kind of a system to by-pass the law, in my 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
33 

opinion – I am not a lawyer either. But I do think the Attorney General has given a very one-sided 

picture of it, and that this Government has a real responsibility for having allowed those things to 

happen which have happened. I know there is no use going back crying over spilled milk, but I do not 

think the Attorney General should throw out the more or less threat that this is the last year, because it is 

a very complicated affair, and it might – even if it went to a full investigation, it might take quite a 

while. I am in favour of the Bill, but just wanted to express that opinion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank (Minister of Mineral Resources): - Mr. Speaker, I do not think the Attorney 

General threw out any threat that this would be the last year. What he stated was that this legislation was 

no guarantee – the fact that it has been done two or three times – that it would be continued, which is 

quite a different thing altogether. When the hon. member for Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) speaks about 

the responsibility of the Government in regard to this question of the handling of privately owned 

property, and what people should do with their own property, I would just like to point out to the hon. 

member and to this House, that no group of people would raise any louder cries than the hon. member 

sitting opposite, if this Government had taken steps to . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: - He‟s out of order! 

 

Mr. Speaker: - The hon. Minister is replying to the hon. member for Cannington. 

 

Mr. McDonald: - It has nothing to do with the principle of the Bill. He is not speaking on the Speech 

from the Throne now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: - Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and the hon. Leader of the Opposition will probably 

realize that it is the Speaker who determines whether I am out of order, not the Leader of the 

Opposition! What I was saying is that no group of people would have cried louder or longer than the 

same member sitting in the Opposition, if we had taken steps to restrict the rights of the people in 

Saskatchewan to deal with their property; if we had placed restrictions on them, and said: “You cannot 

lease or sell this property without you get approval of somebody, or something else.” 

 

Mr. McCarthy: - Oh, that‟s silly! Nobody suggested that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: - It‟s not half as silly as what the hon. members of the Opposition have been 

saying about this question for a good long time now. 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
34 

Mr. McDonald: - Mr. Speaker, if we are going to have a debate on this, let us have it. The Minister who 

has just taken his seat has made certain statements that are not in accordance with the fact, and if we are 

going to delve into the record of what has happened, well, we are prepare to do so. If the Government in 

power had not seen fit to give away 14 million acres of Crown rights of this province for 1/10th of a cent 

an acre, then I doubt very much if the farmers who own the surface and mineral rights in this province, 

would have been so hasty in signing some of the agreements that have been signed in the past; and had 

this Government not seen fit to impose a mineral tax on the farmers of this province, at the very time 

when the lease-hounds were going about endeavouring to take from the farmers their title to their 

resources. Not only were they imposing this three cents per acre, but they went so far as to confiscate the 

title to some property in this land for the non-payment of that tax. Now, that is the record, Mr. Speaker, 

and the only interest we have is what should be the interest of every citizen of Saskatchewan, and that is 

to protect the owners of mineral rights, or any other kind of a right. We are not here to make a political 

issue out of this; it is a matter of giving protection to the people of this province who so rightly deserve 

that protection. 

 

The motion for second reading of Bill No. 19 – An Act to Amend the Limitation of Actions Act was 

then agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 21 – The Landlord and Tenant Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: - Mr. Speaker, the amendments which we are moving to The Landlord and Tenant 

Act, this year, contain two new principles. First of all, it sometimes happens that a tenant, or commercial 

property particularly, is an employer of labour on that property. Now, if he owns the property and goes 

bankrupt, The Bankruptcy Act provides for certain priorities to the workmen for wages. But where the 

employer does not own the property, and is a tenant and fails to pay his rent (that seems to be the time 

when he is going out of business usually), the landlord may levy a distress against the chattels for the 

rent, the sheriff collects these chattels, and sells them and goes through the ordinary procedure. This Bill 

gives the employees, who have not been paid for a maximum period of 90 days, the right to claim 

priority for their unpaid wages, and sets out the procedure by which this shall be done. 

 

The other principle is really a minor one of procedure simplifying somewhat the court procedure which 

is taken by the landlord in eviction proceedings, or by a tenant in certain instances. The new procedure 

strikes the Government as being simpler, more straightforward and less expensive and it is one of the 

four or five recommendations which the Law Reform Committee made to the Government during the 

past three months. 

 



 

February 19, 1959 

 

 
35 

The only other change of any significant is the change of the wording of the Bill to conform with the 

wording of the new District Court Act. 

 

With those few words, Mr. Speaker, I move the second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mrs. Batten (Humboldt): - Mr. Speaker, in connection with this proposed legislation, the method of 

seizing the chattels and goods of a tenant by a landlord is an exceptional remedy to be applied, because 

of the unusual relationship. If there is no other way of collecting rent, this provides simple and effective 

(usually) remedy, and it is for the protection of the landlord. It is to provide incentive for people to 

become landlords, because they are more or less assured of collecting their rent. I think this Legislature 

ought to be warned against anything that will prevent a hazard to that type of relationship, and although 

I think it is perfectly just and good, and I approve of the principle of the labourers who might be unable 

to collect their salaries, should this man be evicted, or should this man leave without distress – I think it 

is good that they should be bale to get their salaries. 

 

There is the other principle that the landlord is actually seizing for the benefit of these employees who 

have no relationship with him whatsoever, and that these claims will be adjudicated upon by a sheriff 

who has only a semi-judicial position. Then what I dislike even more about it is the fact that the sheriff 

will retain five per cent of the moneys he collects, and this will be kept back as a first claim, even 

though the landlord should have seized nearly enough money or goods to get money to pay the salaries, 

without even getting any money for rent. The sheriff will still have five per cent of those moneys. 

 

I am afraid that we are getting to the point in this province where we want justice to not only pay its own 

way, but pay some of the Government‟s expenses, and it is something I think we should be very careful 

of. I think that, after all, it is up to this Government to provide justice and the machinery of justice, 

especially to people in this position – people who are labourers, employees who have been unable to 

collect their salaries, without taking their pound of flesh. This is one of the things I think we should be 

aware of, and I think each member should be very careful in reading and in voting on this legislation, to 

know exactly what he or she is voting for. I think we should be aware of every infringement of this type. 

 

The motion for second reading of Bill No. 21 – An Act to amend The Landlord and Tenant Act was then 

agreed to. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 5:25 o‟clock p.m.  


