



















































Hansard: March 16, 1959


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

22nd Day 

Monday, March 16, 1959. 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

INVITATION TO CURL 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to draw to the attention of the members the invitation 

of the Civil Service Co-operative Curling Association to curl on this coming Saturday night, if they 

wish. I should have the names either today or tomorrow, so that they will not be holding out ice for us, 

which they might otherwise rent, if we are not going to use it. So, if members would please hand me 

their names today or tomorrow, it would be appreciated. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I 

realize this is getting to be quite a habit, but I am always glad to welcome a group of young citizens 

from the city of Saskatoon. I draw the attention of the members to a group of students from King George 

School, in Saskatoon, and I hope their stay will be a pleasant and a profitable one. 

 

SOCIAL AID ACT 

 

Moved by Hon. Mr. Bentley, that Bill No. 76 — An Act to provide for the Granting of Aid to Certain 

Persons under Certain Conditions, be now read a second time. 

 

Hon. T.J. Bentley (Minister of Social Welfare):— Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 76 — a new Social Aid Act, 

1959, — contains a couple of completely new principles in regard to social aid, and will require 

repealing the old Act and replacing it with a brand new one. Because 



 

March 16, 1959 

 

 

2 

of that, sir, I thought that I should make a fairly extended statement and explanation for the members of 

the House so that they will be able to debate it, if they care to, or at least they will have further 

information when the matter goes to Committee. 

 

I would like to point out that, traditionally, relief for the poor has always been the responsibility of local 

government. Even back in the time of Elizabeth I, the poor law then provided that relief for the poor 

would be provided by the parish in which the person lived in those days, and that was transmitted to the 

Maritime Provinces of Canada before Confederation, except that, instead of now being to the parish it is 

to the organized municipality. Saskatchewan’s first Act regarding rural municipalities placed the 

responsibility on the municipality to grant aid or relief to any needy person who was a resident of the 

municipality. That is 50 years ago or more, and 50 years ago, when the legislation regarding urban 

municipalities was passed, similar legislation was passed giving them the same responsibility. So all 

through, the principle of residence and the responsibility of the legal place of residence, be it parish or, 

later, municipality, has continued. 

 

Going back to the 1930’s when relief became very extensive in the province, the extent of the problem 

compelled the Provincial and Federal Governments to come to the aid of the municipalities. We all 

remember that; but even in this the principle of local responsibility was recognized. This is substantiated 

by the fact that municipalities entered into a relief agreement to re-imburse the Government for a 

percentage of total relief made to their residents in 1932-1933 on to 1933-1934. Under those regulations 

those in need were classified in three classifications. There were the bona fide residents, transients, and 

persons without municipal legal residence. The residence factor as it is today was the basis for 

establishing the categories. 

 

The residence requirement has indeed been a fundamental to establishing responsibility for helping 

needy people throughout the ages. There has also been through the ages a feeling, almost a dogma, that 

help for the needy is cold charity, and, therefore a stigma is attached to anyone who requires it. All 

thinking people should know by now that this is not so. People can be in need through no fault of their 

own. In some ways a feeling of this kind is even more difficult to alter than is an actual situation that 

cannot underline our present state of philosophy regarding help for the needy is that help is their 

fundamental right, and providing that help is not a cold charitable obligation but an expression of social 

responsibility on the part of the nation towards its people. This humanitarian philosophy later 

incorporated in the Declaration of Human Rights, was expressed in the philosophy on which this 

Government established the Department of Social Welfare, when we first came into power in 1944. 

 

Time will not permit me to dwell at any length on some of the principles inherent in our Social Welfare 

programs even though they have a bearing on social aid; but I do feel that it will help towards a better 

understanding on the subject and of how the legislation I am proposing is planned to strengthen and 

improve the entire operation of the program. 



 

March 16, 1959 

 

 

3 

There are two specific aspects to a good welfare program, the economic and the social. The economic is 

aimed at man’s physical well-being, and the social is aimed at personal adjustment. A social aid program 

that helps man’s economic steps by providing money, but does it in such a way that his dignity and 

worth as an individual are harmed, may have a long and recurring negative effect on his personal 

adjustment. 

 

In Saskatchewan, public assistance is one part of an over-all welfare program. It embraces all the 

programs under which direct financial assistance is extended. Of this, social aid is only one, but is the 

one not designed for any specific segment of society such as allowances for the blind or mother’s 

allowance or disabled or old-age supplementary allowances. Social Aid is a program the costs of which 

are actually shared by the three levels of government, Federal, Provincial and the municipality. A 

program being administered by the municipalities means that there are 800 places, approximately, in the 

province where a person can apply for social aid. 

 

There are three categories of social aid recipients for which these present financial arrangements are 

made, as follows: 

 

The first is, the municipalities are responsible for their own residents and they are re-imbursed to the 

extent of 75 per cent, by the Provincial Government, of the amount of aid granted. 

 

The second category is the person living in one municipality who has legal residence in another 

municipalities for this category the granting municipality (at the present time we are speaking of) is re-

imbursed 100 per cent by the Provincial Government, and the Government in turn bills the municipality 

of legal residence its 25 per cent of the share. 

 

The third category is for people who have no legal residence in any municipality, and they become 100 

per cent responsibility of the Provincial Government; that is, the Government bears the full cost of those 

people. 

 

Except for those in the first category (those who have legal municipal residence) the administration of 

this program is, to say the least, cumbersome. It is time consuming and is very costly in man-hours and 

in money. All this contributes to the fact that our social aid program has many improvements yet which 

we can envisage and bring into operation. 

 

Before I elaborate on some of the serious objections of the present social aid program, I want to say that 

it is essential, in my opinion, that social aid continues to exist as a municipal responsibility. I realize that 

municipalities need help in financing social aid, and the Provincial Government has shown its 

preparedness to carry a major portion of the cost; but if the Provincial Government continues to assume 

responsibility for administering social aid, as we are so doing now, in the inter-municipal and 100 per 

cent cases that I mentioned in categories two and three, as well as financial aid, social aid will soon 

cease to be a local responsibility. 



 

March 16, 1959 

 

 

4 

Complete control will pass to the Provincial Government and municipalities will be stripped of the very 

essential function, and we want to avoid anything of that nature. 

 

The effect of exercising the responsibility by municipalities alone does not satisfy my concern about the 

program. As the program presently exists, it is not a good one. We, of Government, are not alone in 

seeing this. The subject has repeatedly been aired and discussed at municipal gatherings. You only have 

to look back at resolutions passed to realize what I am saying here. I outlined some of the most serious 

objections to our present social aid program to the Provincial-Local Government Conference held two 

years ago, last fall. The points I then brought out have not improved; if anything, the greater degree of 

unemployment, the ever-increasing mobility of people have caused them, to be come worse than they 

were at that time. 

 

Under the program as it now stands, people are not getting help when they need it, and people are not 

getting the amount of aid that they need because, to a large extent, municipalities are too weak and small 

financially to support generous allowances. People are not getting aid when they need it partly because 

of the reluctance on the part of some municipalities to spend what they consider hard-earned tax money 

on people who, in their opinion, are undeserving. Aid for many people is delayed because of the 

residence factor or, it takes time and it falls on the Government’s shoulders to establish the municipality 

of legal residence. Sometimes it takes still more time and effort to convince them that they are legally 

responsible for their share of aid that they themselves had no say in the granting. 

 

If the Government did not do this, municipalities issuing aid to non-residents would have to bill the 

responsible municipality themselves and go to court to collect if the municipality that was responsible 

refused to pay. The only alternative would be to deny a person seeking it and let them starve and, of 

course, nobody wants that to happen. This problem is a substantial one when you consider that there are 

about 500 municipalities involved in inter-municipal cases, and that in the year 1957-1958, these cases 

received aid amounting to $236,000. The whole residence basis of proportioning costs is most 

troublesome and will become increasingly so as the mobility of our population increases. 

 

Absolute recognition of the drastic need to develop some radical alternative to free us all, provincial and 

municipal governments, from these complications was evident, a year ago, when I discussed with the 

Saskatchewan Association of Urban and Rural Municipalities the possibility of setting up a Committee 

with the Government to go constructively into the matter. Out of all the delving and study of this 

Committee to establish what would meet the present and future conditions as far as we were able to 

observe, and to portend a good social aid program, the basis of the legislation I am going to proposed 

today was evolved and mutually agreed to. 

 

The setting up of this Committee gave us, in the Department, the ‘green light’ to bring to the fore many 

other criticisms of social 



 

March 16, 1959 

 

 

5 

aid programs. These related to what I call the administrative practices. by this I mean such things, for 

example, as follows: 

 

1. What steps are taken in applying for aid? 

 

2. Do all people have a right to apply, or are some refused before they even make a formal application? 

Who decides to grant or refuse aid and on what basis does he decide? Is an objective measuring stick 

used and applied uniformly and impartially to all persons, or are decisions made according to the whim 

or the mood of officials who happen to be in charge? Is the amount of aid determined according to some 

objective measure, or is this, too, decided by how officials feel at any given time? Are applicants 

informed of the decision in such a manner that they can understand why and how the decision was 

arrived at? 

 

3. How can the confidentiality of a person’s circumstances be kept? This is quite important because 

often failure to make adequate provision for this has acted as a deterrent to people seeking aid. The 

program should help people who need aid get it, not scare them off by such things as unduly publicizing 

the situation. 

 

4. What assurance do people have of fair treatment? does the person have a right to appeal a decision by 

the municipality and have a fair hearing? 

 

5. How can the experience of accepting and depending on social aid be made least damaging to the 

individual? 

 

These are extremely important considerations that are vital to a good social aid program which seeks to 

preserve self-respect of people and maintain or strengthen whatever capacity they may have for getting 

out of the difficulties in which they find themselves. Inherent in these bewildering questions, which all 

relate to standards of social aid practice, are multiple social aspects which are contemporary with the 

actual dollars of aid granted or refused, because many of these aspects can impinge on the wellbeing of 

the applicant and his dependants when aid is needed and long after the need is overcome, and we and the 

municipal representatives in the Committee were unanimously agreed that improved and uniform 

standards of practice in the administration of social aid throughout the province are urgently needed. 

 

Before we look specifically at the new social aid legislation I wish to present, we must concede that we 

clearly recognize and accept our responsibility for those of our population who may need this aid; we 

are our brother’s keeper, individually and collectively. For over 350 years the principle of the state’s 

responsibility for its indigents has been established. The question is not whether we should accept 

responsibility, but how we can best discharge it. 



 

March 16, 1959 

 

 

6 

Our program must be anchored to a basic philosophy which serves as a guide and justifies our action. 

This philosophy must affirm a belief in the integrity and dignity of the individual, and must recognize 

that members of society are dependent upon one another, and that the well-being of all is dependent on 

the wellbeing of each. Accepting this philosophy we must recognize that a number of principles flow 

from it which should be carried into the policy and the administrative practices of the social aid 

program, and the principles are as follows: 

 

1. Every individual should have a right to social aid when his need can be demonstrated, regardless of 

his race, creed, residence or citizenship. 

 

2. No individual should have to meet a test of moral worthiness in order to receive social aid. 

 

3. Every individual receiving social aid should have a right to plan his own life as he chooses, even 

though he has lost his financial independence. This means that he should have the right to decide such 

things as how he should use social aid, except if he fails to use it to provide the necessities of life for 

himself and his dependants. He should decide where he shall live and what services he wishes to accept. 

 

4. The privacy of the circumstances of every individual receiving or applying for social aid must be 

respected. 

 

5. Every individual seeking or receiving social aid should have the right to appeal any decisions, 

concerning his application, which he thinks unjust. 

 

6. Every individual should have the right and the obligation to take as much responsibility as he can, in 

seeking a solution to his financial problems. This includes both the finding of employment and the 

establishment of his need for social aid. 

 

It is with the purpose of giving effect to these principles and of enabling them to be brought fully into 

the operation of the social aid programs on a uniform basis throughout the province, that I am proposing 

the new Social Aid Legislation. 

 

You have before you a copy of the new Social Aid Act, 1959, which I propose. This is an Act that 

provides for the granting of aid to indigent and certain other persons. 



 

March 16, 1959 

 

 

7 

The reference to certain other persons, of course, is because, under the Act, we have the authority to 

issue supplemental allowances and mothers’ allowances where they are needed. 

 

I would like to preface my remarks pertaining to the representatives of the S.A.R.M. and the S.U.M.A. 

and my Department was set up last April to study the various proposals that would bring about 

improvements over the existing Social Aid Act, with the particular object of seeing what could be done 

to eliminate the very troublesome residence requirements. After much study and deliberation the 

Committee worked out proposals for eliminating the one-year residence requirement and for coast 

sharing based on municipal per capita of population contribution. These proposals were not only 

mutually agreed upon by the members of the Committee but were, in turn, supported most 

enthusiastically by the Executives of both associations. In other words, they favoured the elimination, 

the wiping out, of the residence requirement and the enacting of legislation whereby the municipal share 

of the cost of social aid will be borne by all municipalities on a per capita basis. The proposal then is as 

follows: 

 

Municipalities will agree to issue aid to anyone within their boundaries who could demonstrate a need 

for it by some objective criterion regardless of how long the person has lived in the municipality. A 

municipal share of social aid cost would be determined not as a percentage of what is issued, as is the 

case now, but by a per capita of population levy which varies in direct proportion to the changes in the 

total provincial social aid cost. To establish a working base, 1956-1957 was taken as the base year. The 

per capita rates, on the 1956-1957 level of expenditure, would have been as follows: cities, 25 cents; 

towns, 20 cents; villages, 10 cents, and rural municipalities, 10 cents. If any subsequent year the total 

provincial social aid expenditure would increase or decrease by a certain percentage (50 per cent, we 

will say), the per capita rates would increase or decrease in direct proportion. 

 

The question that naturally arises at this point is — how are these rates arrived at; and I think this is 

what the House will want to have information on. during the fiscal year 1956-1957, the actual 

expenditures made by the municipalities were equivalent to the following per capita rates: cities, 73 

cents; towns, 37 cents; villages, 22 cents, and rural municipalities, 24 cents. With these figures before 

the Committee, the late Mr. Ferguson, who was at that time the Secretary of the S.A.R.M., proposed the 

following rates which were lower for cities and towns and higher for villages and rural municipalities 

than the 1956-1957 basis. His proposal was: cities, 60 cents; towns, 35 cents; villages, 25 cents and rural 

municipalities, 25 cents. Mr. Ferguson noted that even though this would result in the rural 

municipalities paying about $5,000 more than they otherwise would, they would be prepared to accept 

in order to see the new arrangement established. 

 

The next step was that the Saskatchewan Urban Municipal representatives argued that 60 cents for cities 

was too high. They pointed to a number of cities which would have to pay up to as high as 50 per cent 

more than they do currently, under the new arrangement at the figures suggested by Mr. Ferguson. They 

said that an acceptable arrangement would be to keep the 



 

March 16, 1959 

 

 

8 

per capita arrangement suggested by Mr. Ferguson, but to reduce the rate to the cities to 40 cents. This 

would make the following rate structure: cities, 40 cents; towns, 35 cents; villages, 25 cents and rural 

municipalities, 25 cents. These rates would have increased the Provincial share and decreased the 

municipal share by $77,000 in that base year, had they been in effect then. 

 

However, there was another adjustment that had to be made. If the proposals came into existence it 

would be no longer possible, since residences would be ignored, for us to identify the 100 per cent cases. 

Those were cases for which the Provincial Government was providing not only social aid but also the 

health services, and the various municipalities under the new arrangement would be required to provide 

the health services themselves. It was agreed that the municipalities would accept this responsibility if 

they were compensated for the additional cost that this would entail. 

 

We determined that the cost of this share was $127,000 in that year, or about 15 cents per capita of 

population. We suggested that it would be better to make this compensation by reducing the per capita 

rate for social aid, rather than by trying to continue to have the Province carry a medical program for 

these people who would have, in fact, lost their identities and whom we wouldn’t be able to discover and 

service. This was agreed to. In fact the municipalities have agreed to everything that I am suggesting. 

 

When you subtract, therefore, the 15 cents per capita figure from the rates I mentioned last, the result in 

the rate structure is as follows: cities, 25 cents; towns, 20 cents; villages, 10 cents and rural 

municipalities 10 cents, based on the base year 1956-1957. 

 

Having detailed the proposed rate structure and how it was arrived at, I will go into the costs of the 

program or the proposal, as we see it, to see what the net increase in cost to the Provincial Government 

would be. The actual distribution of the expenditures for the year 1956-1957 should be compared to 

what the contribution would have been under the new proposal. In that fiscal year 1956-1957, the 

municipal and provincial governments combined expenditures on social aid was $2,190,000. Under 

these conditions, the provincial share was $1,854,000, and the municipal share was $336,000. Now, had 

this structure that I am proposing today been in effect at that time, the provincial share would have been 

$1,931,000 and the municipal share $2549,000. If you subtract the two ($259,000 from $336,000) you 

will get $77,000, which is the increase that the Government makes as a contribution to social aid, based 

on that year. 

 

The proposals I have described require the enactment of new social aid legislation which I am 

proposing. The new legislation will, among other things, permit the Provincial Government and various 

municipalities to enter into agreements which would be necessary. The Act and the Agreements under it, 

in addition to providing the necessary machinery for implementing the proposal, attempt to incorporate 

certain minimum standards into the program. Some of the minimum standards of administrative 

practices that municipalities will be expected to adopt, which I would mention was a step of the 

Committee 



 

March 16, 1959 

 

 

9 

in which the municipal officials agreed to, are: 

 

(a) Every municipality or groups of municipalities administering social aid would set down in writing its 

social aid policies including a schedule of allowances it uses; what items of assistance are provided for; 

to whom aid is issued and how the amount of assistance is calculated etc. 

 

(b) Every administering unit whether it be a single municipality or a group of municipalities would agree 

to designate some one person who will have authority and be responsible for accepting applications and 

for issuing social aid immediately when it is needed. 

 

(c) Written application would be used when applying for social aid. 

 

(d) A definite procedure for determining eligibility for social aid would be set out and followed. The 

procedure would provide for visiting applicants in their own homes when necessary and for reporting all 

information gathered. 

 

(e) The budget deficit method of determining these as described in the Social Aid Manual, prepared by 

the Social Welfare Department, to be used. 

 

(f) Clients would be advised in writing of the decision concerning their application. 

 

(g) Where at all possible payments will be made in cash or by cheque. A definite procedure will be set 

out for determining continuing eligibility. A definite procedure would be established whereby applicants 

or recipients could appeal at the local level any decision regarding the allowances they consider unjust. 

A confidentiality of all records and the privacy of all investigations would be respected. The 

administering units in reporting on the program would supply the information and use the forms that are 

necessary. The Social Aid record of the administering units would be made available to the Department 

for purposes of auditing and evaluating the administrative practices. 

 

We should also note another implication. Because of certain types of criteria which will be used for 

determining the amount of social aid to be paid, there might be a slight increase in the social aid 

expenditures. Those municipalities who now refuse to issue or who issue inadequate amounts may find 

themselves issuing more than they have in the past. We have no way, of course, of knowing that the 

increase is likely to be. Part of it, however, would be borne by the municipalities through an 



 

March 16, 1959 

 

 

10 

increase in their per capita levy rates. 

 

The new regulations between the provincial and municipal governments implied by the proposals, 

suggests that some of our staff, namely, those engaged in administering social aid would be freed of this 

task. This is true, but it does not mean that this will result in a savings. However, the staff members who 

are still doing jobs they never should have been doing, will be used to perform essential jobs more 

appropriate to the function of the Department. In substance, rather than administering aid themselves 

they will be helping municipal officials do it according to the standards of practice agreements. 

 

I do not doubt that there are questions arising in your minds. I admit the entire subject of social aid, to 

say the least, is tremendous; but I will answer two questions I feel you will likely be wondering about. 

 

It is very natural to wonder what assurance there is that social aid costs will not sky-rocket because, 

under the legislation I am proposing, the municipal share is substantially reduced, and because it is not 

directly related to the amount of aid a municipality actually issues. To this I can say that at the present 

time, many municipalities are issuing aid to persons who are not residents for which they are being re-

imbursed 100 per cent, and in these cases we have not noted any extravagance in the amounts of aid 

issued. 

 

We do not expect any different behaviour under the new proposals, particularly since any increase in the 

over-all social aid costs will result in an increase in the per capita rate for the municipalities. Further, 

under my proposed legislation, we would be entering into agreements with the municipalities which will 

require them to follow certain procedures, which would control the amount issued. These agreements 

would also give us the right to review their practices, and this review would enable us to discover any 

extravagances and to explore, with the municipality, ways and means to correct such. It is my opinion 

that most of our municipal councils are composed of people who have a high regard for their 

responsibilities to the taxpayer, and hence will not be extravagant. 

 

The second question I believe I should clear is this: is it fair to ask municipalities to pay part of the 

social aid costs through a per capita levy, even though they may issue no social aid in any one year? In 

answering this I would stress that my proposed legislation has aspects that are in the nature of an 

insurance, whereby municipalities, in effect, purchase protection against unpredictable social aid costs at 

a later date. I think this is sound social aid practice. There is a precedent to this in the present 

arrangement for the T.B. levy on municipalities, where all municipalities make their contribution 

regardless of whether they have any, or very few, people from their municipalities under the care of the 

Anti-T.B. League. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have tried to give a very clear explanation without an y side comments of any kind, 

because I thought that 



 

March 16, 1959 

 

 

11 

the House would want to have that information in its mind prior to going into Committee of the Whole, 

on the Bill. With that explanation, I will move second reading of the Bill. 

 

Mr. Nicholson (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, would you mind if I asked a question or two? I would like 

to ask a question for clarification. One question I would like to ask the Minister was: what will be the 

case with regard to people living outside of the province, and the province being billed for their social 

aid? That is one. Another question I am wondering about is the foundation on which you say ‘paid cash’ 

to the recipient. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley:— I have no objection to answering, but these are questions that should be asked in 

Committee. the answering of the questions will bring some other thing to some one else’s mind. 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — Well, this is a matter of principle is it not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley:— They are not involved in the principle. The principles are standardization of 

practice, and the elimination of the residence clause. Those are the principles involved, the other matters 

are matters of detail in connection with the various items. 

 

The motion for second reading of Bill No. 76 was then agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of 

the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The House adjourned at 10:00 p.m. o’clock. 


