



















































Hansard: February 13, 1959


 

February 13, 1959 

 

 

1 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session – Thirteenth Legislature 

2nd
 
Day 

Friday, February 13, 1959 

The House met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

CONGRATULATIONS TO SPEERS HIGH SCHOOL CURLING RINK 

 

Mr. B.L. Korchinski (Redberry): - Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I 

wish to acquaint the House with the fact that Speers High School Curling Rink has, this year, 

successfully competed for the championship of Saskatchewan and have won the championship for this 

province. 

 

I would like to tell the House that this is quite a small community. The population of Speers is about 

150, but the spirit of enterprise and co-operation is very high in this community, and they are very proud 

of their achievements. I would like to wish the high school curling rink the best of luck in Calgary, next 

Monday, when they are going to compete for the Dominion championship. 

 

TRIBUTE TO DECEASED FORMER MEMBERS 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier): - Mr. Speaker, it has become customary on the first day after the 

opening of the House, to pause and pay tribute to any of the members of this Assembly or former 

members of the Assembly who have passed away since last we met. There are three former members 

whose passing I should like to draw to the attention of the hon. members, and ask the members to place 

on the record a motion paying tribute to their service in this Legislature and to this province. 

 

The first one whom I wish to mention is the HON. CHARLES AVERY DUNNING. When the Hon. Mr. 

Dunning died at the age of 73 in a Montreal Hospital on October 1, 1958, an end was written to what has 

truly been described as an “amazing career” in diverse fields of activity, in each of which he achieved 

conspicuous success, in each of which he left enduring monuments to his initiative, his capacity for 

work and his exceptional capabilities. His is a story in the authentic Horatio Alger tradition. 

 

Coming to Canada a penniless immigrant English lad in the year 1902, he started as a farm hand in the 

Yorkton district, working for a wage of $10 a month. He was then 17 years old. At 18, he was 



 

February 13, 1959 

 

 

2 

homesteading in his own right; and at 24 already had begun to make a name for himself in the farm 

organizations of that period. At 32, he entered the Cabinet of the Hon. W.M. Martin as Provincial 

Treasurer, and held most of the portfolios in that provincial administration. In 1922, on the retirement of 

the present Chief Justice from the political field, Mr. Dunning became Premier of the Province, 

President of the Council, Provincial Treasurer and Minister of Railways. Four years later – in 1926 – 

Mr. Dunning resigned the premiership to become Minister of Railways and Canals, and later Minister of 

Finance, in the Federal Government headed by the Rt. Hon. W.L. Mackenzie King. 

 

When ill health forced Mr. Dunning‟s retirement from the political arena in 1939, he found his services 

in such demand in the fields of industry and finance that he was appointed to high administrative posts 

and important directorships in several of Canada‟s leading corporations. 

 

Thus his life in Canada saw him active in three distinct fields of endeavour – farming and farm 

organizations, provincial and federal politics, and in the business world, attaining eminence in each and 

leaving lasting mementos of his initiative and drive. 

 

As a young farmer, Mr. Dunning early gained prominence in the Grain Growers‟ movement. He was 

only 24 when, as representative of the Beaverdale branch of the Saskatchewan Grain Growers‟ 

Association, he proposed a scheme of co-operative hail insurance to a convention of that body in Prince 

Albert, which proposal was eagerly accepted by the delegates and has since proved its worth. Elected a 

director of the Association in 1910, he became its vice-president the following year. When farmers‟ 

demands for a co-operative elevator company to handle their grain, were met, in 1911, by the passage of 

enabling provincial legislation, Mr. Dunning, still under 30 years of age at that time, was entrusted with 

the gigantic task of organizing the Saskatchewan Co-operative Elevator Company, of which he was 

general manager from 1911 to 1916. His success in that, his first business venture may be gauged by the 

fact that the company‟s assets were later sold to the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool for $11 million. 

 

A member of the Canadian Council of Agriculture from 1911 to 1916, Mr. Dunning was appointed a 

Royal Commissioner by the Saskatchewan Government to investigate the question of agricultural credit 

and grain marketing in Europe, in 1913, the report on which formed the basis of much of the farm loan 

legislation which found place in the statute books, both provincially and federally. 

 

His outstanding work in the interests of agriculture brought him, in 1916, an invitation from the Hon. 

Mr. Martin, the Premier of Saskatchewan, to enter the Government as Provincial Treasurer and, later, as 

Minister of Agriculture. His capacity for work enabled him to undertake important extra-government 

activities. He was Chairman of the Saskatchewan Committee for the Victory Loans of 1917, 1918 and 

1919, assuming additional duties in 1918 as Director of Food Production for 



 

February 13, 1959 

 

 

3 

Canada. Appointed Provincial Minister of Railways in 1917, Minister of Telephones in 1918, when he 

became Premier in 1922, he was the youngest provincial Premier in the Dominion. 

 

Mr. Dunning remained at the head of the Saskatchewan Government until 1926, when, following a 

provincial general election, he accepted the call of Prime Minister Mackenzie King to become Minister 

of Railways and Canals in the Federal Government. Out of office in the brief interregnum of that year, 

he once again assumed the railway portfolio on the return of the Liberal Government. In the brief 

session of 1927, his name was associated with the Hudson Bay project, with an extensive C.N.R. branch 

line program, and with the establishment of a new steamship service to the West Indies. It was he who 

had to assume the responsibility for the crucial decision between the rival claims of Churchill and 

Nelson at the railway terminus on Hudson Bay. He staked his political life on his selection of Churchill 

as the Bay port for prairie grain. 

 

In 1929, Mr. Dunning was appointed Minister of Finance, but in the general election of 1930, which 

returned a Conservative Government to Ottawa, he suffered personal defeat in Regina and remained out 

of politics for five years. During this period he entered business, accepting positions on the directorates 

of several large industrial and financial firms. During this period also, he reorganized a number of 

newsprint companies into the Consolidated Paper Company, an outstanding achievement in Canadian 

finance. 

 

On the return of a Liberal Government in 1935, Prime Minister Mackenzie King persuaded him to re-

enter the Cabinet as Minister of Finance. Mr. Dunning returned to Ottawa and, a little later, was given an 

acclamation in the constituency of Queen‟s, in Prince Edward Island. Tremendous demands upon the 

Treasury for unemployment relief, public works projects, prairie farm rehabilitation and assistance, were 

a constant drain upon his energies, and in 1938, while piloting his budget through Parliament, Mr. 

Dunning suffered a heart attack which kept him out of action until the session of 1939. Throughout that 

session it was obvious that he carried on under great physical strain, and it was not unexpected when, 

after prorogation of the House, he decided to resign from active politics. His was not a retirement of 

leisure, however. 

 

At the outbreak of the Second World War, he was appointed Chairman of the national subscription 

committee formed to assist the National War Loan Committee to raise money for defence. In 1940, he 

was named Chairman of Allied Supplies Limited, a Crown company established to administer a 

munitions program undertaken in Canada on behalf of the British Government. 

 

Largely a self-educated man, Mr. Dunning was Chancellor of Queen‟s University from 1940, and was 

honoured by that University with an honorary degree of doctor of laws, a year after his acceptance of the 

post. In the 18 years of his association with Queen‟s, his services to 



 

February 13, 1959 

 

 

4 

that institution were “inestimable” according to Principal W.A. Mackintosh. 

 

To the end, Mr. Dunning maintained a keen interest in Saskatchewan and its people among whom he 

had innumerable friends. He retained also a lively concern for the progress of agriculture, the industry in 

which he had found his start and for which he had wrought so ardently in the pioneer days of farm 

organization. Such were the glowing accounts he wrote home of life and opportunities on the land in 

Saskatchewan that, two years after his own arrival, he had induced his father, a tenant farmer at Croft, 

Leicestershire, to come from England with his wife and five daughters, to homestead with him in the 

Beaverdale district, south of Yorkton. Pioneer residents of that district, Mr. Sam Dunning and his family 

were widely known and highly respected. 

 

With his family roots set deep in Saskatchewan soil it was natural that he cherished throughout his life a 

warm spot in his heart for the province which had been good to him in his youth, and to which he had 

contributed so much. Natural, too, that he should pay annual visits to his near relatives and his host of 

friends throughout Saskatchewan. As a teenage homesteader, he was „Charlie‟ Dunning to his 

neighbours and associates. He remained „Charlie‟ Dunning to the end to those Saskatchewan people 

who were his contemporaries. 

 

Mr. Dunning is survived by his widow, the former Ada Rowlatt, the boyhood sweetheart he went back 

to England to marry in 1913. Also surviving are his son and daughter and four of his five sisters. 

 

This is the official record that I wanted to place before the House. No person can put into words the 

personal associations and personal memories one has of Mr. Dunning. He was a kindly and friendly man 

with strong opinions and expressed them vigorously, and at the same time he had the charm and 

sincerity which enabled him to retain his personal friendships even with the people with whom he 

disagreed politically. 

 

I had the privilege of sitting in the House of Commons from 1936 to 1939 when Mr. Dunning resigned 

as Minister of Finance. Throughout that time I had an opportunity of watching him in action where his 

great ability made him one of the outstanding debaters in the House of Commons. I recall often when 

the House was in Committee he would come over and chat with some of us in the Opposition seats. Mr. 

Coldwell was a deskmate of mine and Mr. Dunning and Mr. Coldwell had been old friends back in 

Regina. They ran against each other. I believe, in the election of 1926 when Mr. Coldwell was running 

as a Progressive and Mr. Dunning as a Liberal. I still recall Mr. Dunning joking about the occasion on 

which someone had come to him and tried to sell him a list of Mr. Coldwell‟s contacts that he had 

managed to procure. Mr. Coldwell also recalled that he got a phone call from Mr. Dunning in which Mr. 

Dunning said: “There is a fellow by the name of „so-and-so‟ in the office here, who is trying to sell me a 

list of your contacts. Just before I throw him out of the office, I wanted to warn you not to be so careless 

as to where you leave your list of workers lying around.” 



 

February 13, 1959 

 

 

5 

This was the sort of thing that Mr. Dunning could do. Despite the fact that debates in the House were 

often quite acrimonious, he retained a wide host of friends on both sides of the House. Hon. members 

will remember that, some years ago, he came back to Saskatchewan to receive an honorary degree from 

the University of Saskatchewan – an honour which he prized very highly. He also came back each year 

to visit his friends here, and many of us had the opportunity to meet him because he always felt that his 

roots were in Saskatchewan and particularly in the Yorkton area. I think all of us will recall very fondly 

particularly his return in 1955, when he came back to the province along with other former Premieres to 

celebrate Saskatchewan‟s Golden Jubilee on that eventful day September 1, 1955. When we place on the 

record the vital statistics, I would like to place along with it, the memory of a very fine gentleman and a 

man to whom this province and this country owe a great deal for his leadership and his integrity. 

 

The second name to be placed in the records of the House is that of ALAN CARL STEWART, a former 

Minister of Highways and a dynamic member of this Assembly during the two terms he served in it. 

“Carl”, as he was known in the days of his activity, died at his home in Long Beach, California, on July 

26, 1958. A political „stormy petrel‟, he survives in the memory of all who knew him – and their name 

was legion – as a doughty fighter who feared no foe. 

 

A lawyer, born in 1893 in Moosomin, the town which has given so many famous sons to the public life 

of this province, Carl‟s public career included three terms as mayor of Yorkton, two terms in the 

Saskatchewan Legislature, and one in the Parliament of Canada. Forced by ill health to retire from active 

politics in 1953, he sought recovery in the gentler clime of California; but the strong constitution which 

had enabled him to withstand the slings and arrows of political fortune had been seriously undermined, 

and recuperation was denied him. 

 

Into his 65 years, Mr. Stewart had crowded the activities of soldier, lawyer, Minister of the Crown, 

Member of the House of Commons, civic administrator, sportsman and farmer. 

 

Carl attended public and high school in Moosomin and studied law at the University of Manitoba. His 

studies were interrupted by the outbreak of the First World War. Enlisting as a private, he went overseas 

with the First Canadian Contingent, was commissioned Lieutenant in the field, and invalided home after 

being severely wounded at Passchendaele. 

 

Completing his law course in 1916, he joined the firm of Wilson and Graham, in the city of Yorkton, 

later becoming a partner with that firm. In due course he was made King‟s Counsel. 

 

His public career began in 1922 with his election as councillor for the town of Yorkton. In the same year 

he married the former Gladys M. McDougall, of Winnipeg. 



 

February 13, 1959 

 

 

6 

In 1927, when Yorkton was elevated to the status of a city, Mr. Stewart became the city‟s first mayor, an 

office he held for three terms. He had also served as president of the Yorkton Board of Trade and as 

resident of the Yorkton branch of the Canadian Legion. He founded the Yorkton Terrier Hockey Club, 

helped to build Yorkton‟s curling rink, and is credited with having brought to Yorkton many of the 

city‟s largest commercial firms and warehouses. As a farmer he was a noted breeder of prize livestock. 

 

When the Progressive movement was formed in 1917, Mr. Stewart broke from the Liberal Party, and it 

was as a Progressive that he made his political debut in the provincial general election of 1925, being 

narrowly defeated on that occasion by the sitting member for Yorkton, the late Tom Garry. He returned 

to the political wars the following year, contesting the federal constituency of Yorkton as an 

Independent. Again unsuccessful, it was as an Independent that, in 1929, he finally won election to the 

Saskatchewan Legislature. In the interval between these two contests, he was thrice elected mayor of his 

home city. 

 

Following the provincial elections in 1929, with the House so divided that no single party enjoyed a 

clear majority in it, Carl Stewart rallied behind him an independent group of five members, threw in his 

lot with the Conservatives headed by the late Dr. J.T. M. Anderson, who thus was enabled to form the 

Coalition Government which continued in office until overwhelmed in the „landslide‟ of 1934. Mr. 

Stewart was taken into the Anderson Cabinet as Minister of Highways, in which he launched a $20 

million highway program – the most ambitious program of highway construction the province had 

witnessed to that time. In the House itself, confronting a strong Opposition front bench constantly on the 

attack, Mr. Stewart never wilted under assault, but returned blow for blow in the bitter debates in which 

no quarter was given, and none sought. The prospect of battle drew crowds to the galleries and to the 

Committee Room, and seldom were spectators disappointed. 

 

Sharing the fate of the Government in the general election of 1934, Mr. Stewart returned to the fray in 

1938, revenged his previous defeat and re-entered the Legislature as a United Progressive sympathetic to 

Social Credit. During this term he formed a Unity group of a section of the Opposition members under 

the title „National Reform Group‟. It was during this term also, that he sponsored the Bill extending the 

„life‟ of the Ninth Legislature to six years. 

 

Mr. Stewart did not contest the election of 1955, but, the following year, he sought election as an 

Independent Liberal in the Yorkton Federal constituency. Defeated on that occasion, he bounced back to 

win the seat, as a straight Liberal, in 1948. Ill health, as has been said, forced his retirement from public 

life on the dissolution of the Federal House in 1953. 



 

February 13, 1959 

 

 

7 

In recognition of his services to Yorkton, that city, on the eve of its 75th anniversary and at the time of 

his death, was preparing to have him return from California, in August last, to receive the tribute he had 

so well earned at the hands of his fellow citizens. 

 

Mr. Stewart is survived by his widow, at Long Beach, California, by a married daughter, also of Long 

beach, and by three sons. 

 

At the last session, Mr. Speaker, when tributes were paid to the memories of those former members of 

the Assembly who had died in the previous year, one name was omitted from the list – not because we 

were unaware of the fact that he died during 1957, but because the biographical data concerning him 

were most meagre and fragmentary. Indeed, despite the fact that he had sat in this Legislature through 

more years than any other member, past or present, even the Parliamentary Guide could give us little 

information other than that he was first elected a member in 1913 and had continued to serve until 1944. 

The only personal detail mentioned in the Guide related to his second marriage. 

 

With a record of 31 years in the Legislature of Saskatchewan, DEAKIN ALEXANDER HALL – or 

„Dick‟ as he was known to fellow members – it was felt was worthy of something better. Yet, though 

inquiries were made of all likely sources at the time, nothing substantive was forthcoming until the 1958 

Session had ended. What I now propose to place on the records we owe to a fortuitous visit paid to the 

Legislative Building, last summer, by the Hon. T.C. Davis, who, as a former Attorney General and as a 

Canadian Ambassador, is well know to the majority of the members. It will be remembered that Mr. 

Hall‟s first wife was a sister of Mr. Davis. 

 

The information supplied by Mr. Davis indicates that Dick Hall was born to the role he filled during the 

greater part of his long residence in this province; that his preferences for a life in the than virtually 

unexplored hinterland that is now Northern Saskatchewan was his by inheritance. 

 

Born in 1884 at a Hudson‟s Bay post on the British Columbia coast, Dick Hall was the son of the late 

Robert Hanley Hall, a Hudson‟s Bay factor, later a Commissioner of the company with supervision over 

the company‟s operation which then extended below the present boundary with the United States down 

to Oregon and the Columbia River. His mother belonged to the family of Peter Skene Ogden, fur-trader 

extraordinary, intrepid explorer and noted adventurer, who as Chief Factor and later a member of the 

board of management of the Hudson‟s Bay Company, had jurisdiction over the company‟s operations in 

all the territory west of the Rockies, who pursued his explorations into Nevada and Utah, and his calling 

even down to the Mexican border. Ogden, Utah, was named after him. Early in his adventurous career, 

Peter Ogden had represented the rival North West Company at Ile a la Crosse, from 1811 to 1818, 

before the two great fur companies amalgamated. 



 

February 13, 1959 

 

 

8 

About the turn of the century, the Hall family moved to Prince Albert, the father having been transferred 

from the west coast to supervise the Hudson‟s Bay operations in the North-West Territories. There, Dick 

completed his schooling, and later joined the late Senator T.C. Davis in a real estate business. However, 

adventure was in his blood, the lure of the wilderness strong upon him. True to his inheritance, he 

pursued the callings indigenous to the north – trapping, fishing, prospecting and mining. Latterly, he 

made his home on an island in Lac la Ronge. 

 

With such a background and with these pursuits, it was natural that in due course, he would be called 

upon to represent Saskatchewan‟s northland in the provincial Legislature. As a member, Dick Hall 

participated only in such debates as provided him an opportunity to castigate his fellow members for 

their lack of knowledge, and their neglect, of the great area he represented and in which he had made his 

home. Of magnificent physique – which, according to Mr. Davis, he retained to the end – Mr. Hall not 

only commanded respect when he rose to make his annual address, but gripped the attention of all 

members as he spoke of the inestimable potentialities of his far-flung constituency. 

 

Deakin Alexander Hall was first elected to the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly on September 8, 

1913, as a Liberal, representing Cumberland constituency. Re-elected in 1917 by acclamation, he stood 

aside in the general election of 1921 in favour of the Hon. George Langley; but on the latter‟s 

resignation in 1922, Mr. Hall was returned in the subsequent by-election in August of that same year. 

Again returned by acclamation in the election of 1925, he was re-elected in 1929 and again in 1934. In 

the latter year, as a result of the redistribution of 1932, the northern ridings of Cumberland and Ile a la 

Crosse were amalgamated to form one great constituency, Athabaska, covering the whole northland. 

This constituency was split in the redistribution in 1938 into Cumberland and Athabaska, and Mr. Hall 

was returned in the election of that year, again as member for Cumberland. Defeated in 1944, he retired 

from active politics and soon after moved with his family to Victoria, British Columbia, where he 

operated a real estate business. 

 

Mr. Hall died suddenly in hospital at Victoria on July 16, 1957, one week after the death of his second 

wife – the former Edna Lois Eede, of Prince Albert. He is survived by three daughters and a sister, Miss 

Caroline Hall, of Victoria. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think there is nothing I can add to the official record, except say that, as the years go by 

and we find it our solemn duty at each Session to pay tribute to members who have passed on, I think we 

have a growing recognition of the part which these men and women have placed in the history and the 

growth and development of Saskatchewan. I think it is a very worthwhile tradition which has built up, 

that we should pause at the beginning of each Session and pay tribute to their memory, put on the record 

the contribution they have made and, in our way, seek to emulate them so that we in our day and 

generation shall be worthy of those who have gone before us. 



 

February 13, 1959 

 

 

9 

I would, therefore move, seconded by Mr. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): 

 

“That this Assembly records its profound regret at the passing, since last Session, of two former 

Members of this Assembly, each of who made notable contributions to the development of this 

Province, and who merit high tributes in commemoration of their services to Saskatchewan and 

to Canada: 

 

The HONOURABLE CHARLES AVERY DUNNING, who earned great distinction in 

Provincial and Federal fields and in the realms of industry and finance, and who died in hospital 

at Montreal on October 1, 1958, was a Member of this Assembly from 1916 until 1926, during 

which period he served as Provincial Treasurer, Minister of Railways, Minister of Telephones, 

Minister of Agriculture, Provincial Secretary, Minister of Municipal Affairs and from 1922 to 

1926, as Premier of Saskatchewan and President of the Executive Council, resigning in the latter 

year to become Minister of Railways and Canals and, later, Minister of Finance in the Federal 

Government; 

 

ALAN CARL STEWART, who died at his home in Long Beach, California, on July 26, 1958, 

was a member of the Seventh Legislature from 1929 to 1934, during which period he was 

Minister of Highways in the Government headed by the late Dr. J.T.M. Anderson, and of the 

Ninth Legislature from 1938 to 1944; and later, of the Federal House of Commons, from 1949 to 

1953, as Member of Parliament for Yorkton Constituency. 

 

This Assembly desires also to pay belated tribute to the memory of DEAKIN ALEXANDER 

HALL, who died at Victoria, B.C. on July 16, 1957, whose record of continuous services in this 

Assembly exceeds that of any Member, past or present, and who, throughout the 31 years he sat 

in this Chamber as representative of northern Constituencies, sought ardently to interest his 

fellow Members in the wealth and variety of the resources latent in Saskatchewan‟s Northland, 

and to advocate their development. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss, the Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathies with 

members of the bereaved families.” 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): - Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think there is anything I can 

add to the official record that has been read to the members of the Legislature this afternoon, by the 

Premier. However, I would like to join with the 



 

February 13, 1959 

 

 

10 

Premier and other members of the Legislature in paying tribute to the three distinguished gentlemen who 

have passed on since we last met in this Legislature about a year ago. 

 

It was my privilege to have known two of the gentlemen concerned and probably I knew Mr. Dunning 

better than either Mr. Stewart or Mr. Hall. As you know, Mr. Dunning found it possible to return to 

Saskatchewan yearly to pay a visit to his friends in this province, and, of course, it was not my privilege 

or opportunity have met the late Charlie Dunning until after he had moved away from the province of 

Saskatchewan. However, on one of the first occasions that he returned to our province after I became 

actively interested in the political field, I was fortunate enough to meet Mr. Dunning, and as I say, 

almost yearly from that time until his passing, I had the opportunity of having a few valuable moments 

of his time when he was in Saskatchewan. 

 

It was a revelation to me to think that one who had lived outside of the province of Saskatchewan so 

long, was able to come back to his native province and to be so conversant with almost every problem 

that existed in Saskatchewan at that particular time. Of course, he played a great part in the early co-

operative movement in this province and, as the Premier outlined, he was greatly interested in the 

agricultural affairs of Saskatchewan. As a matter of fact, this is where he began his political career, so I 

suppose it was natural for him to follow along in those two particular fields especially, agriculture and 

the co-operative movement, because this is the „heart‟ of both of those movements as far as Canada is 

concerned. 

 

I think, when history is written, there is no doubt that Charlie Dunning will go down as one of the 

greatest financial men that Canada has ever known. I believe that everyone in this Legislature and 

everyone in Saskatchewan would agree that Mr. Dunning was one of the most able Provincial Treasurers 

who has ever served Saskatchewan and one of the most able Ministers of Finance that this country has 

ever been able to attract into the Government of Canada. I am one who is going to miss Mr. Dunning 

very, very much because of the close association I was able to build up with him over the latter few 

years of his life. 

 

I had the opportunity of meeting CARL STEWART when I was a very young man. As you know, Mr. 

Stewart was born in the town of Moosomin in the constituency which I have the opportunity of 

representing at this time. 

 

Coming from a Conservative family myself, of course, when Mr. Stewart sat in this Legislature as a 

member of the Anderson Government, it was always instilled in me what a great member Mr. Stewart 

had been, and what a great highway program he had implemented in the province of Saskatchewan. I 

think in the political realm he will be remembered most because of the foresight he had in bringing into 

the province of Saskatchewan, for the first time, a very wide-spread highway program and of course, we 

can all 



 

February 13, 1959 

 

 

11 

remember Carl Stewart because of his stormy political career, and not only his stormy political career 

but also a stormy career in the law courts of our land and also in the sports arena. 

 

It was never my privilege to have met Mr. Hall, but I do understand that he was certainly a very 

colourful member of this Legislature, a gentleman with a vast knowledge of that part of Saskatchewan 

of which most of us have some knowledge today. At the time when Mr. Hall was representing northern 

Saskatchewan, there were few people in southern Saskatchewan who had any idea of the resources of 

northern Saskatchewan, and, of course, if Mr. Hall were only with us now to see the development that is 

taking place in the northern part of this province, I am sure that he would be very proud. 

 

I want to join with the Premier on behalf of the Opposition in extending sympathy to the bereaved 

families, and I can agree that the record of the three gentlemen we have mentioned today should be an 

incentive to all of us to try to do a better job. I am sure that if I were able to come anywhere near 

equalling the record of any one of the three gentlemen, I would feel that I had made a contribution to the 

province of Saskatchewan that this province is certainly entitled to. 

 

Mr. Fred Neibrandt (Yorkton): - Mr. Speaker, of the three former members of this Legislature whom 

we are honouring I had the privilege of knowing only one, that was CARL STEWART. Although the 

Hon. Mr. Dunning had pioneered in the Beaverdale district in the Yorkton constituency and during his 

busy lifetime made innumerable trips to Yorkton to renew the many friendships that over the years he 

had made, it was not my privilege to ever meet him personally. 

 

It was different with Carl Stewart. I remember Carl Stewart since 1917, when he came back from the 

First World War rather severely wounded, and it wasn‟t very long until his dynamic personality was felt 

in political battles. He was supporting John F. Reid on the Progressive ticket at that time. Nobody, 

regardless of his political affiliation, who listened to Carl Stewart, could fail to be impressed with his 

dynamic speeches and with his personality. 

 

I remember an occasion in 1949 driving along in Los Angeles, and a car passed me and flashed me to 

the side with flickers. This gentleman came over and said, “I see you are from Saskatchewan, do you 

happen to know Stewart?” I said “Well, I know a couple of Stewarts, which one do you mean?” He said 

“Carl Stewart.” It happened that this gentleman was from Moosomin, a few by the name of O‟Henry, 

and of course he had heard and read so much about the rise of Carl Stewart politically that he anticipated 

that everybody from Saskatchewan would know Carl Stewart personally. 

 

I had occasion again in 1954, when I attended the funeral of my sister-in-law in Los Angeles, just 

outside of that city in Long Beach, to visit Carl, where at that time he was living with his mother in 

retirement, and was not too well. I was very impressed at that time with his 



 

February 13, 1959 

 

 

12 

humility, which was not so evident during the campaigns that he used to wage in and out of Yorkton 

constituency. 

 

Carl Stewart will probably be best remembered in Yorkton for being its most dynamic citizen. He 

happened to be mayor when Yorkton became a city back in 1925 and ever since 1917, of course, he has 

made his name felt not only pleading before the bar of justice, but in the political field that he so well 

loved. 

 

I don‟t know whether I can add anything further to what has already been put on the records, but I want 

to support the resolution of condolences to his family on behalf of myself and on behalf of the people of 

the Yorkton constituency. 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): - Mr. Speaker, of the three former members of this 

Legislature who have passed away in the past year, the only one I knew was CARL STEWART. We 

were young men in the town of Moosomin back before the First War, and I can recall that he was a good 

athlete, an excellent baseball player. As a matter of fact, I have played against him, I being on the high 

school team while he was on the law students‟ team – a very fine competitor even in those years, which 

was something he carried through into his political life. 

 

He went overseas as a matter of fact, I believe with the first contingent, came back after being severely 

wounded and was an officer in the same Battalion as myself when we left Regina in the early part of 

1917. He had a brother I recall, Meno Stewart, a sergeant, who was killed in France a year or two later. 

 

It is of interest I think, just at this time, for us to know that he was a member of the „On-to-Ottawa‟ 

delegation which went down to the capital city just 17 years ago now. I believe he was mayor of 

Yorkton at that time. 

 

I just want to add with the others, my sympathy to members of his bereaved family. 

 

Mr. A. Loptson (Saltcoats): - Mr. Speaker, I think I am the only member in this House who sat with 

two of those members we are speaking about, although I knew all three. I did not know Mr. Dunning 

intimately, although I knew his father very well and he was an eminent gentleman. 

 

The record that has been brought forward in this House has been very complete and ably presented by 

the Premier, and I want to concur in everything that he has said with respect to the three former deceased 

members. There are some things that I might add. For instance, I think Mr. Dunning‟s record, he coming 

here as an immigrant boy, penniless 



 

February 13, 1959 

 

 

13 

as he was, with a meagre education – I understand that he had hardly finished his elementary schooling 

– and coming forward as he did, as his record indicates, should be something for the young people of 

this country to take note of. Young men who have the welfare of our province and of our country at 

heart can well follow the steps of „Charlie‟ Dunning in an effort to serve this country. Mr. Dunning was 

a man who came up from what you might call obscurity and rose to the heights of the financial, co-

operative and social welfare of our land. I want again to concur with what the Premier has said with 

respect to Mr. Dunning; he indicated very ably how Mr. Dunning came up step-by-step from his 

homestead days. 

 

As far as Carl Stewart is concerned, I knew him both as a bitter political opponent and also as a 

colleague in the same political camp. I remember particularly one occasion when he was sitting over 

there (where the Attorney General is sitting now) as Minister of Highways. We were going through his 

Estimates one evening and it reached 11 o‟clock and somebody on this side of the House drew the 

attention of the Premier, Dr. Anderson, that it was 11 o‟clock and time for adjournment. Dr. Anderson 

got up and explained that there were only two items left in the estimates and he thought it would be best 

to finish them and then adjourn. Well, we stayed that night until half past five and there were still two 

items left to be passed. (I am saying this as a warning to the Premier at the present time – it is not always 

well to be too antagonistic to the Opposition.) 

 

Carl Stewart was most noted for his aggressiveness in everything that he undertook and very often he 

did so absolutely unselfishly. His name as an aggressive promoter in the Yorkton district will be 

remembered for a long time. 

 

As far as Dick Hall is concerned, I sat in the House with him from 1929 to 1938. He was a very 

congenial gentleman; he never got into any arguments in the Legislature, but he delivered one speech 

every Session that every member looked forward to, and he made a masterpiece of that speech, 

demonstrating all the northern area which none of us were familiar with. I think if some of his speeches 

are on record in the records of this Legislature, they would open the eyes of some of us who don‟t know 

much about the north country, if we just read them over again. 

 

With these few words I want again to associate myself with the resolution sending condolences to those 

who are mourning the former members of this Legislature. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Natural Resources): - Mr. Speaker, there are three other 

members of this Legislature – the hon. member from Arm River (Mr. Danielson), the hon. member for 

Kelvington (Mr. Howe) and myself – who sat in the House with two of the members of whom we are 

speaking today. We sat in the House from 1938 to 1944 with „Carl‟ Stewart and „Dick‟ Hall. I do not 

wish to repeat any of the things that have already been said, but I want simply to point out that these 

men were men of strong character who certainly left their 



 

February 13, 1959 

 

 

14 

mark on this Legislature, and to sit with them in this House, to listen to them and watch them in 

operation, was of great value to us. How Carl Stewart could carry on a battle! And how Dick Hall could 

make you very careful – if you were a southern tenderfoot – of anything you said about the north, 

because if you said anything about the north that wasn‟t right, you could be assured that the next time 

Dick Hall made his annual speech he would have you over the coals. 

 

These men played their part in our province, and it is fitting that we honour them. I wish to join in the 

messages of condolences. 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): - Mr. Speaker, I feel that I would be remiss if I did not add my words to 

those that have been spoken, particularly as one of the younger members thinking back to those who 

have served this country and who have left us – some of those who have served our province well. I was 

in the fortunate position of having had the opportunity of meeting and knowing personally each of the 

three whom we are remembering here, today. 

 

I can best remember Mr. Dunning because of the close family relationship that existed for many years 

and I think quite often when we are discussing those in public life we tend to forget their partners to 

some extent, those who go through the trials and tribulations that one has to go through in public life. I 

can remember, as a small boy, the difficulties that were faced by the Dunning family, the very poor 

health of Mrs. Dunning for some time and the fact that, for many years, they were afraid for her life 

during the time Mr. Dunning was taking an active part in political life. Following her recovery Mr. 

Dunning had the misfortunate to suffer the heart attack which finally ended his political career. 

 

I can remember some of the stories that have been told about Mr. „Dick‟ Hall. He was the junior 

member in the Legislature at the time my father came into this House in 1914. Mr. Hall was elected in 

the fall and my father was elected in the spring, and I can remember stories he has told me of entering 

the House and of the friendship that he had with Dick Hall down through the years, in political 

campaigns and work for the Liberal Party. 

 

With regard to Carl Stewart, in spite of some of the remarks that have been made here, today, I know 

full well that throughout the political career of Carl Stewart and my father they were actually very close 

friends, in spite of some of the political battles they had in this House. As a small boy I can remember 

sitting up above the clock there and listening to some of the debates which took place between Carl 

Stewart and members of the Liberal Party at that time. As a younger member of the Liberal Party 

beginning my work in politics, I can remember attending the Convention at which Carl Stewart was 

nominated to represent the Liberal Party in an election for the House of Commons, in 1949. 



 

February 13, 1959 

 

 

15 

I would like to add my words to those of other members in remembrance of three men who served their 

people well and I hope that those of us who are serving our first term are privileged to give the same 

type of service over the same number of years. We can say of these three that they served their country 

well, they fought a good fight and they kept the faith. 

 

(The Motion of Condolence was then passed unanimously by silent standing vote) 

 

Premier Douglas: - Mr. Speaker, I wish now to move, seconded by Mr. McDonald: 

 

“That the Resolution just passed, together with transcripts of the oral tributes to the memory of 

the deceased former Members, be communicated to the bereaved families, on behalf of this 

Assembly, by Mr. Speaker.” 

 

(The question being put, it was agreed to, unanimously.) 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 3:40 o‟clock p.m. 


