



















































Hansard: March 19, 1959


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session – Thirteenth Legislature 

25th Day 

Thursday, March 19, 1959. 

 

The House met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon City): 
 

Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to welcome the largest group of school children 

that has come down so far from the city of Saskatoon. They are pupils from Churchill School and the 

North Park School, and I am sure all members will join with me in saying how delighted we are to have 

them attend the Session. We hope their stay in the capital city will be a pleasant one, and also a 

profitable one. 

 

CORRECTION OF PRESS REPORT 

 

Mr. F.E. Foley (Turtleford): 
 

Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to make mention of a press report in the 

Thursday edition of ‗The Leader-Post‘ in which it states that I asked for the elimination of long-distance 

telephone calls levied from North Battleford to Battleford, just across the river. I believe, Mr. Speaker, 

that should have read long-distance ‗rates‘ between the two communities. I just wanted to make that 

observation. 

 

R.C.M.P. BAND 

 

Moved by Mr. Thorson, seconded by Mrs. Cooper: 

 

―That this Assembly condemns the removal of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Band from Regina 

and requests the Government of Saskatchewan to communicate to the Government of Canada the 

earnest desire of the people of Saskatchewan to have the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Band 

maintained with permanent headquarters at Regina.‖ 

 

Mr. Kim Thorson (Souris-Estevan): 
 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all members of the Assembly, earlier this year, heard with regret the 

announcement of the intention of the Federal Government to remove the Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police Band from the city of Regina. Regret is no doubt felt for different reasons. For myself, I regret it 

mainly because it removes from our midst a living link with our past, and I want to spend some time 

dealing with the past traditions of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. 

 



 

March 19, 1959 

 

 

2 

The members will remember that originally they came into being in 1874 as the North-West Mounted 

Police, and came into being as the result of the needs of civilization on these prairies where we now live. 

I submit that the traditions of this early police force are our traditions, and to remove from the midst this 

link with our past should be condemned, and should be opposed in every way possible. It seems to me 

that we spend a good deal more money maintaining museums and other symbols of our past, than it 

would cost to maintain this band here in the city of Regina and in the province of Saskatchewan. I am 

hopeful that the Federal Government will see the wisdom of maintaining the band at the ―home of the 

Mounties‖ here in Regina. 

 

I want to say just a word or two about the conditions which existed in the North-West Territories on 

these prairies in the late 1860‘s and early 1870‘s. Anyone who has taken a look at the conditions of 

those times is aware that civilization and settlement of the prairies was not possible until the rule of law 

had not only been established but was maintained on the prairies. The first white men who came to this 

part of North America brought with them a good many unscrupulous traders who brought lawlessness, 

and who were responsible for exploitation of the native population that was here. Members will know 

that names like Fort Benton and Fort Whoop-Up are associated with the early events of those days. By 

and large the trade goods came up the Missouri River system to Fort Benton in Montana, and then were 

trucked overland to Fort Whoop-Up, which is located in what is now Alberta. 

 

Most of the traders who were active in trading with the Indians at that time were Americans, although 

not all of them were Americans. Most of them had little or no consideration for the future development 

of this land or for the people who had settled here. They were simply interested in making a profit as 

quickly as possible and with the least possible inconvenience to themselves. 

 

The single event which drove home to the authorities in Ottawa the seriousness of this situation, of 

course, was the Cypress Massacre in May, 1873, when a number of Indians were slaughtered as a result 

of a fight between the traders and the Indians themselves. I won‘t take time to go into all the details of 

the events leading up to this Cypress Massacre, other than to say that this single event made it 

abundantly clear to the authorities in Ottawa that some kind of police force was necessary to maintain 

law and order in the North-West Territories. So it was that the North-West Mounted Police was 

organized. 

 

On July 8, 1874, under the command of Commissioner French, which consisted of a troop of 318 men, 

along with their horses and Red River carts and other equipment, found themselves at Dufferin in 

Manitoba. From this point, in July of that year, the column set out on its march to the west towards Fort 

Whoop-Up to bring law and order to the North-West Territories. This column, as it marched, was two 

and a half miles long. It marched over the prairie wilderness, harassed by heat, by storms, by shortages 

of water and food, and the best it could make was 26 miles per day, and more often, on stormy days and 

on hot days, it made as little as 14 miles per day. When they were 275 miles out from Dufferin, 

Manitoba, they stopped for three days at Roche Percee, 



 

March 19, 1959 

 

 

3 

which the members will know is in my constituency. The site where the first troop stopped for three 

days is now marked by a marker which was established in our Jubilee Year, 1955. Here the column was 

divided, and one group continued on the main route and the other went towards the north-west, towards 

what is now Edmonton. 

 

It was during this three-day stop at Roche Percee that the first band was organized in the North-West 

Mounted Police. Of course, it was strictly a voluntary arrangement, and consisted simply of some men 

getting together, and with a fife, a tin dish and tent pegs, they formed a band to keep up their spirits, 

which, I think we can understand, must have sagged a good many times during this march. Behind them 

they left a good many dead animals, a good many sick, crippled men who could not keep up with the 

pace that was being set. All the time, of course, when they looked ahead, they could have little more 

than fear and apprehension. Rumours were spreading at that time that when they got to Fort Whoop-Up, 

the traders would defend the fort with machine guns, and very likely this small police force of barely 

300 men could not put down the lawlessness which these traders were responsible for. 

 

Finally, after leaving on July 8th, they arrived on September 6th in the general vicinity of the area where 

they intended to maintain their permanent headquarters. On that day they ran into a snowstorm which 

was a sort of final, or the crowning, indication to them of the rigors of the climate which they would 

have to put up with, aside altogether from the dangers that were going to beset them from the traders in 

the areas. On September 7, they arrived in the Sweetgrass Hills just beyond the Milk River, and when 

they got there they had achieved what had, up to that time, been the longest overland march in history 

for a force carrying its own supplies. They had marched 1,009 miles in 97 days. And after that march, 

law and order was permanently maintained in the Canadian west. 

 

I wanted to say just a word or two about the early bands in the North-West Mounted Police. As I 

mentioned, the first one was improvised during the march westward in 1874, when they stopped at 

Roche Percee on July 25th. The first brass band was organized at what was then the headquarters of the 

Mounted Police – at Swan River, in February, 1876. It is interesting to note that the men organized the 

band voluntarily; that they purchased the instruments with their own money, and had them shipped from 

Winnipeg by dog-team to Swan River. Though they organized in February, their first public appearance 

took place on May 24, 1876, on the Queen‘s birthday. 

 

The accounts of the early history of the force indicated that the next most significant appearance of the 

band was later during that same year, on August 19th, at Fort Carleton, when the band was present for 

the signing of Treaty No. 6 with the Cree Indians of the Plains, and the government of the land. On this 

occasion the band added a great deal to what was already a colourful event, with a number of people, 

both natives and the people who were coming in to settle, being present, having 



 

March 19, 1959 

 

 

4 

their trade goods and taking part in the celebrations and the events leading up to, and surrounding, the 

signing of this Treaty No. 6. 

 

In the following year the band was present for the signing of Treaty No. 7, with the Blackfeet Indians on 

the Bow River, in September. I should like hon. members to try to picture this scene on that occasion. 

The accounts tell us that, on that occasion, the band played ‗The Maple Leaf Forever‘ before 5,000 

Indians and an honour guard of 50 Mounted Policemen. Over them all flew the Union Jack. While the 

ceremonies were taking place, a nine-pounder gun fired a salute, and at the end of all the ceremonies, 

Lieutenant-Governor Laird and Commissioner McLeod shook hands with all of the Indian Chiefs while 

the band played ‗God Save the Queen‘. Lieutenant-Governor Laird paid tribute to the band in his report 

on the signing of Treaty No. 7. He said: ―The volunteer band of the force deserves more than passing 

notice, as it did much to enliven the whole proceedings.‖ 

 

This is a good point to pause and note how well the North-West Mounted Police succeeded in bringing 

law and order to British North America. It is a matter of record that the Indians of the Plains had to 

remain in western Canada. You can contrast this with the situation in the nation to the south of us, where 

the Sioux Indians thought of the United States Army as ―wolves seeking their blood‖. For years and 

years, the American Indians could not trust the military force of the United States government. The 

situation was entirely different in British North America where the force was not only trusted by the 

native people, but it was the desire of the native people that the force should remain to maintain law and 

order, for the protection of themselves as well as for the settlers who were coming in. 

 

At the time of the singing of Treaty No. 7 in 1877, when we can assume that law and order was being 

maintained, and that it was just three years prior to that that the Cypress Hills Massacre took place, and 

there was no one there to prevent it. It was just during the year before that, on June 25, 1876, that 

General Custer and his five companies of the U.S. 7th Calvary were completely destroyed in the valley 

of the Little Big Horn River in Montana. Even as the treaty was being signed in September, 1877, with 

the Blackfeet Indians of Canada, the United States Army under General Miles was still waging war with 

Chief Joseph‘s Indians in the Bear Paw Mountains south of the border. 

 

I wanted to say just a word or two more about further developments of bands in the North-West 

Mounted Police. The headquarters of the force were moved in 1876 from Swan River to Fort McLeod, 

and here a band was organized. It consisted mainly of men from the headquarters group. I should note 

that the headquarters of the voluntary band moved from Fort McLeod to Fort Walsh in 1878. Here they 

gave concerts, and they added a good deal to the social life for the men who were stationed at the post, 

and for the civilian population in the village near the post. In 1880 the band was reorganized and moved 

to Fort Qu‘Appelle. A couple of 



 

March 19, 1959 

 

 

5 

years later, in 1882 a band was known to exist at Battleford, and it was made up mainly of men from ‗D‘ 

division, under Sgt. Fred Bagley, who had made the march with the force some years before that, in 

1874. 

 

Members, of course, know that what is now called the Saskatchewan Rebellion took place in 1885. The 

band had at lest one significant part to play in the events of that rebellion. The records show that, 

following the Frog Lake massacre in April 2, 1885, Inspector Dickens (who, as members probably 

know, was the son of the well-known writer, Charles Dickens) decided to move the men under his 

command from nearby Fort Pitt, and seek refuge at Battleford. They had a good deal of difficulty in 

getting away from Fort Pitt, but they finally did, and they finally made it to Battleford on April 20th, and 

it is recorded that as they marched into the fort they were escorted by the march music played by the 

band. 

 

There were other volunteer bands in the force at various posts. In 1882, the headquarters was moved to 

Pile of Bones which we know now as Regina. A band was started. I should say that the band in Regina, 

according to the earliest record, was organized in 1886 on a voluntary basis, but this time the 

instruments were purchased by the government. In 1887, one year later, the first musical ride was 

organized and trained in Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I take my place, before I leave this rather sketchy account of the early days of the 

North-West Mounted Police and the role which the band played in the events of those days, I want to 

sum up by quoting the words of a Canadian poetess, Pauline Johnson, in her poem called, ―The Riders 

of the Plains‖. This is what she has to say about the North-West Mounted Police: 

 

―These are the fearless fighters, whose life in the open lies, 

Who never fail on the prairie trail ‗neath the Territorial skies, 

Who have laughed in the face of the bullets and the edge of the rebels‘ steel, 

Who have set their ban on the lawless man with his crime beneath their heel; 

These are the men who battle the blizzards, the suns, the rains, 

These are the famed that the North has named the ‗Riders of the Plains‘, 

And theirs is the might and the meaning and the strength of the bulldog‘s jaw, 

While they keep the peace of the people and the honour of British Law.‖ 

 

As I said when I began, my regret in the removal of the R.C.M.P. band from Regina is that it takes from 

our midst a living link with the past, with the traditions of the police force which, I submit, in this part of 

Canada are our traditions. I hope all members will join with me in giving support to this resolution 

which seeks to retain the 



 

March 19, 1959 

 

 

6 

R.C.M.P. band here in Regina, at the Home of the Mounties, and that the force will be maintained with 

permanent headquarters here. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure in moving this motion, seconded by Mrs. Cooper. 

 

Mrs. Cooper (Regina City): 
 

Mr. Speaker, I will just speak very briefly to this. I think the hon. member for Souris-Estevan has said 

about all that need to be said on the subject. I am sure we have been very much interested in the 

historical review which he has given us, and I think we all realize that this band of Regina is part of the 

tradition of our province and our city. We in the city of Regina have appreciated this band. It has been a 

colourful band, and a very excellent band, and they have been so generous with their services. They 

have gone around to the various schools and given concerts, which have been very much appreciated, 

not only in Regina, but wherever else they have been. 

 

We had sort of taken for granted that this was part of our past, part of our tradition that would remain 

with us. We were very, very sorry when we heard that the band was going to be moved, and I know the 

citizens of Regina, one and all, regret it very much, and we feel that it was not necessary. I do hope that 

a unanimous resolution from this Legislature might do something to change the mind of the authorities, 

to see that this band does remain in Regina as a permanent asset; that it can continue to play the very 

fine part that it has over the years, since 1886, played in the life of the city of Regina and the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. J.H. Sturdy: — Mr. Speaker, I am certainly very happy to support the resolution in which Regina 

is particularly interested. Also, of course, it is so evident that the R.C.M.P. band is very, very closely 

associated with the development and the history of the force itself in Saskatchewan. For 12 years I 

resided at Fort Qu‘Appelle which at one time was the headquarters of the R.C.M.P. One of the stories I 

heard there in connection with the prestige that had been early developed by the R.C.M.P. is worth 

repeating in this House. It appears that, immediately after the massacre known as the ‗Custer Massacre‘, 

some of the Sioux had requested the Great White Mother, Empress of the British Empire, that they 

might take refuge in the country over which she reigned. So permission was granted for a group of the 

Sioux to come to Canada, and find a permanent home here. They came to Fort Qu‘Appelle to what 

became known as the Standing Buffalo Reserve. It is a very populous reserve, and a very fine one, on 

the banks of the beautiful Qu‘Appelle Valley. 

 

This is the story that is told. The band of Sioux, as they came up through North Dakota, were 

accompanied, not by a platoon of American soldiers, not by a company but by a whole regiment of 

American soldiers. When they came to the border and were turning the Sioux over, they were amazed to 

find that the Great White Mother in her wisdom had sent one lonely ‗Red Coat‘ to take over the custody 

of the Sioux Indians, and that one lone constable led the Sioux to their permanent home on the 



 

March 19, 1959 

 

 

7 

banks of the Qu‘Appelle Valley, without ‗incident‘. 

 

I merely point this out because, even in those early days, in the 1870‘s, so great had become the prestige 

of the North-West Mounted Police as a force to maintain law and order that it was only necessary for 

one constable to act as guide and guard for that Indian band. Certainly, I take great pleasure in 

supporting this motion, which I am sure will be unanimous. 

 

Mr. F.E. Foley (Turtleford): 
 

I am sure all hon. members in the Assembly, as well as the people throughout Saskatchewan, are very 

proud of the history of both the Royal North-West Mounted and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police 

and the part they have played in the history of our province. 

 

I note that the history of the Mounted Police has been reviewed by previous speakers along with some of 

the history of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Band, so there is little that I can add to what has 

already been said. 

 

There are a few historical facts, however, that might be of interest and which have not received previous 

mention in this debate. It is interesting to note how these early musicians supplied their own instruments 

and used a great deal of their own time to practice and build up the band in those days. It is interesting to 

note, also, of course, the impact that the R.C.M.P. Band, along with the colourful uniform of the force, 

had upon the Indian population of western Canada over the years. I think I am correct in saying that the 

dignity and the bearing of the force played a great part in opening up the west to prairie settlement with 

as little bloodshed as there was. 

 

I took the trouble to do a little research in the text entitled ―Annals of the Royal North-West Mounted 

Police‖, by L.P. Turner, which deals with the history of the force, in two volumes. Mr. Turner mentions 

the following – if I might be permitted to quote just a few excerpts from his excellent text: 

 

―There was no scarcity of musicians among the non-commissioned officers and men of the force. 

While ‗D‘ division was stationed under Superintendent Steele at Battleford conjointly with ‗K‘ 

division, in 1886, a very good band had been formed, but upon the transfer of some men to the ‗K‘ 

division the band became a post institution rather than a divisional institution. When ‗D‘ division was 

transferred to Fort Macleod the band was broken up for some time. 

 

At this time the musical instruments belonged to the police themselves.‖ 

 



 

March 19, 1959 

 

 

8 

I do not wish to go into too much detail, but I think it is worth mentioning that we had efforts made to 

form police bands, not only in what is now Saskatchewan but also at Fort Macleod and along Pincher 

Creek and thereabouts. 

 

I would like to call your attention to one more excerpt from Mr. Turner‘s text, where he discusses the 

attempt made by the town of Macleod to form a police band: 

 

―However, they mentioned having difficulties even in those days in getting a suitable personnel for the 

band. Local talent was still in the pioneer class. The orchestra consisted of the present stagecoach 

driver at that time, who led the band in the Pincher Creek area.‖ 

 

I was very pleased with the fact on behalf of ‗E‘ division, that this community subscribed nearly $600 

for the purchase of instruments, and eventually Inspector Antrobus received a yearly grant of $100 

towards the purchase of music in those days. This was, of course, a substantial amount. 

 

I think it is important to note the part the police band played in providing recreation, in view of the 

absence of theatres and other forms of entertainment which we have today. Superintendent Herchmer, 

referring to this, reports as follows, in Mr. Turner‘s text: 

 

―The entire absence of theatres, concerts and other sources of amusement is hard on the young men 

who are generally of good education, but with the establishment of bands in many of the divisions 

most of these drawbacks will be forgotten.‖ 

 

He goes on to say that he would recommend a yearly grant of $50 to each division to assist the band. 

 

I have one final excerpt which I wish to bring to the attention of the members, this afternoon: 

 

―In 1887 the following report was read for the Regina District: 

 

Regina Barracks now boasts a fairly complete band under Bandmaster Sgt. J.T. Farmer. Earlier in the 

year Inspector Matthews, who had served in the 4th Hussars, organized and trained a musical ride, 

including non-commissioned officers and constables.‖ 

 



 

March 19, 1959 

 

 

9 

I am sure it is interesting to note that the famous musical ride, which, I am given to understand, has been 

discontinued, was organized some 72 years ago and apparently at the Regina barracks, as near as I can 

gather from the texts, this is where the musical ride originated. 

 

While I have seen the musical ride on the movie screen on several occasions, I had the pleasure, last 

summer, of attending the Pacific National Exhibition at Vancouver, and for the first time actually saw 

the famous Royal Canadian Mounted Police musical ride on display before many thousands of people. I 

do wish to say that I was certainly proud to be from the province of Saskatchewan and to see the Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police in probably one of the most stirring exhibitions of horsemanship that has ever 

been seen in Canada and throughout the world. While we are on the topic of the Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police I do want to pay tribute to the musical ride, which I regret is passing from the Canadian 

scene. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only will the city of Regina and the immediate area miss the Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police band; but certainly we here in the Legislature will miss this colourful group who have helped to 

make the Opening of the Legislature a very commendable event each year. 

 

I took the trouble, Mr. Speaker, to review a few facts about the work of the Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police Band at the British Empire Games in British Columbia. I want, with your permission, just to read 

a few short excerpts from the ‗R.C.M.P. Quarterly‘ published by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, 

and the remarks that have been made about this occasion. 

 

―During the winter of 1953-54 an opportunity was presented to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police to 

attend the British Empire Games, the following summer; and an invitation was received to have the 

Royal Canadian Mounted Police band participate. Commander L.H. Nicholson, M.B.E., decided that 

to accede to this request would also provide the opportunity to arrange a band tour of the province of 

British Columbia, and would stimulate recruiting members of the force on the west coast would be 

given a chance to heard a band of their own.‖ 

 

The following account certainly commends the activities of the band during the Centennial in British 

Columbia. It is quite lengthy, But I would like to read a few of the final lines from the article, written by 

the director of the band. He goes on to say about the tour: 

 



 

March 19, 1959 

 

 

10 

―It is perhaps fitting to say that it was the teamwork of this band from the very inception of the 

tour which made it the successful and happy engagement that it was. It is to be hoped, too, that 

the people of British Columbia enjoyed the appearances of the band as much as the musicians 

enjoyed playing for them.‖ 

 

I am sure that on that occasion as on many other occasions, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Band 

was indeed a happy ambassador for Saskatchewan in many parts of Canada, and in many of the 

appearances which they were able to make in our local communities throughout our own province. So 

there is no doubt that, if the decision to discontinue the band in Saskatchewan is irrevocable we have 

indeed lost a historic organization from this province which will be sorely missed by people in all walks 

of life. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, while I associate myself with the previous speakers who have expressed their 

regrets that the band is being removed from Regina I have some hesitation in condemning this fine 

organization with such a marvellous history. You will note that this resolution states: 

 

―That this Assembly condemns the removal of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Band from Regina 

. . .‖ 

 

I feel that the wording is unfortunate. I don‘t really believe that it represents the true feelings and 

sentiments of any of the hon. members, because, while we may regret the removal of this honourable 

organization, to ―condemn‖ them suggests unwarranted interference with the administration of the 

police force. We have had, in the last few days, a rather unhappy experience with interference in the 

normal discharge of the duties of this organization elsewhere in the Dominion. 

 

Of course, when one considers the resolution further, one wonders what jurisdiction the Government of 

Canada has over the operations of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, and particularly the Police Band. 

From press reports I am given to understand that the main reason, and possibly the only reason, for the 

decision of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police to discontinue the band in Regina was the lack of 

suitable personnel to make up the band. If this was the only reason, and if this reason is valid, there 

seems to be some justification for the decision they arrived at. I would repeat once again that, while I do 

associate myself with previous speakers in expressing my deep regret for the discontinuance of such a 

fine and historic organization as the Royal Canadian Mounted Police band, I cannot associate myself 

with the word ‗condemns‘ as used in the resolution. For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the 

resolution. 

 



 

March 19, 1959 

 

 

11 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — In order that the hon. member may support his argument, I wish to move, seconded 

by the Hon. Mr. Walker: That the motion be amended as follows: 

 

―That the words ‗condemns the‘ in the first line be deleted, and the following substituted therefore: 

 

‗Regrets the proposed‘.‖ 

 

I believe this would remove any objection he might have. I think it would be unfortunate if this 

resolution could not receive unanimous support. I am sure there isn‘t a member in the House who does 

not regret the proposed removal – and again I think the word ‗proposed‘ should go in, because I would 

hope that it still isn‘t too late. I might say further that I do not think there would be anyone else to deal 

with this but the Government of Canada. They are the ones, after all, who do have the responsibility for 

the administration of the police force. I don‘t think there is anything further I need to say. I know the 

people of Regina and of Saskatchewan generally will regret very much if this decision is implemented, 

if we are not to have the further continuance of this band. I would therefore like to move that 

amendment, in order that it might be supported unanimously. 

 

Mrs. Mary J. Batten (Humboldt): 
 

Would the hon. minister permit a question? Has the Federal Government the power to remove the band, 

or is that a matter of R.C.M.P. personnel consideration? Is that authority vested in the Federal 

Government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — That is the decision of the Federal Minister of Justice. He accepts the responsibility 

for it. 

 

Mrs. Mary J. Batten: — The amendment certainly makes the motion far more acceptable, I am sure, to 

the majority of the members of the House, because it removes that word ‗condemn‘, which I don‘t think 

we are entitled to do. But further to that, I am still very unsure as to the actual situation here, and this is 

one of the problems which we run into continually when we deal with Federal matters, instead of 

dealing with things that in our own jurisdiction. 

 

There have been no facts presented as to who did remove this band. I understand from the Hon. 

Provincial Treasurer‘s answer to my question, that the Minister of Justice has to accept responsibility. I 

can understand in general terms that that would be correct, but I would think that it was up to the 

R.C.M.P. themselves to decide whether they had a band, or riding horses, or any other details such as 

that. I cannot see why we, as a Legislature, should do anything to put any influence or put any pressure 

on the R.C.M.P. as to the internal discipline or the arrangements which they themselves make as 

members of their force. Surely I do not think it behooves us to put any political pressure, or popular-

support pressure, on the R.C.M.P., or on their superintendents, or their commanding officers, to keep 

certain personnel here or to move them some place else. I think one of the finest things about the 

R.C.M.P. has always been that they have served aloof and apart from political interference; they have 

themselves built up such a wonderful 



 

March 19, 1959 

 

 

12 

reputation that nobody ever condemns them or judges them, in view of changing political conditions. 

Certainly I think that anything that would destroy that integrity and that aloofness is certainly to be 

condemned, and unless I were convinced, or given some facts to show, that this was purely a decision of 

the Federal Government and not one of internal management, I certainly would not want to support the 

motion, or the amendment. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, if I may just say a word. I am sure that the mover and seconder of 

the resolution, and certainly not any member who would vote for it, would want the impression to go 

around that we are criticizing the R.C.M.P., or that we are trying to bring political pressure to bear, 

respecting their administration of police in Canada, or their internal discipline. I take it that the matter of 

moving the band from Regina is a matter of estimates, and a matter of money and of policy, which does 

come under the Minister of Justice, and that he must make that decision. I wrote him in December, and I 

am sure he would not object if I read his letter, which gives the reasons why they are doing this, and, in 

my opinion, this resolution might help the Department of Justice at Ottawa to reconsider this matter. It 

says: 

 

―I have your letter of December 23rd, and I regret that I must confirm the report you have, which is the 

planned discontinuance of the Regina R.C.M.P. Band. Circumstances forced us to take this step. It has 

been found impossible to keep our part-time band, and we are therefore discontinuing the Regina unit, 

and gradually converting the Ottawa band from a part-time to a full-time organization. 

 

I am told that when the present-day bands were organized, the Ottawa band in 1938 and the Regina 

band in 1949, the plans was to have the bandsmen fill full-time administrative jobs, and carry out their 

band duties as a side-line. It has, however, become progressively more difficult to get men who have 

the musical qualifications desired, and the willingness to fill a double role. The force has even gone to 

the point of trying to recruit men in the United Kingdom for its band, but its efforts were unproductive. 

 

The strength of both units has been dropping, and the quality of their performance is also dropping. 

Now it is clear that we must abandon the plan of maintaining these bands under the original plan, and 

the first resultant decision has been the closing out of the band at Regina. 



 

March 19, 1959 

 

 

13 

I might add that when orders were given to break it up just before Christmas, its strength had dropped 

from the authorized establishment of 36 to 15. We are now going ahead with plans for building up a 

full-time band here in Ottawa. It is estimated that this change-over will take two or three years. When 

completed, we will have a unit that devotes itself to almost entirely band work. It must be available to 

a much greater extent for tours in different parts of Canada, or different parts of the country. 

 

We visualize this band going to Regina from time to time, and from that point visiting other places in 

western Canada as well as offering concerts in Regina itself. I repeat, however, that it will be two or 

three years, at least, before we can put this arrangement into effect, of switching from a part-time to a 

full-time basis, and at the same time building the quality which the band must have – it is not 

something that can be accomplished quickly. 

 

I know the force will appreciate as I do, your interest in the band, and your complimentary remarks 

about it and about the musical ride, and I have, therefore, sent a copy of your letter to Commissioner 

Nicholson.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this resolution is quite in order, in the light of the letter from the Minister of Justice. 

It seems to me that if there is only going to be one band (I myself am not convinced that we could not 

have a number of part-time bands) but if it has been found that one full-time band is better than a 

number of part-time bands, I still think there is a good case for having that full-time band located at the 

headquarters and the training centre of the R.C.M.P. After all, Ottawa has a number of military bands, 

and various military establishments which are there, and it would seem that the logical place for a full-

time band, if there is to be only one, is at the headquarters of the R.C.M.P. For that reason, I will support 

the motion and the amendment. 

 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): 
 

Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say one word on this motion. I listened with some interest to the letter 

the Premier just read, and I thought, when opening his remarks, he stated that it was a matter of 

estimates. I read in the paper where the Commissioner at that time had said it was a matter of being 

unable to get trained musicians, and rather than have a second-rate band, it would be of interest to the 

police force to try to 



 

March 19, 1959 

 

 

14 

make at least one first-rate band. I think the Premier has a point when he says the band should possibly 

be located at the headquarters of the R.C.M.P. I would go along with him on that. But that isn‘t what the 

resolution pertains to. The resolution, I think, is in very strong language, because it says ‗we condemn 

. . . ‗ 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — We‘re speaking on the amendment to it, now. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I‘m sorry. If it is amended, then, of course, I am prepared to take a look at it, because 

I don‘t think at this time, with the experience we have had in Ottawa the last few days, we should put 

ourselves out in a position of criticizing anything pertaining to the R.C.M.P., or their activities. 

 

The question being put on the amendment (Hon. Mr. Fines), it was agreed to. 

 

The motion (Mr. Thorson) as amended, was then agreed to unanimously. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o‘clock p.m., without question put. 


