



















































Hansard: March 26, 1959


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session – Thirteenth Legislature 

30th Day 

 

Thursday, March 26, 1959 
 

The House met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

ABOLITION OF CAPITAL PUNISHMENT 
 

The Assembly resumed from Tuesday, March 24, 1959, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 

Mr. Neibrandt: 

 

―That this Assembly, believing that capital punishment is incompatible with Christian concepts of 

justice and the value of human life, and recognizing that the death penalty has not, in practice, had the 

deterrent effect for which it is imposed, recommends that the Government of Saskatchewan request 

the Government of Canada to abolish capital punishment.‖ 

 

Mr. A. Loptson (Saltcoats): 
 

Mr. Speaker, in looking over this resolution, I just wonder why it was ever brought into this Legislature. 

It appears to me that most of us have lived in the peaceful atmosphere of law-abiding citizens for most 

of our lives; at least I have lived for over 65 years in a community, and I cannot recollect a single 

murder during that period in that community, or even in my constituency. In view of this fact, it seems 

that we have not had the experience of dealing with cardinal criminals, or to pass judgment on what 

method should be used in dealing with them, especially in view of the fact that we are asking in this 

resolution to change entirely the method that is and has been used by nations for centuries past. Surely I 

think we are expressing an opinion of rather superior knowledge to over-rule those who have the 

experience of dealing with the subject matter in this resolution. 

 

I venture to say that, if the hon. member for Yorkton (Mr. Neibrandt) or the Minister from Saskatoon 

(Hon. Mr. Sturdy) had had a member of their family a victim of the vicious attack of some of these 

criminals, they would not be asking now for sympathy for them. No, Mr. Speaker, I feel that we have 

little knowledge to pass any reliable judgment on how these people should be punished. I may say there 

is no place for pigeon hearts or pious sentiment in dealing with hardened criminals, such as those 

culprits who will walk into old-age pensioners‘ homes and batter them to death for the few dollars they 

might find on 



 

March 26, 1959 

 

 

2 

the premises. Nor do I think there is any place for pious sympathy for those who allure our teen-age girls 

and boys into a secluded place, and batter or strangle them to death, and throw them into ditches, or 

other places either dead or to die. Nor do I find any room for pious sympathy for those who will walk 

into a bank or other business place and, in cold blood, shoot down members of the staff for what money 

they can gain by their action. Nor can I see any pious sympathy for those who will hire a taxi-driver to 

take them out to the outskirts of the city, or any secluded spot, and knock him over the head for the few 

dollars they might find in his possession. 

 

I feel that this is a serious matter, and it is a matter of our responsibility, and the responsibility of 

authorities, to protect our society against these criminals. There has been something said about capital 

punishment being responsible for not getting convictions by jurors, and I think the hon. Minister from 

Saskatoon indicated that it was hard to get a conviction on a charge of murder, for fear that they might 

be sentenced to death by the judge. That is not exactly the case. A jury, when it finds the accused guilty 

of murder, can by recommending mercy, invariably assure the convicted person of a life sentence. 

Secondly, I understand under our law that if the jury thinks the charge of murder is more severe than the 

facts justify, they can ask for it to be changed to manslaughter, which would carry life imprisonment. 

 

Furthermore, I would like to mention some of the reasons brought out by other authorities after they 

have carried out investigation. The hon. member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron), when speaking here a 

few days ago, referred to a Parliamentary Committee that had been set up by the House of Commons at 

Ottawa as late as 1956. Their report indicated that capital punishment was deterrent to capital crime and, 

therefore, in the interests of the safety of the people, and further, that the provincial Attorney Generals of 

Canada had agreed to this, except the Attorney General for the province of Saskatchewan that expressed 

that opinion, or whether it was the former Attorney General, but in any event, I presume there was more 

political reason for his action in not agreeing with the others than any particular sentiment with the 

matter under consideration, especially since Saskatchewan has a government that is foreign to the 

complex of all other provincial governments. 

 

Then, further, the United Kingdom has probably had more experience in this matter than most other 

countries of the world. It set up a Committee in 1948, which brought down a report in late 1953. I 

understand that, during the period of this investigation, capital punishment was suspended (I may be 

corrected on that). But in any event, at the end of this suspended period, it was not extended, and 

continuation of capital punishment was recommended. Similarly in New Zealand, they suspended 

capital punishment for a period of time, and after that period ran out, they re-imposed capital 

punishment. so the actions of these people ought to be some direction to the Members of this House. No 

member of the British Commonwealth of Nations, as far as I can gather, has abolished capital 

punishment. 

 



 

March 26, 1959 

 

 

3 

Then we have been told that a conviction of murder does always carry with it the capital punishment of 

hanging. That is not the case, as far as the records show, for I have a report by this Royal Commission of 

the United Kingdom to which I referred, that, during the 10 years 1940-49, there were 262 convictions 

in the United Kingdom which carried the death penalty. Out of that number, only 127 executions were 

carried out. I have checked on the Canadian records . . . 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): 
 

At least one of them was an innocent man. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — Yes, but you don‘t care how many innocent men and women were killed by these 

people, either. The Bureau of Statistics indicates that, during the same years, there were some 479 

murder charges laid, 196 death sentences were passed, and only 104 were carried out. 

 

So I say, Mr. Speaker, that this matter is not for the legislature of this province to pass its judgment on. 

A vote for this resolution is an expression of tolerant leniency for capital crimes, and will encourage, 

rather than deter such crimes. There are no records to show that, where capital punishment has been 

abolished, that crime might not have been less than what it is, if the capital punishment had been kept 

on. So, when our hon. friends say that abolition of capital punishment is a deterrent to capital crime, it 

does not hold water. 

 

In view of this, Mr. Speaker, I want to move an amendment to this resolution, because I don‘t want to 

ask the members of this House to reject it entirely, although I think it deserves it, but rather to modify it 

so that it might partly agree with the sponsors of it. The amendment will read as follows, seconded by 

Mr. Danielson: 

 

―That the motion be amended first by deleting the words ‗believing that capital punishment is 

incompatible with Christian concepts of justice and the value of human life, and recognizing that the 

death penalty has not, in practice, had the deterrent effect for which it is imposed‘; 

 

and secondly by deleting all the words after ‗Canada‘ and substituting therefore the words ‗to continue 

to investigate the advisability of abolishing capital punishment, or alternatively, of changing the 

methods of administering them‘. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to add this. In this resolution, where it refers to the Christian concepts of justice – 

that our present system is not consistent with it – it is contrary to the facts. it is the right of everyone to 

defend himself and his family, and this method of prosecuting criminals is, in essence, defending society 

from the attack of criminals. 

 



 

March 26, 1959 

 

 

4 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I had not intended taking any part in this debate, but I think there 

have been some remarks made, both by the member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) and the member 

for Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) that impel me to say just a few words regarding this resolution, and the 

amendment which has now been moved. 

 

The member for Saltcoats said, just now, that the Attorney General of Saskatchewan was the only 

Attorney General who had filed objection to capital punishment with the Parliamentary Committee, and 

this was undoubtedly more for political reasons than for any other. I want to say very frankly, Mr. 

Speaker, that, of course, this is not a political question at all. This is a matter which depends entirely 

upon each individual‘s conscience as he feels regarding this very important question. This is not a 

C.C.F. proposal, or a Liberal or Conservative or Social Credit proposal. I notice in the debate which has 

just finished in the House of Commons at Ottawa, that there were members of different parties on 

different sides. I can remember as far back as 1937 and 1938, a Bill was introduced every year in the 

House of Commons while I was there, moved by Dr. Blair, who was a Liberal member for, I think, 

North Renfrew, and seconded by Mr. Woodsworth, who as at that time leader of the C.C.F. Party. 

Resolutions for the last two years have been moved alternately – one year moved by a Liberal and 

seconded by Mr. Winch, another year moved by Mr. Winch and seconded by a Conservative. If a 

recorded vote were taken in this Legislature, I don‘t think we would be voting on party lines. I am not 

sure that all my colleagues on this side will agree with what I am going to say, or necessarily agree with 

the resolution, and I am not sure that all the people on that side agree with the member for Saltcoats. I 

don‘t think it is a political question at all. It is just a matter of how we feel about this particular matter. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — I agree with the hon. Premier that it should not be a political matter yet. We, as a 

Legislature, have a greater responsibility than an individual outside the Legislature. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Absolutely. But we are discussing this as a Legislature, and because it is much an 

important matter, that is why I was hoping that no political note would be introduced, and that it would 

not be suggested that the Attorney General had opposed capital punishment, as my hon. friend said, for 

political reasons. It was because the majority of the Government so instructed the Attorney General, 

because that was our considered opinion. 

 

In the first place, it is not easy to argue on the basis of what has happened elsewhere, because we have 

not too much information. My hon. friend, for instance, referred to the United Kingdom where, it is true, 

that a Parliamentary Committee was set up to study this matter, and it is true, as he said, when they 

reported back, much the same as our own Parliamentary Committee in Canada, they recommended 

retaining the death penalty. But it is interesting to notice, since the Committee reported in the Parliament 

of Great Britain, that three times a Bill has been passed by a majority vote in the 



 

March 26, 1959 

 

 

5 

House of Commons to abolish the death penalty, and that in all three cases it has been vetoed by the 

House of Lords. If the hon. members read the last issue of Maclean‘s Magazine, the article there written 

by Beverly Baxter, who is a Conservative, and who lead the Conservative wing which broke way from 

the Government to support the Bill to abolish the death penalty, they will have noticed there the 

arguments that he presents. He tells the story of a woman who was accused of murder during the time 

when he was editor of a very large London newspaper, and now presents the evidence to show that, in 

his opinion, she is entirely innocent of the actual murder in which it was claimed she was implicated, 

and that the death penalty was largely passed against her in a mood of revenge and public hysteria, as 

against what was a very careful murder which had taken place. 

 

This is not uncommon. When my friend speaks of the United Kingdom, I can recall, in 1953 in Great 

Britain, the papers were still filled, during the Coronation with a story of a man called Evans, who was 

hanged. It will be remembered that he is claimed to have put to death four or five women and buried 

them in the garden of his little house in London. He was convicted on the evidence, mainly, of one 

witness, and 12 months later that same witness was proved to have been the murderer. The man who 

was then responsible, was of course, put to death. This could not give life back to Evans, and this was 

one of the cases, along with this case of Mrs. Edith Horton, that has helped to sharpen the feeling in 

Great Britain that this is an irrevocable penalty, and that when justice has misfired there is no way by 

which you can rectify this error which has been made. 

 

I think it is rather significant that, three times in the last six years, the members of the House of 

Commons by a majority vote have asked for the abolition of the death penalty. It is rather significant 

that it has been the House of Lords, and the appointed bodies, who have retained it. There are other 

countries in the world, of course, and pretty progressive countries, pretty enlightened countries, who 

have abolished the death penalty, and who maintain it has had no effect insofar as increasing crime or 

making people more careless about the carrying of fire-arms or the taking of human life. 

 

The whole argument, it seems to me, settles around a matter of, first, this question which my friend has 

called, or challenged, by asking that it be struck out, and that is whether or not capital punishment is 

incompatible with Christian concepts of justice and the value of human life. This is not something on 

which people can be dogmatic. Different people have different ideas of what a Christian concept of 

justice is, a Christian concept of the value of human life. I think what the mover has said in this 

resolution is that capital punishment belongs to the old Mosaic idea of ―an eye for an eye; a tooth for a 

tooth‖; that society must take its revenge, and that is if a person has committed a crime, he must be 

punished. But increasingly, the concept of today is that our attitudes to the criminal ought not to be 

penal. They ought, first, to be corrective, and secondly, ought to involve rehabilitation; that, for the sake 

of society, we must take an anti-social person out of circulation, so that he or she cannot continue to hurt 

other members of society, but that having, for the safety of the community, taken him out of circulation, 

we have a responsibility to retrain 



 

March 26, 1959 

 

 

6 

that person and rehabilitate him, in order that he may go back into society at some future time possibly 

as a useful member of society. That is why I have believed for years that our whole Criminal Code ought 

to be altered, and provide for indeterminate sentences. I have never agreed, for instance, with the idea 

that a sex criminal, who has probably criminally assaulted a child, be given three years in jail. Are we 

any more convinced that in five years and one day, it will be that that person is not fit at the end of five 

years to be turned loose in society to hurt some other child. I think a person who is a menace of that sort 

ought to be confined – I think the term the British use is ‗confined at the will and pleasure of Her 

Majesty‘ – and that a panel of psychiatrists, jurors, penologists decide when that individual is safe and 

fit to back into society. That may mean keeping them for not five years, but for 15, 20 or 25 years. 

 

It seems to me that we must have to keep this fact in mind that punishing the individual is not enough, 

because society itself has some responsibility insofar as the individual is concerned. I remember, some 

years ago, when I was a student in Chicago University – in the days when the Al Capone gang-wars 

were going on, there was a young killer who had shot some policemen in a bank robbery and went 

fleeing across the country, and shot several other policemen who tried to capture him. There was a great 

hue and cry. One of the leading Chicago papers had a blazing headline saying, ―Where is Crowley?‖ A 

prominent columnist of that time wrote a column which he headed, ―Why is Crowley?‖ I have never 

forgotten what he said. He said, ―A much more important question than where Crowley is, why is 

Crowley. Why do we get this dangerous young hoodlum who takes human lives?‖ He went back over 

his story – he was the child of an unmarried mother, tossed into an orphanage at 14 years of age, tossed 

out on to the streets, getting into gang wars. At 17, he had two or three convictions for stealing cars and 

breaking and entry. By 19, he had several bank robberies to his credit an by the time he was 21 he had 

already been involved in the shooting of several policemen. The columnist made the point that, while 

this young man is undoubtedly to blame, and must be taken away out of society before he kills anybody 

else, society itself has some responsibility for having produced this diabolical monster. You cannot 

throw youngsters on to the streets at 14. You can not have poor housing and inadequate recreational 

facilities, and the lack of all the formative influences that help to build character and morals, and not pay 

a price for it. It is not enough to simply take a man and break his neck, and say, ―This settles the whole 

question.‖ 

 

We, as members of society, have some responsibility for the fact that he is a criminal. For the 

environment in which we have allowed him to grow up, and the conditions that we have allowed to 

obtain in the community, have certainly played a part in introducing this kind of person. 

 

That is the whole argument which has been presented, both by the member for Maple Creek the other 

day, and by the member for Saltcoats: it rests on this question of whether or not capital punishment is a 

satisfactory deterrent, and that if we remove it we are practically inviting the hardened criminal to have a 

hey-day in the community. I don‘t think any member of this House wants to invite that. 

 



 

March 26, 1959 

 

 

7 

I want to point out that all the arguments which have been presented are exactly the same arguments that 

were presented 100 years ago, and 150 years ago, when reformers were asking for the removal of the 

death penalty for other crimes. 150 years ago, I think the estimate is there were 148 crimes for which 

you could be hanged – robbery, and a whole host of things for which a person could be hanged, and you 

have only to read James Boswell‘s biography, read of him traveling from Edinburgh to Glasgow and 

seeing the bodies of highwaymen hanging in chains along the highway. Did it lessen crime? Was there 

more crime then than there is now? Do you prevent people from committing crimes by having public 

hangings or any kind of hangings, or do you brutalize society so that human life becomes cheap, and 

concern for human welfare becomes negligible? It has never been shown that hanging people is a 

deterrent. There were times when a man stealing sheep, or a footpad steeling a person‘s purse, could be 

hanged. This did not stop robberies; this did not stop purse-snatching. There was more robbery and more 

crime; and there is no evidence to my mind that it has been an advantage, that this is a deterrent. 

 

I was very interested in the report of the debate which has just taken place in Ottawa. This is a 

newspaper report of March 25th, (Canadian Press). I notice the statement made by Margaret Aitken, 

who is the Progressive-Conservative member for York-Humber. She said she was a member of the 

Parliamentary Committee that studied capital punishment, and in 1955 she voted for the retention of 

capital punishment. This is what she said then: 

 

―I must confess that I have changed my mind. The prospect of life imprisonment seems to me to be a 

much more severe punishment than the painless form of death.‖ 

 

I think maybe there is something to be said for that. I am not sure that we have done any good at all by 

having death penalty as a deterrent. To argue, as my friend has done here this afternoon, that we are 

trying to set ourselves up as knowing more than everybody else by suggesting that we should not 

question what is being done and has been done for years, would just be as silly as saying we question 

slavery, that John Howard should not have questioned the condition of the gaols, and the people 150 

years ago should not have questioned the idea of capital punishment for purse-snatching. 

 

Mr. Loptson: — That‘s nonsense. 

 

Premier Douglas: — People‘s concepts of human propriety change from generation to generation, and 

surely it is not enough to say that we have been hanging people for hundreds of years, and that anybody 

who thinks we should stop it, is now setting up themselves as being insincere. 

 

To me, there is one much more compelling reason why I would like to see capital punishment abolished. 

It‘s not out of sympathy to the hardened criminal. I am against capital punishment because of what I 

think 



 

March 26, 1959 

 

 

8 

it does to society. I don‘t think that you can provide a deterrent against murder by society itself 

becoming a murderer. The mere fact that we collectively come together as a group to put a man to death, 

does not lessen the act that we have murdered somebody. We have done it with all the rigmarols of the 

law, but we have still taken a human life, and I think every time we take a human life we debase and 

brutalize the society which performs the act. I think society is a little less human, little less humane, and 

has lost a little of its gleam of immortality every time collectively it participates in the act of taking a 

human life. It is all right to talk about this thing in the abstract, but I can remember we had a couple of 

boys, 19 and 21 out at the gaol, and we were going to have to put them to death, and the long struggle 

we had to try to get it commuted to a life sentence. Finally the boy of 19 had a life sentence commuted, 

and the other boy of 21 was put to death. 

 

This is an awful thing, to have to be part of a society that takes a young man out at 21 years of age, early 

some morning, and deliberately breaks his neck. I think by doing it, we have not deterred anybody else; 

we have cut off his life, so that, if our information was wrong and he was not guilty, we remove any 

opportunity to rectify the situation. Above all, we have collectively done something which, I think, 

leaves us a little less the kind of people that we want to have in a Christian society. For that reason I 

think we ought to be prepared to take this step forward, as they have done in so many other countries, 

and abolish capital punishment. 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): 
 

Mr. Speaker, I don‘t intend to take up very much of the time of the House, this afternoon, in dealing 

with the question which is before us; but I do feel I would like to say a few words with regard to the 

resolution, which would ask the members of the Assembly gathered here to recommend to the 

Government of Canada that capital punishment be abolished. 

 

In 1954, I had the opportunity of attending the General Council of the United Church of Canada, and the 

opportunity of hearing men in the field of Christian work, those who have been educated in Christian 

work in this country in one of our largest church bodies, debate the issue as to whether capital 

punishment should be abolished or not. I don‘t think, after listening to the arguments of that assembly of 

some 1,000 people, representing both the ministerial level and the lay level of the United Church of 

Canada, that there were many who had their minds changed, one way or the other, as to whether capital 

punishment should be abolished in this country. But when the vote was held at that particular council, 

there was a majority of three of all the delegates present that voted in favour of abolishing capital 

punishment. The Minister who was chairman of the meeting stated he felt that a body of that type should 

not send a recommendation to the Government of Canada, with a small majority, or a statement saying 

that only slightly over 50 per cent of all those gathered, representing one of the greatest churches in this 

country, had recommended that capital punishment be abolished. So it was decided by the Assembly 

that that recommendation not be forwarded to the Government of 



 

March 26, 1959 

 

 

9 

Canada, because it was felt that it might not, under the circumstances, represent the true feeling of the 

membership of the United Church of Canada across the country. 

 

I can well appreciate the view of both the Premier and also the member for Saltcoats, because of the fact 

that here at this Council which I had the opportunity to attend, I heard men speak on both sides of the 

question, and ministers of the United Church, men who, I believe, have a true realization of Christian 

principles, men who were leaders of the Christian church right across this country, but who differed 

personally in their views as to whether or not Christian ethics definitely pointed out that capital 

punishment should be abolished in this country of ours. So I cannot myself say that, except perhaps in 

my own mind, whether I would believe, or whether the people of Canada would believe, or whether the 

majority of those who take part in Christian teachings actually believe that Christian ethics prevent us 

from carrying out protective force for the well-being of the general public in our country as a whole. 

 

So I say here today, that I feel that the amendment which has been offered to the Legislature, still places 

the question before the public; still permits further investigation of this question which might eventually, 

if it is found to be in the best interests of the people of Canada, mean a change in the law in relationship 

to capital punishment in this country. So this afternoon, I feel, for that reason, I would have to support 

the amendment, although with regard to the question of capital punishment itself, there is no doubt, as 

the Premier has stated, there are strong arguments both for the abolition of capital punishment and its 

retention. 

 

I would also like to point out that one of the examples used by the Premier with regard to the fact that in 

many cases, in murder trials, mob violence or the wishes of the majority of the people that want revenge, 

quite often enters into the picture; but I don‘t think that particularly in the last number of years, in 

Canada you would find many examples of this mass hysteria that has led to the execution of anyone who 

has been convicted for the crime of murder, largely because I believe that the people of our country have 

a greater sense of the importance of justice in our country, and are not the type who will go out to try to 

use this type of pressure on the courts of this land in order to see someone put to death for an act which 

he might have undertaken. I don‘t think you will find that that circumstance has existed in the court 

annals of this country to the same extent is has in other countries of the world, where things of the same 

nature have taken place. 

 

I do believe, in deference to the views of the Premier, that there definitely is proof in many cases, in may 

of the stories in criminal annals, that the death penalty has been a deterrent to the criminal who might 

otherwise have committed murder, except for the fact that he had facing him this fact that he might have 

meted out to him death on the gallows by the responsible government of the country in which he lived. 

So I would say, as the member for Saltcoats has said here, that I believe we, as others in this country, 

should undertake further study. 

 



 

March 26, 1959 

 

 

10 

Therefore have been examples of errors that have taken place across the seas, but I believe that, as far as 

Canadian court annals are concerned, there has yet to be an example of a case here someone has been 

committed to the gallows and has been an innocent individual. There was a rumour for a while, this past 

year, that the first case might take place, but it was finally wiped out by the fact that the story of the 

individual concerned, as far as the law enforcement bodies are concerned, was proved false. That would 

have been, had it proved correct, the first time in the annals of legal history in this country when it had 

definitely been proven that someone was put to death for a crime that he had cont committed. So we 

have not the same example to go by that the people of Britain have had, in the annals of their court 

justice. I think it is for the reason that we have sufficient safeguards in our laws, as was stated by the 

member for Saltcoats. I believe we had sufficient safeguards to prevent occurrences of that type, and to 

see to it that proper justice is meted out, according to the laws of our country. 

 

Of course, our Federal Government has the final authority – not the courts of the land. After the courts 

of the land have decided, it is still the prerogative of the representatives of the Queen in this country, to 

finally decide whether or not a person should be put to the gallows for the crime he has committed. I 

think the protections that we have for those who break the law at the present time, are sufficient until 

such time as further study can bring certainty to the minds of the majority of the people, at least. At the 

same time as we are safeguarding the rights of the individual who has committed the crime we have to 

be sure that we are sufficiently safeguarding the rights of others in the country; that we are safeguarding 

those who have the responsibility for undertaking the protection of the people, as police officials in this 

country. Until we have sufficiently proven that to the satisfaction of the majority, in the meantime we 

have, I believe, sufficient safeguards to protect those who would carry out acts of the type we are 

discussing in the Legislature under this resolution. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with those words I am going to say now that I feel, for those reasons, I will have to 

support the amendment. 

 

Hon. T.J. Bentley (Minister of Social Welfare): 
 

Mr. Speaker, I just wish to say a word or two. The evidence in support of both sides is so confusing that 

one, as the Premier said, must depend upon his own feelings and conscience to decide what is right and 

what is wrong. I must confess that, until not so very many years ago, after a prolonged and, I suppose, 

what might be called a misspent life in some respects, I did not support the idea of capital punishment. 

One reason was that at that time I believed it would be a deterrent; and the other reason, I suppose, I was 

prompted by the very human feeling that if somebody murdered a friend or relative of mine that I would 

want to have revenge. Those were the opening statements of my friend from Saltcoats, if I heard him 

correctly, this afternoon. He suggested that any member of this Legislature who had a member of his 

family murdered would feel that he would want the murder dealt with in the way he recommended. 

That, of course, Mr. Speaker, is prompted by revenge. 

 



 

March 26, 1959 

 

 

11 

Mr. Loptson: — Mr. Speaker, I never passed any judgment as to the methods of dealing with a person 

who had committed such an act. I said that the members who moved this motion might not have the 

same pious feeling towards the criminal, as they have now, if a member of the family was a victim. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley: — I accept the correction, Mr. Speaker. The inference, however, is there – and again 

I am not holding this against anyone because I recognize that this is probably a feeling held by many 

people that we would want the one who wronged us to pay retribution. However, I do think, in the 

studies I have tried to make and the reading I have tried to do on this matter, that there is a good deal of 

evidence to support the belief that much of the desire to retain capital punishment stems from the desire 

of the individual, or society as a whole, to exact revenge for a wrong done one of its members. 

 

Looking at it the other way, in assuming that one of us were afflicted this way, and, therefore, had these 

feelings, I think if we waited a while, or as they told us when we were young – ―count 10 before you 

lose your temper‖; if we counted to maybe 1,000 or 10,000 we might conclude that the execution of the 

offender, while it may satisfy some feelings, would leave us with a terrible feeling of sympathy and 

regret for the members of his family – his father and mother, his sisters and brothers, his wife and 

children (if he had any) and his circle of close friends who have to live with the knowledge that one of 

their family or close circle of friends, offended society and was hanged. That is a terrible thing to live 

with. 

 

I notice that mention was made by previous speakers or the member who preceded on that side of the 

House of what had been done in the House of Commons examination. I have here a report of that, and 

the last paragraph does do the very thing that the hon. member for Saltcoats suggested in his 

amendment. This is three years old; it was printed in June, 1956. Their recommendation No. 94 was: 

 

―The Committee concluded the most satisfactory method of execution is by electrocution, and 

accordingly recommends the law be amended to replace hanging by electrocution . . .‖ 

 

It does go on to say that if the electric chair has some of the bad effects that some people say it has, then 

further consideration should be given to substitute the gas chamber as a method of execution. So all that 

the amendment which the member for Saltcoats moved this afternoon is, to examine alternative methods 

of execution. 

 

Again in this I find (I am reading here from the Votes and Proceedings of the House of Commons, 

Ottawa, Wednesday, June 27, 1956): Chapter 21, Statistics on Incidence of Murder and Homicide: 

 

―The Committee carefully considered, during the course of its enquiry, statistical material relating to 

the incidence of murder and homicide in Canada and other countries. The Committee concluded there 

are gaps in Canadian statistics which cannot be filled up, 



 

March 26, 1959 

 

 

12 

and from the evidence presented to it assumes that apart from the United Kingdom with a few other 

jurisdictions, this lack of complete statistical data is common to most countries.‖ 

 

So, therefore, it can be assumed again, that a person will be influenced by the statistics he reads 

according to the beliefs he has arrived at. I note there are a number of bodies. There is, of course, the 

National Campaign for the Abolition of Capital Punishment – this is from the old country. They give 

statements here about the number of countries, and some states of the United States, where capital 

punishment has been abolished. They produce evidence to indicate, so far as their statistics are 

concerned that there is as much support for the belief that capital punishment is not a deterrent as there 

is for the other side, and, in their opinion, more. 

 

I want to mention another point. The hon. member for Saltcoats indicated his belief that the previous 

Attorney General, made his feelings known to the Federal Government during this investigation I was 

speaking of a moment ago, for political reasons. That was hardly a fair statement, and I don‘t think it can 

be supported by the facts, because a great many people, who are not supporters of the C.C.F. either here 

or elsewhere, certainly have made representations along the same lines. The Canadian Welfare Council, 

which I expect cuts across all political parties and possible has among its membership people who are 

not very strong supporters of any political party but have great humanitarian instincts and desires. They 

made a submission to the Joint Committee of the Senate in the House of Commons against capital 

punishment. But I think the most convincing evidence, for myself (again I am not going to argue the two 

sides from a point of view of statistics) is that we do know there are a tremendous number of countries 

that have abolished capital punishment by statute, and some, including Denmark, who had had no 

executions long before they made the formal abolition. 

 

The Royal Commission on capital punishment in 1949-53 in Britain was headed by a gentleman by the 

name of Sir Ernest Gowers. Since then he has written a book called ―A Life for a Life – Capital 

Punishment.‖ He was, as I say, the chairman of the Royal Commission on capital punishment during 

that time. He wrote a book. It would be interesting, if I had the time and you had the patience if I read it 

all through to put it on the record, but it can always be available to anybody who cares to read it. I would 

like to read the latter parts of it – starting on page 135, and all through the book he has pointed out that, 

prior to the time he became the Chairman of this Commission, he had believed that capital punishment 

was probably right. If he had any firm convictions at all, it was on the side of capital punishment; and it 

was only during the hearing of the evidence that he finally changed his mind. He changed his mind on 

the rational rather than the emotional aspects of it. For instance, he says: 

 



 

March 26, 1959 

 

 

13 

―Even though the dogma of life for a life may settle the question for those who believe in it, and make 

utilitarian reasons superfluous, the rational arguments will no doubt continue to be much stronger. As I 

have said, they are felt to be much more respectable than the emotional ones. It is clear from the 

opinions cited in previous chapters, that the principal rational arguments used in favor of the death 

penalty are four. One is that public opinion demands it. (2) is that to punish all murderers by 

imprisonment, some of them for a very long time, will present insuperable difficulties to the prison 

authorities. (3) that death is a more humane punishment that long imprisonment, and (4) if the 

deterrent effect of the death penalty were removed, more murders would be committed.‖ 

 

Then he goes on, page 137, to say: 

 

―There remains the argument that without the more uniquely deterrent value of capital punishment, 

more murders would be committed, this is the only serious utilitarian argument in favour of capital 

punishment, and the one on which thoughtful supporters of it almost wholly rely. 

 

It is also the argument that can be put most readily to the test of evidence in the proper sense of the 

word, and, as we have seen, such evidence as there is goes to show that the abolition of capital 

punishment does not have this result.‖ 

 

Than he goes on to quote Professor Sellin who also gave evidence before the Canadian Joint Committee 

of the Senate and the House of Commons, and Professor Sellin gave a good deal of evidence to support 

his theory. 

 

It is true, again I have to admit, these things are not convincing to those who do not believe them. They 

did not convince, completely, anyway, the British people. It has not convinced our Canadian Joint 

Committee, and therefore, our Canadian Parliament. But they do convince a lot of us and I am among 

those. With all the argument that can be produced to rationalize thinking one way or another, I still think 

there is something left to the conscience of the person who is trying to make up his or her mind, and 

mine has convinced me that it is wrong to take a life, whether I do it illegally or later on, whether I do it 

to the person who has done it illegally, as a member of society, in the name of the law. The evidence that 

supports the 



 

March 26, 1959 

 

 

14 

abolition from a rational point of view, I think, is excellent evidence and support for my feelings of 

emotion (if you like, Mr. Speaker) that I call my conscience, in trying to decide between right and 

wrong. Because of that I am, this afternoon, doing my utmost to convince as many members of this 

Legislative Assembly, when they vote on this question, to defeat the deferring effects of these 

amendments and to vote for the resolution proper. 

 

Mrs. Mary J. Batten (Humboldt): 
 

Mr. Speaker, I had no intention of speaking on this motion whatsoever, because I have to admit, first of 

all, that I am emotionally biased for the motion in the sense of the effect of the motion. I hate to even 

think of the idea of a human life being taken, and I think that applies to most of us. 

 

At the same time, I have absolutely no intellectual conviction one way or the other, simply because I 

have not studied the problem sufficiently, and I am not sure, even someone has spent years studying it, 

that, on a purely rational basis, any decision could be reached. 

 

I want to say, though, in regard to the humanity of the punishment that I, and I have no doubt other 

members of this House, have seen people who were imprisoned, who were suffering almost beyond 

human endurance. I have seen grown men shaking the bars in the waiting room where you interview 

them in the gaol, with tears running down their cheeks, and saying, ―I wish they would shoot me, rather 

than keep me here‖ – not because our gaols are not as humane as they can possible be, but because the 

make-up of some people is such that merely to be shut up in a cell, or even kept within certain bounds, is 

just beyond their way of living. They simply cannot tolerate that kind of enclosure, and for myself I 

would rather than be imprisoned, accept personally the penalty of death. At the same time, I don‘t think 

there are very many of us who heard the words of the mover of this motion, who did not find it very 

difficult to listen to the details of an execution, and I think all of us are horrified at the idea of taking a 

human life. 

 

I think emotionally we have become civilized, and I think we are at the point where taking a human life 

is something that we cannot even picture ourselves doing. I think there is not one person in this House 

who would not hope, if a choice came to him or her either to surrender his life or take another‘s life in 

self-defence, that he would have the Christian courage to accept death rather than kill the other person. 

But in actual practice, Mr. Speaker, how many of us could be capable of such heroic self-sacrifice? 

Surely almost all Christian ethics do permit the taking of another life in self-defence! I don‘t see how we 

can remove ourselves from all the emotional implications in a question of this kind, and I resent the fact 

that we are put in the position where we have to make a choice of this kind. 

 

I think this is a problem that should face very citizen of every country, because it is, after all, on these 

citizens the decision depends as to whether we have capital punishment or not. I do not think this is a 

decision which should face me, as a legislator, or anybody else 



 

March 26, 1959 

 

 

15 

in this House, because it is not our responsibility as a legislative body, although, as I said, it is our 

responsibility as citizens. Therefore, even if this motion is passed, what does it mean, Mr. Speaker? 

What does it mean to the Federal House? It means that we, as individuals, a certain number of us are 

prejudiced against capital punishment, and some of us think that we should have capital punishment. It 

doesn‘t give any sort of guidance to the Federal House whatsoever, and I personally feel that I am in no 

position to represent my constituency on a matter of this kind. I am certain that I could not speak for all 

of them, and I think that is true of every other person in this House. I could only speak for myself, 

personally, and I simply could not justify any type of vote on this question. 

 

Therefore, I have to support the amendment first because at least it gives us an opportunity to look 

further into the matter, and to have competent people study the matter further. Secondly, I do not think I 

could possibly vote in favour of this motion, not because it condemns capital punishment – I could go 

along with that; but I could not vote for it because it also says that capital punishment is incompatible 

with Christian concepts of justice and the value of human life. By voting that way, I am condemning all 

those people who don‘t believe with me as being unChristian. I cannot imagine the arrogance that would 

accompany that type of vote. I cannot say, as a matter of statistics or as a matter of any known scientific 

analysis, that this death penalty has not had a deterrent effect. I simply don‘t know. In all humility, I 

have to admit that I cannot vote for the motion on that basis. 

 

The amendment (Mr. Loptson) was negatived on record division by 29 votes against 10. 

 

The motion (Mr. Neibrandt) was then agreed to, on division. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:40 o‘clock p.m. 


