



















































Hansard: March 04, 1959


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

15th Day 

 

Wednesday, March 4, 1959 

 

The House met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

CORRECTION 

 

Hon. R. A. Walker (Attorney General): – Mr. Speaker, I cited some figures for the provinces of 

Ontario, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia and Manitoba – figures for the deficit which they estimated to 

have in the current fiscal year, and inadvertently my eye went to the wrong column of figures I was 

reading. I would like to correct the record by saying that Nova Scotia will be $12,720,000; New 

Brunswick, $1,020,000; Ontario, $176 million; and Manitoba, $22,670,000. Those are the deficits which 

are expected this year. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. F. A. Dewhurst (Wadena): – Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I 

would like to draw to the attention of this House the group of students which is in the west public 

gallery. They are the Grade VIII students from Wynyard, along with two of their very capable teachers, 

Mr. Minken and Mr. Washenfelder. 

 

Those students are here today to take in the proceedings of the Legislature, this afternoon. They have 

also had the opportunity, this morning, I understand, of visiting the Police Barracks, and are later this 

afternoon planning to visit the Museum. One of their teachers told me they wish to thank the 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company for arranging all the details of their trip. After chartering a bus 

from the Saskatchewan Transportation Company and telling them of the plans for the day, the 

Transportation Company arranged all the details of the trip. I would like to welcome them to the 

Chamber this afternoon, and hope their stay is a pleasant one, and that they will long remember their 

visit to the Legislative Chamber during Education Week, 1959. 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 

2 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed from Tuesday, March 3, 1959, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 

the Hon. Mr. Fines: That Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair (The Assembly to go into the Committee 

of Supply). 

 

Hon. C. G. Willis (Minister of Public Works): – Mr. Speaker, I find it very remarkable that the 

Opposition‟s financial critic, the member for Maple Creek, did not make his usual attack on the Crown 

Corporations. Neither did the member for Melville, who spoke yesterday. This is quite a change from 

the good old days of throwing the Crown Corporations out the window. All the members of the 

Opposition used to indulge in this sport. In fact, the more Crown Corporations a person could throw out 

the window in a given time, the higher he was regarded by his colleagues in the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Loptson: – You have already thrown out more than half of them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis: – I did not believe the day would come when tossing Crown Corporations out of the 

window would fail as a sport for the members of the Opposition; however, nowadays it is becoming 

more difficult to treat our public enterprises lightly. 

 

Mr. Loptson: – None left. 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis: – The facts and figures presented by the Provincial Treasurer in his Budget Address 

prove our Crown Corporations are growing up and are playing an important part in our economy. We 

were informed, in the Budget Address, regarding Crown Corporations in 1958, that the total volume of 

business transacted by the thirteen public enterprises had risen to $71 millions; that the number of 

workers employed that year by our Crown Corporations stood at 5,500; that the salary and wage bill in 

1958 was $21 million; . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson: – Practically all Telephones and Power. 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis: – . . . that taxes paid to municipalities amounted to $564 thousand, and that royalties 

paid to the public treasury were more than $578,000. Surely, Mr. Speaker, this is an impressive record. 

It is no wonder that the member for Maple Creek, and the member for Melville refuse to try their hand at 

tossing. You don‟t lightly toss $71 million worth of business out the window. Neither is employment for 

5,500 people to be disregarded in these days of mass unemployment. The province‟s economy would 

miss an annual payroll of $21 million. 

 

The Provincial Treasurer further reported that the two major Crown Corporations, Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation, and Saskatchewan Government Telephones, had gross surpluses of $12,672,000 in 1958, 

compared with $10,757,000 in 1957. Gross surpluses of the other eleven 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 
3 

Corporations amounted to $1,284,000. This $1,284,000 of gross revenue for the smaller Crown 

Corporations represents a return of 14 per cent on the Government‟s outstanding investment in these 

businesses at the end of 1958. Surely, this is indeed an impressive record. A return of 14 per cent should 

be sufficient in itself to convince the members opposite that these enterprises should not be thrown out 

the window. 

 

Mr. Loptson: – They are supposed to produce – not be for profit! 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis: – In former years, one of the main reasons for tossing these corporations out the 

window was the deficit shown by the shoe factory, the woollen mill, etc. 

 

Mr. Danielson: – That is just some of them! 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis: – However, this year, only one Crown Corporation ended in the red, with 

Saskatchewan Government Airways reporting a deficit of $19,701. 

 

In regard to losses, it is interesting to note that the accumulated deficit of all Crown Corporations over 

all their years of operation amounted to $1,929,000 up until December 31 last. But over the same period, 

the Crown Corporations (with the exception of Power and Telephones) had accumulated a surplus of 

$11,268,394. Surpluses of $11,268,000 minus deficits of $1,929,000 leave an over-all surplus of 

$9,339,000 turned over to the provincial treasury for budgetary purposes by our smaller Crown 

Corporations. This is certainly an impressive record when one considers this net surplus of $9,339,000 is 

large enough to pay off the total amount of advances outstanding to the account of these Crown 

Corporations, as at December 31st last. 

 

One notes from the Summary on page 11 of the Budget Address regarding these Crown Corporations 

that one, namely the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office, had no advances debited to it. Upon 

checking back, we find the Government Insurance Office was started on its way with an initial advance 

of $12,000 from the treasury, in 1945. The Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office has prospered 

until today, 14 years later, total assets of almost $15 million have been built up. In the words of one of 

the earlier Annual Reports put out by the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office: “There are few, 

if any, instances in the history of insurance to equal this accomplishment.” With this rapid advance, 

today the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office has become one of the largest insurance 

companies west of Toronto. 

 

Because the S.G.I.O. was not thrown out the window, employment was provided for 365 persons, with a 

payroll in 1958 of $1,078,000, and an additional 600 people throughout the province acted as 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office agents, receiving $800,000 in commissions during this past 

year. A surplus of $427,027, earned by the Corporation in 1958 was turned over to the Government to 

bolster its revenue. This amount of $427,000 has raised the total revenue turned over to the Provincial 

Government since the corporation‟s inception to $2,941,910. This profit of almost $3 million, from one 

of the province‟s Crown Corporations, would in itself pay 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 

4 

the total losses of all the Crown Corporations since 1944, and leave a balance of over $1 million besides. 

 

Cash reserves of almost $10.5 million have been built up, and are being used almost exclusively for 

investments in the province‟s school, hospital and municipal debentures. Here is certainly an 

outstanding example of successful public enterprise. 

 

Yet the figures obtainable from its annual reports, while accenting that remarkable success, only tell part 

of the story, and that a minor part, of what the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office has meant to 

the people of this province. In a period of rising replacement and construction costs, Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance Office is steadily reducing its fire insurance rates throughout the province. Here 

in Regina, 1947 fire insurance rates charged by the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office were 75 

cents a $100 based on a three year coverage. In 1950, the Government Insurance reduced that 75 cents to 

50 cents per $100 of coverage, a reduction of 53 per cent in fire insurance rates here in the city of 

Regina, in a period when most other costs were spiralling. 

 

What makes this reduction even more outstanding is that the 1959 policy has a broader coverage than 

that of 1947. On a province-wide basis, this reduction in rates brought about by Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance means a savings, not only to those who purchase Government Insurance, but to 

everyone who takes out fire insurance in Saskatchewan, for other companies in order to sell insurance 

here have had to be competitive and sell at comparable rates. 

 

News releases made last year by the Canadian Underwriters‟ Association and the Western Canada 

Underwriters‟ Association indicated that effective January 1st, 1959, there would be a „slight‟ reduction 

in the fire dwelling rates in Saskatchewan, and a substantial increase in other areas. The slight reduction 

in Saskatchewan rates was due, so it was claimed, to the better fire loss experience in this province. Mr. 

Speaker, I would suggest that the reason board companies‟ rates are lower in this province than in our 

neighbouring provinces is not because of a better fire experience in Saskatchewan but because of the 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office here. 

 

I have here in my hand rate sheets from the Western Canada Underwriters‟ Association showing the 

various rates charged in Saskatchewan, Alberta and Manitoba. At the bottom of the page it says 

„Revised effective January 1, 1959‟. The page is headed – “Minimum Tariff A – Three-Year Basis 

Rates” and below that: (a) Dwellings situate in Manitoba and Alberta, for all classes of construction – 

Building 70¢, Contents 75¢. The next heading says: “Dwellings situate in Saskatchewan” – all classes of 

construction – Building 40¢, Contents 45¢. In Manitoba and Alberta the rate is 70¢ per $100 on a three-

year basis. Here in Saskatchewan, the rate in 40¢ per $100. 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 
5 

For purposes of comparison on a personal basis let us apply these rates to two different communities – 

one in Saskatchewan, near the Manitoba border and the other in Manitoba just east of the border. 

Fleming, on No. 1 Highway, is situated just three miles from Kirkella, Manitoba. These places are well 

known to the Leader of the Opposition, as Fleming is in the Moosomin constituency; but, Mr. Speaker, I 

don‟t know whether the member for Moosomin is so well aware of the savings that his constituents, as 

well as other Saskatchewan residents, have made because of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance 

Office. 

 

In Kirkella, Manitoba, taking an average policy and applying the rates set up under the Western Canada 

Underwriters‟ Association, we find that on a building insured for $5,000 at 70¢ per $100 a person pays 

$35. Say the contents are insured for $2,000 at 75¢ per $100, at a cost of $15, he pays a total premium of 

$50. 

 

Just three miles west of Kirkella, in Fleming, Saskatchewan, for the identical coverage a resident would 

pay a rate of 40¢ per $100, or $20 to insure his buildings for $5,000: and 45¢ per $100, or $9 to insure 

the contents for $2,000 – a total premium of $29. In Manitoba – $50 ; in Saskatchewan, for identical 

coverage, because of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance, $29. A $21 saving, Mr. Speaker, directly 

attributable to the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office. 

 

Government Members: – Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis: – Here is a saving of 42% in insurance costs for Saskatchewan residents. Mr. Speaker, 

there has been a good deal of loose talk in this Chamber of government action contributing to the 

increased costs of the residents of Saskatchewan. That this is loose talk is shown by figures such as this. 

 

The same type of savings is available to farmers taking out fire insurance. Another page of these rate 

sheets lists those rates applicable to farm dwellings. Again this is put out by the Western Canada 

Underwriters‟ Association. At the bottom of the page it says – „Revised, December 1958‟ – and reads – 

“Farm Tariff Rates – for rates applicable to farm property situate in Manitoba, Alberta and the 

Northwest Territories, apply rates provided under rating Groups “A” and “B” hereunder” – and under 

the next heading: “Saskatchewan – Deduct 20% from the Final Fire Rates provided under rating Group 

“A” and “B”.” Here again the farmers of Saskatchewan benefit as to lower rates in comparison with 

farmers in Manitoba and Alberta because of action taken by this Government. 

 

The 1957 Report of the Superintendent of Insurance for the province of Saskatchewan shows that the 

total volume of Fire premiums written in Saskatchewan amounted to approximately $7,800,000. If we 

assume that fire rates in Saskatchewan are 20% lower than they are in Manitoba (and 20%, Mr. Speaker, 

from these rate figures I have given certainly would be a conservative estimate) – if we assume that rates 

are 20% lower than would be the case out for the influence of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 

6 

Office, then we can estimate the savings on fire insurance premiums paid by Saskatchewan residents in 

1957 to be $1,950,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just as everyone carries fire insurance to protect himself from loss of his buildings, so it is 

becoming just as necessary for motorists to have automobile insurance as protection against the every-

increasing hazards of operating a car. Here again, Saskatchewan through its compulsory insurance under 

the Automobile Accident Insurance Act, and the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office, provides 

a service which means a substantial saving to Saskatchewan motorists, when compared with Alberta or 

Manitoba motorists. 

 

I have here automobile rate comparisons – first for Manitoba, second for Alberta and third, farm truck 

insurance premium rates for Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta. The automobile rate comparisons are 

made on a 1956 standard model Chevrolet or Ford; the applicant is 25 years of age or over; has had no 

accidents in the past three years; has held a driver‟s permit for the past three years also; and finally, no 

male drivers under 25 – (Class 1A – Vehicle Rating Group 2). 

 

Comparisons of coverage show the coverage in Saskatchewan to include both the License Insurance and 

the Package Policy. In Saskatchewan we have „Injury Compensation without Regard to Fault – Limit 

$10,000.‟ This is not provided in the standard policy for Manitoba, nor any other province other than 

Saskatchewan; “Bodily Injury Liability” from $60,000 to $120,000 in the Saskatchewan coverage, while 

in Manitoba, $50,000 to $100,000 is provided. „Property Damage‟ of $10,000 in both cases; „Collision‟ 

– $50 deductible in both cases; „Plate Glass‟ – $50 deductible in Saskatchewan, $25 deductible in the 

case of Alberta, and Manitoba. These coverages are as nearly similar as is possible under the 

circumstances, with the advantage probably being in favour of the Saskatchewan coverage. 

 

In comparing the rates we find the similarity ends. Here in Saskatchewan, on a 1956 standard model 

Chevrolet or Ford passenger car, used for pleasure only, a resident of Saskatoon, Regina or Moose Jaw 

would pay $60 for his insurance. In Manitoba, a resident of Brandon would pay $72, while a resident of 

Winnipeg would pay $69 and a resident of northern Manitoba would pay $105. In Saskatchewan, apart 

from the three larger cities, motorists obtaining their license insurance plus the package policy would 

pay $47 for this coverage; but in rural Manitoba, outside of Winnipeg and Brandon, they would pay $67; 

in Saskatchewan $47. That is an increase of 43% over Saskatchewan. 

 

If the same model was used for business and pleasure, in Saskatoon, Regina, or Moose Jaw the rates go 

up to $63, but in Brandon they go up to $108, and in Winnipeg $107. In the remainder of the province of 

Saskatchewan, a motorist, using this same model for business and pleasure would pay $49; while in 

rural Manitoba, $100 – just double the cost. 

 

Let us compare the rates in Alberta with those of Saskatchewan. For the same coverage, in 

Saskatchewan we have $60 for the three larger cities; in Edmonton, Alberta, $91; in Calgary $80, and in 

Lethbridge, $79.79. In the remainder of Saskatchewan outside the three 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 
7 

larger cities, $47 as mentioned previously; in Alberta, outside their three larger cities, $97.54. Imagine, 

Mr. Speaker, a person living in Lloydminster, which marks the boundary between Saskatchewan and 

Alberta. In Saskatchewan he gets his insurance for $47, while his Alberta neighbour, living directly 

across the street, must pay $97.54 for the same coverage. 

 

If this 1956 Ford or Chevrolet passenger car were used for business and pleasure in the three larger cities 

in Saskatchewan, the amount to be paid would be $63 as mentioned previously, but in Edmonton $141; 

in Calgary $124 and in Lethbridge $118. In the rest of Saskatchewan, $49, while in Alberta, apart from 

the three larger cities, not $49 but $144.62. 

 

Now let us take a look at Farm Truck insurance premiums. For a 1956 one-ton farm truck (no drivers 

under 25 years of age, Group (3)), the standard policy coverage in Manitoba or Alberta is exactly the 

same as for passenger cars, except in this case the collision is $25 deductible in Alberta, Manitoba and 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Basic Rates (Class A) 3-Yr. No-Claim Rate – in Saskatchewan we would pay $8 under the 

compulsory feature of the Automobile Accident Insurance Act, $2 for the Operator‟s License and $15 

for the Package Policy, or a total insurance premium on this 1956 one-ton farm truck of $25; while in 

rural Manitoba, not $25 but $38.20. In rural Alberta, the premium is still higher – $54.92. If the person 

in Saskatchewan is not eligible for a no-claim discount he would have to pay $31 for this insurance, but 

in Manitoba he would have to pay $52.96 and in rural Alberta $76.30. And yet, Mr. Speaker, the people 

opposite say that the Government of Saskatchewan is contributing to our cost-price squeeze. In a 

comparison of the rates which I have just given, with those of Manitoba (which is the most favourable to 

Saskatchewan) it would be reasonable to say that Saskatchewan rates are at least 40% lower than those 

of Manitoba. 

 

Again referring to the Annual Report of the Superintendent of Insurance for the Province of 

Saskatchewan, the total automobile premiums written in Saskatchewan, including the compulsory 

insurance, amounted to $8,983,000. If we assume the saving to have been not 40% but rather 25%, then 

the appropriate saving in dollars to residents of Saskatchewan would be $2,994,000 in 1957. These two 

savings, $3 million in automobile and $2 million in fire, on actual insurance in force in Saskatchewan, 

would constitute an indirect saving to Saskatchewan residents of $5 million for one year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our S.G.I.O. has proven its value many times over. It is one of the public enterprises 

operated by and for the people of Saskatchewan which in the past, Opposition members would “throw 

out the window.” The people of Saskatchewan would like to know where the Opposition members now 

stand regarding our Crown Corporations. Have the views of the Opposition members re Crown 

Corporations changed or do they still favour disposing of these business? These are, I realize, academic 

questions; but they are questions which the people of this province would like to have answered by the 

Opposition. Furthermore, the people are entitled to know. 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 

8 

Mr. McDonald: – Tell us about Public Works! 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis: – Because this position has not been stated to date in this Legislature, I challenge the 

members opposite to make their position clear at this Session of the Legislature. Surely the Opposition is 

not lacking in courage or in leadership in this regard. 

 

Now I would like to discuss briefly the program for my Department, the Department of Public Works. 

 

Mr. McDonald: – Hear! Hear! It‟s about time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis: – Our capital estimates to be voted by the Legislature amount to $5,750,000 – a 

reduction of $750,000 from the $6.5 million voted last year. Considering that reimbursements from the 

Federal Government will be up this year from $180,000 to $682,000, or an increase of $500,000, our 

actual expenditure on capital will be $6,432,000 – down only $248,000 from the current year‟s 

expenditures. 

 

Public Works estimates on Ordinary Expenditure are up from last year‟s $2,289,410 to $2,417,880 – 

hence the total Public Works estimates on both Capital and Ordinary Account for 1959-60 will be 

$8,849,000 – an over-all decrease of $119,530 compared to the year ending March 31st. 

 

Our larger ordinary expenditures are accounted for, mainly, by the increased responsibility entailed in 

maintaining the new buildings which were opened during this year and those which will be opened 

during 1959. These are: the new Court House in Saskatoon, now in operation, and the Health and 

Welfare Building on the Legislative Grounds here, along with the new Provincial Office Building in 

North Battleford, both of which will open late in 1959. 

 

In our capital program we will undertake only one new major building this year, namely a Court House 

for Regina to replace the present inadequate structure which originally was built in 1894, with an 

addition in 1924. 

 

It will be of interest to the members, Mr. Speaker, to know that the total actual and estimated capital cost 

of all major projects which Public Works had under way during the current year amounted to 

approximately $15,700,000. These included the Court House in Saskatoon – total cost approximately 

$1,200,000; and 120-bed addition at the geriatric centre, North Battleford Mental Hospital, $465,500; 

Health and Welfare Building which is being erected just south of the Administration Building on these 

grounds – total cost approximately $3,600,000. 

 

At the University of Saskatchewan we are putting up three buildings – the Animal Husbandry Building 

at a cost of $482,000; the Arts Building, which will be completed some time in 1961 at a cost of 

$2,700,000. The Animal Husbandry Building will be completed some time this year; and a Biology 

Building which will be completed around the same time at a cost of $2 million. 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 
9 

Then we are putting up the Saskatchewan Technical Institute Building at Moose Jaw this year, and hope 

to be in the shop sections of that building by fall. The other areas – classrooms, gymnasium and cafeteria 

– will be completed next year, and the total cost of the entire building will approximate $2.5 million. At 

the Boys‟ School in Regina we have added a gymnasium and other classrooms, which will bring the 

total cost of the Boys‟ School up to $250,000 to date when these additions are completed. Then there is 

the Provincial Office Building in North Battleford. The cost is approximately $600,000 and it will be 

completed this year. Extensive roof alterations are being made on the main building of Saskatchewan 

Hospital at Weyburn, which when completed will cost $1,500,000. There are four such roof sections. 

We have completed two of them and are working on the third, and the fourth will come up next year. 

The La Ronge Hospital will cost approximately $400,000, and work is proceeding on that project now. 

 

As I have said, the total estimated cost of all construction – all the major projects – undertaken by the 

Department of Public Works will be approximately $15,714,000. We have paid on that amount to date, 

or will have paid on March 31st, $7,038,300, leaving an amount of $8,675,800 to complete what we 

have started this year. When the Court House in Regina gets under way, the cost of which will be 

approximately $1,500,000 we will have commitments for the Department of approximately $10,175,800 

spread over the next two or more years. 

 

As mentioned before, the Health and Welfare building will be completed this coming summer, and with 

its completion will commence one of the greatest single moving projects ever undertaken by the 

Department of Public Works. “Operation Checkerboard” as it may well be called, will involve four 

complete Departments of Government and eight other agencies or branches of Departments. The Health 

Department will move from the present Provincial Health Building to the new building, occupying the 

first three floors. The Teachers‟ College at Moose Jaw will move from Moose Jaw into the present 

Provincial Health Building at the corner of College and Broad. The Department of Social Welfare will 

move from the Administration Building to the new Health and Welfare Building. Crowding in the 

Legislative Building and Administration Building will be relieved by various minor moves or 

expansions. Operation Checkerboard is being carefully planned, so as to cause as little disruption of 

work, and as little inconvenience to the public and employees as possible. 

 

I should like to report to the Legislature that extensive additions and renovations have taken place at our 

mental hospitals at Weyburn and North Battleford this year. We are presently engaged in renovating two 

basement wards at Weyburn. This will make a total of eight wards so renovated in the past four years. 

So attractive are the new wards that visitors to the Hospital after an absence of some years can hardly 

believe they are in the same building. 

 

The exterior appearance of the hospital buildings at Weyburn is being altered also. The sloping roof is 

being replaced by 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 

10 

modern, light-type construction which, with the removal of the old dome, gives the building an entirely 

different appearance. New usable space is being provided where formerly there was attic storage area. 

 

The new space on the northeast wing provides living quarters for the male nursing staff. On the central 

section, the dome has been replaced by a modern elevator penthouse. Renovation here has now been 

completed, and this central section is being used mainly as the Administration Centre. The third stage of 

roof renovation is now under way and will serve as a hospital area for patients who are physically ill. 

The two completed sections of this are shown in Public Works Annual Report, and the cost is 

approximately $763,000. 

 

An addition to the Geriatric Centre at Saskatchewan Hospital, North Battleford, provides an extra 120 

beds in wards of four-bed, two-bed and single bed capacity. The total cost of all capital projects at 

Weyburn and North Battleford mental hospitals and at Moose Jaw, in 1958-59 will be approximately 

$1,200,000. 

 

Over the past fourteen years this Government has spent in capital funds at Moose Jaw, North Battleford 

and Weyburn a grand total of $13,482,675 in improving conditions for our mentally ill and retarded. 

This is almost $1 million annually for capital improvement of these institutions. As a result, much has 

been done to transform these buildings into attractive, utilitarian institutions. 

 

It might be of interest in ending this report, Mr. Speaker, to state that the members here should prepare 

themselves for considerable change in the appearance of the Chamber when they return to Regina on the 

occasion of Her Majesty‟s visit this summer. The three portraits now hanging on the wall behind and 

above Mr. Speaker will have disappeared from the Chamber. We have completed negotiations, through 

Mr. Graham Spry, Agent General for the Province of Saskatchewan in London, England, to have a 

suitable portrait of Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth II painted, and this should be available some time in 

June, when it will be displayed in the Chamber in place of the three which hang here now. The painting, 

which will be a copy of Sir James Gunn‟s State Portrait of Her Majesty, will depict the Queen in Royal 

Regalia. 

 

It might be of interest to the hon. member also to know that the central portrait of His Majesty King 

George V was painted by Joseph Henry Lee-Grayson, who for the twenty years from 1923 to 1943 was 

Saskatchewan‟s provincial artist. I am told that Mr. Lee-Grayson was a colourful figure, having served 

as cavalryman and infantry officer in the Imperial Army in various parts of the world before entering the 

Saskatchewan Civil Service. The portrait of the late King George V was painted by him from a 

photograph in 1939, shortly before the Royal Visit to Regina in that year by the late King George VI. I 

am reliably informed that the Clerk of the Legislative Chamber accommodated Mr. Lee-Grayson by 

acting as stand-in for some of the detail work. 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 
11 

Mr. Speaker, this completes the report on the Department of Public Works. I assure you I will support 

the budget. 

 

Hon. J. Walter Erb (Minister of Public Health): – Mr. Speaker, the annual budget speech of a nation 

or a province is always an occasion that is keenly anticipated by the citizens in every walk of life. As the 

hon. Provincial Treasurer pointed out in his address, year by year, government budgets are coming to 

play an increasing role in the daily lives of our citizens. This increasing role in exemplified by the 

contemporary programs in education, health, welfare, agriculture, highways, mineral resources 

development – and has, particularly in Saskatchewan, resulted in not only a closer relationship between 

Government and the people, but in a more knowledgeable and discerning taxpayer. It is evident, 

therefore, that since the taxpayer is also the voter, the manner in which the budget is both allocated and 

administered determines to a great degree the life of the political party in office. 

 

This being the fifteenth consecutive budget brought down by the present Provincial Treasurer not only 

demonstrates most eloquently the approval of the people of Saskatchewan of the efforts of the Provincial 

Treasurer in this regard, but also underlines the confidence of the people which this Government has 

enjoyed throughout the years. The discerning and responsible taxpayer of today is not satisfied merely 

with a mathematically balanced budget. His criteria of a balanced budget are extended as to whether or 

not there is a balanced allocation of the budget between the different functions of government; whether 

there is a balance of expenditure between that of direct and indirect services, and that of investment in 

our resources, which is to provide the wider base for future returns to meet the costs of our expanding 

services. 

 

I submit that the 1959-60 budget meets eminently these criteria, and inasmuch as preceding budgets of 

this Government were conceived by the same philosophy of humanitarianism, coupled with a great 

regard for financial integrity, the 1959-60 budget will receive the overwhelming endorsation of the 

people of this province. 

 

At a time when inflation is rampant throughout our nation with its corroding effects on the standards of 

living of the people of Canada, when the Federal Government, as well as a number of provinces of 

Canada, are committed to deficit financing, thereby further adding to inflationary pressures, it is 

gratifying to note that Saskatchewan has a balanced budget. 

 

The hon. member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) had, the other day, exercised the traditional 

prerogative that falls on him as financial critic of the Opposition in replying to the Budget Address. I 

suggest that had he consulted with the editor of „The Leader-Post‟ on the budget, rather than with his 

accustomed mentor, his sound and fury might have been tempered with some degree of light, such as 

was shed by the editorial in „The Leader-Post‟ commenting on the Budget Address. Or better still, if my 

hon. friend had availed himself of some visual education last Saturday at 6:15 p.m., when the hon. 

Provincial Treasurer, with graphs, 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 

12 

charts and diagrams explained the budget to television viewers, the remarks of my hon. friend might 

have borne some evidence that he was familiar with the budget and was, in fact, replying to it. But alas, 

Mr. Speaker! My hon. friend got lost in the cement factory, and never did get back on the track. 

 

The traditional function of Her Majesty‟s loyal Opposition, as everyone knows, is to offer constructive 

criticism and to constitute the alternative to the political party in power. I submit, Mr. Speaker, without 

malice, that our friends to your left have fallen short of their performance in this function. I am not 

saying that they have not offered any criticism; I think they have, and I am quite sure the Government 

has, on occasion, been guided by this criticism. But what I am saying is that the burden of their efforts in 

this Legislature and outside has been directed toward discrediting this Government, and deprecating its 

achievements in our social and economic structure, and misrepresentation by endeavouring to create in 

the minds of an unsuspecting public, images of sinister and malicious motives underlying the actions of 

this administration. On the other hand, one does not expect my hon. friends to stand up in their places 

and acclaim this Government. I cannot help but think, Mr. Speaker, what an incongruous pose the hon. 

member for Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson) would strike, were he to do so. I‟m sorry he is not in the House. I‟m 

sure he would be doing it right now. But I venture to say that even an unorthodox act such as this would 

much more enhance their political integrity than the tactics that they presently employ. 

 

Among the many illusions that my friends to your left, Mr. Speaker, have tried to create over the years, 

there are two that stand out in particular to my mind. The first one is that because of the political climate 

in Saskatchewan, industry hesitates to locate here, thereby inhibiting our economic and industrial 

development. The second one is that this Government is largely responsible for the economic plight that 

has befallen our farmers. Theoretically, I presume that they have chosen a good battle-ground, because 

the welfare of the entire province is involved in these areas. But I am reminded of what was said about 

the German Generals during World War II: that they never made any mistakes – just the big ones! Either 

my hon. friends across the way haven‟t had the time, inclination or capacity to assess the magnitude of 

our economic and industrial development, and the impact it has had on the province, or else they believe 

that the people of Saskatchewan are so naive that they can yet be convinced of these charges. 

 

I shall not take too much time to try either to enlighten or to convince my. hon. friends to your left about 

the economic and industrial development which has taken place in the province. The hon. Premier and 

my colleagues have, on numerous occasions, tried to do so with more eloquence and logic than I can 

command. But, inasmuch as repetition wears away rock, I should like to make a few observations for the 

consideration of my hon. friends opposite, particularly upon some of the things they had to say 

yesterday. 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 
13 

Speaking in the budget debate, yesterday afternoon, the hon. member for Melville (Mr. Gardiner) 

seemed to be as much confused about the disposition of the Federal Government‟s reimbursement to our 

hospital plan as was the financial critic of the Opposition. While, as the Provincial Treasurer pointed out 

in his address, it was hoped that these funds could be used for other purposes, rising costs, increased 

utilization, with the inclusion of new groups which were formerly the responsibility of the Federal 

Government, made up of Indians and recipients of Veterans‟ pensions, has raised these costs, which 

were running at about $22 million annually three years ago, to an estimated $33.3 million for 1959. In 

addition, with the return to the taxpayer of about $1,686,000,000 by virtue of the reduction in the family 

personal tax which was reduced from $45 to $35, it is apparent that almost all of the Federal 

reimbursements will be used for hospital purposes. If my hon. friends think that this reimbursement is a 

bonanza then they are living in a world of unreality. 

 

The hon. member for Melville also must have had some misunderstanding about the geriatric centres. 

For his information, I want to say that these facilities have been recognized by the Federal Government 

as eligible for cost-sharing under National Hospital Insurance. Patients in three geriatric centres in 

Regina, Melfort, Saskatoon are not charged for the insured services provided under Hospital Insurance. 

Mr. Speaker, if an „Oscar‟ were being handed down for the silliest statements of the year in this House, 

the hon. member for Melville (I‟m sorry he is not in his seat) would have been the recipient of that 

„Oscar‟ yesterday, for he indicated that we were “just continuing with Liberal policies.” We were “just 

continuing with the policies” of the former Liberal Government of Saskatchewan. One might ask – what 

policies? But assuming they had policies with respect to hospitalization, how did the people fare in 

Saskatchewan under such a policy? Well, Mr. Speaker, there are thousands upon thousands of people in 

Saskatchewan who want to forget the nightmare of this Liberal policy, and I should think the Liberal 

Party would want to forget it, also. But the hon. member for Melville seems to have a penchant for 

reminding us of Liberal policy, not only of the Hospitalization Plan but other policies as well, to the 

embarrassment of his political party that is desperately trying to make a political comeback. 

 

Let us, for a moment, examine the statistics of the hospital situation in Saskatchewan during the years of 

Liberal administration. Let us take the last year the Liberals were in office because by that time we can 

assume that the maximum work, if any, had been done on hospitals. In 1944 (and I shall quote this in 

terms of hospital beds) there were 3,529 hospital beds as against today, in 1958-59, some 6,727 beds. I 

want to point out that these 3,529 beds in 1944 were not beds that would meet the standards required by 

the Federal Government under the grant structure of today, indeed under the present qualifications, nor 

for cost sharing under National Hospital Insurance. 

 

What about the Union Hospital districts? In 1944 there were 24 Union Hospital districts. Today we have 

111 Union Hospital districts. Now, if the Liberals ever had any policy for Hospitals, certainly they 

would have indicated that they had some interest in the hospitals, and 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 

14 

they would have, therefore, assisted hospitals by providing grants, etc. But what do we find? We find 

that Liberal Governments made no grants whatsoever for Union Hospital Districts. Now I am sure, if we 

were to follow Liberal policies, we would still have 24 Union Hospital Districts. The hospitals would 

not have received any grant moneys, and other assistance. But the fact is that, since 1944, this 

Government instituted a policy whereby construction grants were made to our Union Hospital Districts. 

Accordingly, in 1944, $2,845,310.04 were directed in grants toward Union Hospital Districts. This is a 

lot of money, but a great deal more, many millions more, have been spent on the University Hospital, 

Medical College, and the geriatric centres. 

 

My friends talk about having a policy for hospitalization; one would assume they also had some kind of 

policy for medical care. 

 

What about medical care grants. Many years ago, the first doctor-municipal plan which went into 

operation, but the Liberal Government made no grants toward this plan. It was not until June 15, 1945, 

by Order in Council No. 1867, that for the first time in history medical care grants were provided in this 

province. Mr. Speaker, I‟ll let the record speak for itself. 

 

The hon. member for Melville, as hon. members here will recall – speaking in an election campaign in 

1952 and 1956, and over the radio, laid claim to the fact that it was a Liberal Government that 

inaugurated the Air Ambulance Service of Saskatchewan. The fact is that the former Liberal 

Government never voted a five-cent piece for Government Air Ambulance Service. It was not until the 

C.C.F. Government of Saskatchewan set up the Air Ambulance Service, which became the first of its 

kind on the North American continent. I submit the Liberal Party in office had no policies at all affecting 

human welfare. Any efforts in this regard were undertaken by local initiative, by local jurisdiction, and, 

on top of this, they had a very difficult time in persuading a Liberal Government to pass legislation in 

order to make it possible for them to develop their program. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, and I am sure that the people of Saskatchewan will say with me, thank goodness this 

Government is not just “continuing the Liberal policy!” If we were, this province would still be the 

socially and economically barren legacy that was left to us by the previous Liberal Government. There 

would have been no Hospital Services Plan – indeed there would not have been for a long time to come, 

National Hospital Insurance, unless this Government had instituted the first universal plan in this 

province. There would have been no free cancer program such as we have now, which is the first on the 

continent as well, and which is world renowned. The mentally ill would be still languishing in the 

dungeon-like atmosphere of the custodial care, rather than received the benefits of the humane and 

enlightened and progressive care that is provided in Saskatchewan today. 

 

There would be no rural health regime bringing preventive service to over 600,000 people of this 

Province. There would be no Government 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 
15 

Insurance Office, which my hon. friend from Melfort-Tisdale (Hon. Mr. Willis) described a few 

moments ago. The Government Insurance Office has saved the people of Saskatchewan millions of 

dollars in premiums. The farm homes in this province, the villages and hamlets, would still be lit with 

oil lamps, rather than by the flick of switches whereby 55,000 farm homes, all towns, villages, and 

hamlets, are lighted up the electrical energy in this province. What I believe is even a worse indictment 

of the Liberal Party in not planning a policy that would provide the services I have mentioned, is the fact 

that when this Government was bringing in legislation to provide these services, the Liberal Opposition 

voted against these measures that have helped immeasurably in the happiness, health and welfare, and 

the prosperity of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Time does not permit me to go into detail with respect to the industrial and economic development that 

has taken place in Saskatchewan, about which the Liberal Government had no policy, or had no 

inclination to formulate one. But now that this Government has a policy, they have made possible 

through that policy almost 4,000 oil and gas wells in the province; through this policy it has been made 

possible to bring gas to our people in the cities and towns. It has made it possible to bring numerous 

industries to our province, including the cement plant, rolling mill, pipeline plant, wire and cable plant, 

and a dozen others. And my hon. friends to your left, Mr. Speaker, don‟t like it. They constitute a 

strange paradox. In one breath they say that, because of the political climate in Saskatchewan, industry 

is afraid to locate here. 

 

Opposition Members: – Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: – My hon. friend, the financial critic from Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) said the other 

day we were “hand in hand with big business!” 

 

Mr. Cameron: – Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: – Mr. Speaker, my hon. friends to your left can talk all they like – 

 

Mr. McFarlane: – They‟ve got their hands in your pockets! 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: – . . . because by their performance as the government of this province, they convinced 

no one of their aptitude. As the Official Opposition, their performance is even less likely to impress the 

people of Saskatchewan, in constituting the unqualified alternative to this Government. 

 

A long time ago I learned a little poem that I am sure all of us ought to remember. It is one my hon. 

friends ought to nail to their mast, and write on their hearts: 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 

16 

“New occasions teach new duties; 

Time makes ancient good uncouth, 

They must ever up and onward 

Who would keep abreast of truth.” 

 

Mr. McDonald: – Do you recognize them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: – Mr. Speaker, both as a farmer and as member of the Legislature for a rural 

constituency, the constituency of Milestone, I would be remiss in my duties as a member were I not to 

associate myself with my colleagues on the stand they have taken on behalf of western agriculture 

generally, and Saskatchewan agriculture particularly. I do not think that anyone in Saskatchewan needs 

to be convinced, least of all the farmers, that western agriculture is facing a crisis, and has been for some 

time. On looking at the farmers‟ gross income and their expenditures for 1957, in which they have a net 

loss of $127 million, no one will deny that a depression has settled upon the agricultural economy in the 

west. 

 

One needs only to consider a few simple figures to further substantiate what I have just said. Since the 

year 1947, the costs of goods and services used by farmers have increased by 50.3 per cent. During this 

period the average price of wheat on the farm has declined by 20.8 per cent. The average price of barley 

and oats has declined by 27 per cent, and 36.7 per cent respectively. This inverse proportion has had a 

most disastrous effect upon the purchasing price of a bushel of wheat. For example, in 1946, a small 

combine could be purchased for 1,845 bushels of wheat. Today it requires 3,963 bushels of wheat for 

such a purchase. As a matter of fact, only once in the history of western agriculture was the price of a 

bushel of wheat less than it is today, and that is, as you know, during the depression of the „thirties.‟ 

 

Mr. McFarlane: – How many bushels to you take for taxes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: – Contrary to what some may believe, neither surpluses or lack of markets are directly 

related to the farm income problem. Surpluses, as everyone knows, were created during the three-year 

period when we raised the equivalent of five crops. The surpluses, because of the storage problems, 

were bothersome, of course, and they appeared to indicate a loss of markets. However, the average 

annual deliveries from the farms during the last five years amounted to 391 million bushels. This is 

considerably higher than the 35-year average, which was 329 bushels. So far as exports are concerned 

during the last five years, the average export of wheat amounted to 292 million bushels. Again this 

figure is substantially higher than the 35-year average export, which was only 257 million bushels of 

wheat. 

 

In summary then, Mr. Speaker, the farmers‟ income problem is due to the fact that the cost of goods and 

services he required in farming operations have steadily increased since 1946, while the commodities he 

had produced to sell have steadily declined. So today, his cost of production is greater than his return. 

He is required to buy in a protected market, and 



16A 

 

the commodities which he produces must be sold in an unprotected market. It is as tragically simple as 

that. 

 

For sometime now we have been subjected to the nonsense that the farmer, particularly the small 

operator, is inefficient, that he must go, presumably, to join the ranks of the half million of unemployed 

in this country. I admit there will always be, even under the most favourable conditions, small farms 

which, due to other reasons than inefficiency, are uneconomic. One asks; “how large must the farm be?” 

It would be just as sensible to ask; “how large must a Canadian shirt factory be to successfully compete 

with a Japanese shirt factory?” It is obvious at once that, no matter how large or how efficient the 

Canadian shirt manufacturer may be, he couldn‟t begin to compete with his Japanese counterpart, and 

for very obvious reasons. This is precisely the kind of situation in to which the farmer is cast. 

 

It is for these reasons that the farmers, the farm organizations, the Wheat Pool, etc., are asking for 

deficiency payments covering the production of grain over the past three years. In this they are 

supported by thousand upon thousands of people in the west, whose economic welfare is dependent 

upon a solvent agricultural economy. 

 

It has been argued, as we all know, that the Canadian economy cannot afford to guarantee the farmer a 

parity price for his products. Well, that is exactly what is being done for other sections of the economy. 

For example, the gold-mining industry is subsidized by $40 million a year. The entire gamut of the tariff 

system in Canada which, as estimated by the Gordon Commission, and as pointed out by the hon. 

Premier not long ago, amounts to over $1 million. This is an indirect subsidy to Canadian industry 

which the Canadian people are required to pay. 

 

I submit that, if we are prepared to subsidize the manufacturers in this economy that they may have a 

proper relationship between the cost of production and the selling price of their commodities, there is no 

reason why we ought not to give the same kind of consideration to our farmers, so that there will be a 

fair relationship between the commodities which they produce, and what they eventually get for them on 

the market. I think that the farmers of Saskatchewan particularly, and generally of the west, will greatly 

welcome the fact that yesterday in this Legislature a resolution was passed unanimously asking that the 

Federal Government give favourable consideration to the petition that is to be carried to Ottawa, asking 

for deficiency payments. As was mentioned before based on the utterances of the Prime Minister of 

Canada when he was Leader of the Opposition in the House of Commons, I don‟t believe that our 

farmers and farm organizations, and those making the „March to Ottawa‟ ought to have too great a 

problem in convincing the Prime Minister. Unless he has utterly changed his thinking, there still must be 

that cause for concern in his being that made him say on March 12, 1956, when he moved a motion: 

 



17 

 

“In the opinion of this House, consideration should be given by the Government to the advisability of 

introducing, during the present Session, legislation to create a parity price for agricultural products at 

levels to ensure producers a fair cost-price relationship.” 

 

Then again, Mr. Speaker, in a speech which commences on page 202 in Hansard, he made a powerful 

plea for parity prices. He says: 

 

“The squeeze which the farmer suffers results from the disparity in the relationship between the prices 

of farm products, and the prices the farmer has to pay. When they are in proper relationship, parity is 

established, and it is parity that farm organizations across this country are asking for – not charity, but 

parity.” 

 

With that kind of conviction, Mr. Diefenbaker hoped that some aid would come to the farmer when he 

was the Leader of the Opposition. It is our hope that he still has this conviction, that this march to 

Ottawa will stir up in him the fires of loyalty to the west, and grant the farm organizations their request 

for deficiency payments that are so urgently needed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I come now to my Department, and I would like to make a few comments on the steady 

progress that is being achieved with Saskatchewan health program. While outstanding advances have 

been made in the organization of health services in this province (many of these are widely known 

across North America), I wish to direct the attention of this House to some of the important unsolved 

problems and gaps that remain to be filled. 

 

It is the major responsibility of governments to protect the health of the people, and to improve their 

physical and mental well-being. This concept is clearly stated in the preamble to the constitution of the 

World Health Organization, which states: 

 

“Governments have a responsibility for the health of their people, which can be fulfilled only by the 

provision of adequate health and social measures.” 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan has included this concept as an integral part of its program since 

1944. It has, with determination, carried this concept into practice. 

 

One important sphere of responsibility with which 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 

18 

the Government, through its Health Department is charged, is the control of communicable and 

infectious disease. I shall only cite one or two important examples to illustrate how concerted action on a 

public program has been outstandingly successful. Today we hear very little about poliomyelitis, 

compared to the situation just a few years ago. All of us recall the severe epidemic of 1952, when 1,223 

cases occurred, followed by 90 deaths. A year later, in 1953, 1,187 persons contracted the disease, 

resulting in 70 deaths. The situation was duplicated in other provinces of Canada, and in the United 

States, and also in European countries. 

 

Shortly after this, the young doctor and scientist, Dr. Jonas Salk, produced his now famous polio 

vaccine. After the very extensive testing of the vaccine in the United States and parts of Canada, 

supplies became available for the protection of the public at large. Despite the restricted quantities in the 

early states, this Government in 1955 immediately announced the policy of free vaccination of everyone 

up to 40 years of age, with the first priority assigned to young children and expectant mothers. This 

program of extending Salk Vaccine across the province was largely carried out by an outstanding group 

of devoted and able public health nurses, with a lesser number receiving vaccine from their own doctor. 

The result has been that of the population up to 40 years of age, at least 75 per cent have had two doses 

of vaccine; 64 per cent have had three doses, and by the end of 1958, in all the total of over 1.3 million 

cc‟s of vaccine have been used, or equal to 275 gallons. Indeed, the results of this vigorous effort are 

demonstrated by the fact that in 1958 there was only one reported case of paralytic poliomyelitis, and 

this occurred in a child who had not bee properly immunized. 

 

The one disappointing aspect of the entire program has been the less favourable response to vaccination 

by the adult section of our province. I would urge that the adults of this province come forward to 

receive this protection. It will be some time before we will be able to disregard poliomyelitis as a serious 

disease, if ever, and complete protection of our population against this crippling disease is essential. 

 

Another important communicable disease is tuberculosis. Here again the evidence is one of continuous 

progress under the devoted leadership of the Saskatchewan Anti-Tuberculosis League. The latest 

available figures for 1957 show a continuing declining rate of mortality – a total of 31 deaths, or a rate 

of 3.5 per thousand people, the lowest ever reported for the province. The number of new active cases 

has also shown a steady decline over the past four years. Bed occupancy in sanatoria is at an all-time 

low, and continued efforts bring the dream of eradication somewhat closer to realization. It does not 

mean that eradication of this once-dreaded disease is just around the corner. New problems must be 

faced with the “hard core” of infection that remains. However, my Department will continue to support 

the program of the League, and the Government will continue to support it through its financial policy. 

The success of these major communicable diseases, including diphtheria . . . 

 

Mr. Foley (Turtleford): – May I ask a question, Mr. Speaker. Would the hon. Minister tell me when the 

Anti-Tuberculosis League had its beginning in the province? 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 
19 

Hon. Mr. Erb: – Mr. Speaker, I am sure if the hon. member is trying to indicate that this is something 

we had begun, I want to say that the Anti-Tuberculosis League has been in operation, I believe, since 

away back in 1919. 

 

Mr. Foley: – Mr. Speaker, all I had in mind was this; it would hardly be the action of a government that 

has no interest at all in the people‟s welfare! I just wanted to make that clear. 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: – As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, the success against the major communicable diseases 

such as diphtheria, whooping cough, typhoid fever and others, are in large measure the result of the 

efforts of organized health regions in Saskatchewan, as well as the health department in two major cities. 

Hon. members will recall that the concept of health regions to cover the entire province with full-time, 

modern health services, was first proposed by Dr. Henry Sigerist in 1944. During ensuing years, a total 

of 10 health regions have been organized, and they now provide services to almost 600,000 people, not 

counting the cities of Regina and Saskatoon. These regions encompass a total of 679 rural and municipal 

units, and they are an expression of how municipal bodies have undertaken with provincial support to 

pool co-operatively their resources for up-to-date health services. 

 

During the coming fiscal year it is proposed to organize a new region in the Humboldt-Wadena district 

to include a population of some 47,000. Here again, municipal bodies have indicated their support. Mr. 

Speaker, I wish to report that our health regions are continuing their work in traditional fields of 

prevention; are constantly exploring new avenues to set up principles and practices of prevention of 

disease and disability. Health officers, public health nurses, sanatoria, nutritionists and health educators 

work day by day to improve sanitary conditions, to educate all sections of the community in sound 

health principles and to protect the health of mothers and children. In a typical month, our Public Health 

staff conducts an average of 360 child health clinics in every corner of this province. 

 

An important new type of activity is work to prevent heart damage among cases of rheumatic fever. Our 

regional health workers, with the added co-operation of the medical profession, are discovering early 

cases of rheumatic fever, and providing penicillin without charge on a long-term basis to prevent heart 

disease. Here is a notable example of how one important type of chronic disease can be prevented. With 

prevention there are savings in human suffering and disability, and also substantial savings in high 

medical and hospital costs that might otherwise be required. 

 

It is my belief, Mr. Speaker, that more vigorous efforts in the way of community action and direct 

popular participation are required in order to apply measure that will prevent disease. In the long term, 

this must be our approach, if we are not to be faced with a continuously expanding demand on our 

economic resources, and on our limited 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 

20 

supplies of trained health personnel for curative services of all kinds. In many instances, a great deal of 

knowledge is already at hand to prevent disease. In other important diseases, our scientific knowledge is 

still lacking, still limited. Here vigorous research should be promoted in order to add to our present lack 

of knowledge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to cite two or three examples to emphasize the point I am trying to make. 

Coronary heart disease is one of the most important causes of death and disability in middle and later 

life. Recent work in England has demonstrated that persons with occupations which demand a greater 

physical effort have less coronary diseases than persons in sedentary occupations. While more remains 

to be learned about this disease, it certainly suggests that much can be done now to intensify measures 

for physical fitness of all kinds. 

 

Another important example is the relation of cigarette smoking to lung cancer. Scientists everywhere are 

generally agreed that this relationship exists. In Saskatchewan there are more deaths annually from 

cancer of the lung than there are from pulmonary tuberculosis. We recognize the great difficulty, of 

course, in substantially modifying the habits of adult members of the population. However, we believe 

that serious consideration should be given to a program of educations that will direct its appeal to young 

people not to acquire this formidable and potentially dangerous habit. This approach is the one that other 

countries, most notably Sweden and Great Britain, have adopted. 

 

I would like to stress that my Department for some years has been concerned with methods to improve 

dental health among the people of our province, particularly among the children. In recent years, perhaps 

the most important public health measure which science has uncovered is the dramatic effect of fluoride 

on the prevention of dental tooth decay. Increasingly, communities in Saskatchewan are coming to 

understand and accept the fact that effective steps can be taken to protect the dental health of their 

children. I do not wish at this time, of course, to review the mass of positive scientific evidence which 

comes from outstanding investigators throughout the world, but I do want to record my dismay at the ill-

judged statement made recently by the Minister of Public Health for Ontario. He suggests that a health 

measure such as fluoridation was “mass medication.” This is distortion of facts, and, I might say, in a 

most irresponsible way. This dental health measure of fluoridating the water achieves prevention, 

whereas medication is invariably a means to treat or cure a disease. 

 

Recent evidence in Saskatchewan substantiates the remarkable value of fluoridation for the dental health 

of our children. Observations carried out in Moose Jaw and Prince Albert in 1958 among three-year old 

children, showed that in Moose Jaw, which has had fluoridated water since 1953, only 35 per cent of the 

three-year olds showed any dental defects requiring treatment, whereas Prince Albert, without 

fluoridation, the comparable figure was 68 per cent – almost twice as much. I suggest these facts speak 

for themselves. 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 
21 

I should also like to mention briefly other important health programs which my Department is studying 

and actively seeking solutions. In the last few years the United Nations, as well as governments in many 

countries, are becoming more alert to the hazards of radiation. The use of X-rays has given medicine a 

powerful tool for diagnosis and treatment. However, X-rays are being used increasingly not only in 

hospitals and in doctors‟ offices, but in industry and to some extent in shoe stores for fitting shoes. 

Accordingly, we have directed that an expert committee be established under the leadership of the 

Occupational Health Branch of my Department. This committee intends to survey X-ray installations 

across the province and to identify hazards to X-ray workers, to patients and to the public. We expect 

this committee will advise on the most effective measures to reduce any hazards to a safe minimum 

allowed by recognized international authorities. 

 

I would draw the attention of the House to the growing interest and concern that all of us have for the 

problem of the aged and with those suffering from long-term or chronic illnesses. With the rising 

numbers of aged in our population and the gradual extension of length of life, we will be facing the need 

for new resources for services to meet a growing problem. The needs of the aged are many and complex, 

and meeting the health and medical needs is one of the most important requirements. Undoubtedly it is 

of utmost importance to develop an integrated attack on this problem. We must attempt to meet the 

economic, social, health, recreational and housing needs of senior citizens in a balanced way. To achieve 

this aim the Government and voluntary groups at the provincial and especially the local level, must find 

the best way to participate co-operatively. As was announced in the Speech from the Throne, the 

Government intends to call or convene a province-wide conference on aging and long-term illness. With 

my colleague the Minister of Social Welfare, who is directly concerned, we look forward to hearing 

views from the representatives concerned from the local and regional areas, in many walks of life. In 

this way it is hoped that sound and imaginative solutions can be found. 

 

Perhaps the most important health challenge we face today in both human and economic terms, is the 

problem of mental illness. This Government has given leadership in the acceptance of the new 

philosophy concerning mental illness and to developing programs to implement that philosophy. The 

mental health program is based on three main principles. First, that mental hospitals should be 

therapeutic rather than custodial, and should carry out the function of restoring patients to life in the 

community. Secondly, the treatment facilities should be available at the community level and without 

cost to the patient, in order to make early treatment of mental illness as easily obtainable and as 

acceptable as other forms of illness. Thirdly, that prevention of mental illness be developed as an 

integral part of the public health program. The preventative aspects of the mental health program are 

being expanded by the appointment of a highly trained teacher psychologist in the newest Health 

Region, by further training of public health nurses in mental health, and by an enlarged program of 

mental health education throughout the province. 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 

22 

These multiple services are all co-ordinated in full-time and part-time mental health clinics scattered 

throughout the province. In-patient treatment services were maintained at a high level in Regina, 

Saskatoon and Moose Jaw, through the operation of well-staffed psychiatric wards in general hospitals. 

Out-patient treatment services were increased by the opening of a fourth full-time mental health clinic at 

Swift Current, under the direction of a certified specialist in psychiatry. Additional part-time or 

travelling clinics were opened during 1958 at Biggar, Rosetown, Maple Creek and Shaunavon. We now 

have four full-time and ten part-time clinics, and the volume of services provided by all the clinics, in 

1958, increased by almost 23 per cent over 1957. 

 

It is proposed, also, to extend the community treatment services further during 1959, by opening a full-

time mental health clinic in Prince Albert. This clinic, like the one opened in 1958 at Swift Current, will 

provide diagnostic and consultative services to physicians throughout the health regions and will give 

psychiatric treatment to suitable cases when referred to the clinic by physicians. 

 

In the mental institutions, there was a continuation of the progress that has been made, for some years, 

towards higher standards of care, and a more completely therapeutic program. In the treatment program 

there was sustained emphasis on socializing activities to prepare patients for a return to their 

communities – and when I say socializing, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t want my friends opposite to get the idea 

that we are making Socialists out of the patients. By this term I mean a social re-orientation of the 

patient is endeavoured to be made. Social work assistance was focussed towards rehabilitation after 

discharge, and this is a very important follow-up work. 

 

Careful trials of new tranquilizing drugs were continued, and several of these drugs were found useful in 

making patients more accessible to treatment. With the guidance of specialized consultants, certain 

reorganization of the institution was carried out to provide a basis for better patient care. The staffing of 

the institution is being improved by the addition of physicians in two areas of the hospital, and providing 

advanced training to selected staff members. 

 

Further remodelling of the Saskatchewan Hospital at Weyburn, as pointed out by my colleague the 

Minister of Public Works, has been carried out and is continuing. Much of the living spaces of the 

patients has been made more attractive and more conducive to therapy. Much teaching and occupational 

therapy space has been provided, as well as living accommodation for male staff. 

 

At the Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford two new one-storey wings were completed and 

opened. These are now providing ideal accommodation for 120 ambulant elderly patients, as well as 

reducing the over-crowding that we had hitherto in the irrigation building. 

 

I should like to draw the attention of this House to the highly important research studies that are being 

carried out at the University with regard to schizophrenia. Schizophrenia, as we know, is a mental illness 

that is responsible for over half of the admissions to our mental hospitals. 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 
23 

This program at the University is the most extensive carried out by any province in Canada. The 

investigations that are being made here have been receiving world-wide acclaim for the promise they 

offer towards new methods of treating this serious mental illness. 

 

In all of these developments we must recognize the prime importance of heightening the understanding 

of the people of the province with regard to mental illness. There has been a very positive change in 

public attitude so that, today, there is less fear and prejudice than a few years ago, and there is more 

willingness to accept treatment and to support progressive psychiatric programs. Much remains to be 

done in the field of mental health education, but there are grounds for satisfaction in the progress that 

has been made. 

 

Probably the strongest single factor in bringing a more positive attitude on the part of the public is the 

improvement which the people have seen in our facilities for the care of the mentally ill and our 

programs of psychiatric treatment. This is a point also that the Minister of Public Works dwelt on – the 

tremendous improvement that we have witnessed in the mental health hospitals over the years. 

 

Last Thursday, I was privileged to table in this House the Annual Report of The Saskatchewan Hospital 

Services Plan for 1958, and I would urge everyone to read this report for the wealth of information that 

it contains. The Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan is still considered the outstanding social 

experiment in the field of hospital care in Canada. We are pleased that other provinces have been able to 

draw on our experience in the development of their new programs. The emergence of the Federal 

Government in the field of hospital insurance after an unusually long period of preparation is, of course, 

welcomed by all of us. However, we must continue to voice our great disappointment that the hospital 

care for the mentally ill and those with tuberculosis were excluded. The argument that was put forth by 

the Hon. Paul Martin, Minister of National Health and Welfare in the former Liberal Government, went 

something like this: “The provinces are already providing institutional care for mental illness and 

tuberculosis, largely with public financing, and, therefore, there is no need to include this under National 

Hospital Insurance.” 

 

The present Minister of National Health and Welfare has seen fit to take a similar view. Their position, I 

submit, is completely irrelevant. The same reasoning (or lack of it) could be applied to the general 

hospital care in the province, which was being provided for a 10-year period before National Hospital 

Insurance came into being. But the important point is this; the Federal Government has accepted the 

broad principle that relieving the financial burden of hospital care from the backs of individual Canadian 

families is a good thing. Then why make an unjust distinction between diseases and, indirectly, penalize 

those people who have been so unfortunate as to contract a mental illness? It should be evident to 

everyone that a Federal Government, with its wider access to national revenues, is in a position to assist 

the provinces to push ahead as never before with 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 

24 

increased, more comprehensive, services, especially for the mentally ill. 

 

We are pleased that the Minister has agreed to include, under the agreement, care provided in psychiatric 

wings which are attached to general hospitals. We have asked him if the National Act could be 

interpreted to include care given in small community mental hospitals attached to regional general 

hospitals, if such were developed in Saskatchewan. To our mind there is no fundamental difference 

between these two types of community institutional services, but we have yet failed to receive a clear, 

unequivocal, and positive answer from the Minister of National Health and Welfare. 

 

As part of the plan to improve the Hospital Services Plan whenever possible, I wish to report that out-

patient services involving minor operations for persons not requiring admission will be added as a 

benefit, commencing January 1, 1960. At that time we anticipate that facilities will be adequate to 

provide this care. It is expected that the policy will help to relieve the necessity of admissions for a 

certain number of cases and at the same time broadening the scope of the Plan. Discussions are 

continuing with hospital and medical representatives on the extension of diagnostic services on an out-

patient basis. I must say, Mr. Speaker, that hospitals in Saskatchewan, as well as elsewhere in Canada, 

are plagued with shortages of trained personnel. This is an important limiting factor in extending out-

patient services. We must be certain that adequate technical diagnostic services are available, 

particularly for the people in the hospitals who are seriously ill. I want to make it clear that if we were to 

endeavour to provide out-patient care, we would not have the staff for one thing, and the people who 

badly need in-patient diagnostic services would, in many cases, be denied them. 

 

At the same time substantial progress is being made with training programs for the various types of 

technicians. It is encouraging, for example, that in the field of X-ray technicians we are approaching a 

point of sufficiency for current needs. 

 

I would like to take the opportunity to issue an appeal to the young people of our province, in the cities 

and towns and on the farms, to come forward to embark on a health career. There is a great deal of room 

for young men and women, especially those who have real vision and determination who want to make a 

public contribution, to enter the field of medicine or nursing or medical technology, as well as the many 

other interesting and challenging occupations in the health field. Especially is this important in regard to 

our need for dentists. The dental manpower situation in Saskatchewan, where we have a dental 

population of one dentist to 4,600 of population, is a serious one; and it is almost as serious in other 

parts of Canada. During the past two years the intake of dentists has not kept up with the losses due to 

retirement and death. Universities with dental schools, in a number of Canadian centres, have increased 

their enrolment; they have increased their facilities as well, and we welcome this move. For our part we 

are to commence, in the coming fiscal year, a program of bursaries for undergraduate dental education. 

Through a system of financial support it will be possible to assist students and to ensure that they will 

practice in Saskatchewan for a stated period after graduation. 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 
25 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I turn to a problem towards which we are applying continuous attention and concern. 

I refer to the supply and demand for general hospital beds and the complex factors which influence it. 

Saskatchewan continues to provide a very high level of hospital care compared with the rest of Canada. 

In the year just ended the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan provided for 205 discharged cases and 

2,043 days of care per 1,000 population. I must point out that, while this is a high level of care, the point 

reached in 1958 has been maintained without much change since 1949, or two years after the Plan 

commenced operation. 

 

Notwithstanding this high rate of hospitalization, demands for construction of increased numbers of beds 

in various centres continue to be put forward, and this fact is a continuing source of concern to my 

Department. I think we can be justly proud of our progress over the past dozen years. The crushing 

burden of hospital costs has been removed from the shoulders of the sick person and his family. Hospital 

financing has been established so that, today, we don‟t find surpluses in one hospital and deficits in 

another. At the same time growth in the quantity and quality of hospital bed accommodation has been 

stimulated, but there seems to be limited appreciation that, collectively, we have approached the point of 

meeting our need for acute hospital beds, even though certain redistribution may be required to reflect 

urban-rural shifts in population. 

 

It is my conviction that in the next period, we shall be obliged to seek ways to make more efficient and 

more economical use of the hospital resources which we now have. The care of chronic, long-term, 

patient demands are of great concern. We must explore vigorously the possibilities of organized home 

care programs, extended visiting nursing services to the homes, and relief type services outside the walls 

of the hospital institutions. There is abundant evidence that services of this type can, in time, prove more 

economical and are more likely to lead to better medical and social outcome for the patient and his 

family. These are some of the directions, Mr. Speaker, which we must take in order to find solutions for 

these increasingly complex health problems of today. 

 

I suggest that careful planning is paramount. Above all, we must co-ordinate or achieve a co-ordinated 

approach so that all health agencies at the provincial, regional and local levels, will co-operate and pool 

their resources for the common health of the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I shall support the 

budget. 

 

Mr. B. L. Korchinski (Redberry): – Mr. Speaker, I wish to congratulate all the speakers who have 

taken part in both debates up to this date. I listened with great interest and attention to the things that 

have been said, and I may say that I do not always agree with some of the presentations that have been 

made. 

 

For the last few hours we have had the opportunity to hear the Ministers of the Crown speak on behalf of 

the Government and it is rather surprising to me that they are still labouring under some type of 

inferiority complex. They act as if they were Opposition to some government. 



25A 

 

In past years their favourite pastime was criticizing Ottawa; somehow, this year they have turned to 

criticizing the Opposition. It is a very peculiar state of affairs. Last year we had an opportunity to see a 

film called „Sceptre and Mace‟, which was, I believe, one of the best films on governmental procedure 

that has been produced and I believe it was filmed with technical advice from some of the best 

parliamentarians of our country. In that particular film it said that the duty of the Opposition is to oppose 

– to criticize and oppose. We are continually being told that we should offer constructive criticism to the 

Government. I don‟t think that the Government would know, even if they saw it, what constructive 

criticism is, after what we have heard yesterday and today from the Minister of the Crown. 

 

There was little said by the Attorney General (Hon. Mr. Walker) yesterday that there is hardly anything 

to pass any comments upon. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: – Don‟t bother then. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – Today we have heard two Ministers and it was very difficult to tell what they were 

Ministers of by their speeches. I would say that the Minister of Health – I found out after the radio time 

was over that he was the Minister of Health. It would have added to his stature very much out in the 

country if he had made the last part of his speech first and the first part . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank (Minister of Mineral Resources):– Don‟t give up. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – The Minister of Mineral Resources reminds me of the evil-eyed beagle, who gives 

everybody the double whammy when he looks at them. I think he had better keep quiet because I have a 

few things to say and I am going to get through with them whether he interferes or not. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: – We‟re only encouraging you. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – The Minister of Public Works (Hon. Mr. Willis) was wondering what stand the 

Opposition is now taking on the Crown Corporations and when we are going to start talking about 

throwing the Crown Corporations out. We have discovered that our main preoccupation now is the 

process of tossing, not the Crown Corporations out of the window, but the C.C.F. Party. 

 

He talked about loose talk on this side of the House; if there ever was any loose talk it was what he was 

putting across today. He is the one who engaged in it. I don‟t know whether he realized that what he was 

saying was going over the air, but to listen to what he was saying, if the people in the neighbouring 

provinces happened to have him tuned in they would be rushing in to the paradise the C.C.F. have built 

in this Province. I think he had better get his Department of Public Works busy constructing 



26 

 

some temporary transient housing for all these refugees from the capitals outside of Saskatchewan. 

 

There is nothing so wonderful as the C.C.F. paradise in which we live. “The C.C.F.-sponsored Crown 

Corporations have never been as prosperous as they are today.” “Saskatchewan insurance is the best 

insurance in the world.” I am wondering why there are still some private companies left operating. It is 

rather surprising that this Insurance doesn‟t go into business in the neighbouring provinces. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: – We‟re not allowed to. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – Then we heard the Minister of Public Health (Hon, Mr. Erb) hold forth. It was very 

difficult to understand what he was getting at until, as I said, towards the last of his speech. He said 

about the budget – that this is a political budget which was designed to catch votes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: – You‟re dreaming. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – I am really surprised that he admits that they have attempted to make a political 

budget. 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: – Nonsense! 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – Now he says that the budget is nonsense! 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: – You are misinterpreting that just as much as you misinterpret . . . 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – He admits that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: – Judging by the cackles from over there his friends are laying eggs. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – It is very strange to hear a Minister of Public Health talk like that. I don‟t think that 

this budget, if it was designed to get votes, will catch him very many votes, especially after what the 

people have heard about the budget from the hon. member from Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron). 

 

Premier Douglas: – We haven‟t heard anything about the budget at all from the member for Maple 

Creek. We just heard about the Time question. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – Maybe you should wash your ears, if you never heard criticism advanced. Of course 

when there is any constructive criticism we never get any proper reply to it. The Ministers, when they 

are speaking continually go back to 1944 – they are the „1944 boys‟. They look nostalgically back to 

those wonderful days when they could come and tell anybody anything and it would be believed. But it 

is getting more and 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 
27 

difficult for them to put across and to make people believe what they proposed in 1944. All I can say is 

they should keep on going back to 1944 and they will land there where they were before 1944; there is 

no question about that. I would say that the Premier should contain himself because I have some 

wonderful quotations from his own speeches. I memorized quite a few of them. The Minister of Public 

Health said that he is a farmer; he doesn‟t look like one; he resides in a farm constituency . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: – You don‟t look like a school teacher either! 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – Did you hear what the Minister of Bees said just a while ago? He said there was no 

squeeze on the farmer as a result of the actions of this Government. Now I don‟t say that the whole 

squeeze is the result of the policies of this Government, but a large part of the squeeze on the farmers is 

a result of the actions of this Government. It is the last straw – the straw that broke the camel‟s back. 

Just to make a long story short, how about the $500 that the farmer has to pay for electrical connections? 

How about the double price on lumber? How about the cement – $5.90 a barrel in Regina, when it is 

only $3.40 in Winnipeg? How about a farmer building a granary for $400 when he should actually build 

it for $200? He has to pay double the price for his lumber. How about the power rates which are 70 per 

cent higher than in Manitoba? How about the tax on land and property which has been tripled? How 

about gasoline tax? How about the upping of the truck licences? I believe that the Minister of Health 

was shedding crocodile tears for the farmers. I don‟t think there is anything else I can say in reference to 

the Minister who spoke before me. 

 

I would like to advance some opposition to the idea of opening up the Technical Institute in Moose Jaw. 

I do not begrudge the people of Moose Jaw a Technical Institute, but old-timers in the olden days, when 

they built a school, they usually tried to locate it in the centre of the school district. Now this is the only 

school of this type in Saskatchewan and I think that it should have been located in the centre of the 

Province, instead of at the very south boundary. I believe that the logical place for it would have been 

Saskatoon – the hub city of Saskatchewan. There are more reasons than it being the centre of 

Saskatchewan – there is our University; and I believe that these institutions would have been 

complementary to one another and a lot of expense to the public would have been saved by locating the 

Technical Institute in Saskatoon. 

 

It amuses me to hear the Government members – Ministers and back-benchers – get up and weep over 

the labour, and talk about the labour and say how friendly they are to the labour group. They have just 

about convinced themselves – I don‟t think they have convinced anybody else – that they are the only 

political party that is friendly to labour. If it is so, why is it, then, that the labour in other parts of Canada 

has not supported them in the past? How is it that the greatest industrial centres of Canada do not 

support the C.C.F. party? How is it that Ontario, British Columbia, Quebec, and those places that are 

mostly industrial, do not support this Party? We had better, perhaps, organize a special Committee to 

investigate why this political party doesn‟t get the support of labour in those places. I believe 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 

28 

that what has happened – they have been able to hoodwink the labour in Saskatchewan, or at least a 

large section of labour, into believing that they are their great friends; and I would like to ask what stand 

do they take now – or how do they explain to labour the deal that they have put across with the cement 

plant promoters, and that they have put across with the cement plant promoters, and that they are putting 

across with the steel mill promoters? Haven‟t they sold labour down the river? I think that the labour 

group isn‟t that dumb and the time will come when labour will see what is behind all this machination of 

this particular group. 

 

There is one particular item that I would like to bring to the attention of this Legislature and that is the 

matter of opening up liquor stores in various places in Saskatchewan. I understand that there is one rule, 

that they have, whereby a certain number of liquor stores must be opened and, during the past year, there 

was one opened up at Hafford; and I may say that the people of Hafford are very glad to have a liquor 

store – not that they are alcoholics or anything like that but it saves them money and time when they 

want to get any of these products. But I would suggest to this Government that if any place is asking for 

a liquor store, they should be given a liquor store. If the majority of the people vote that they want a 

liquor store then you should give it to them, because they should know what is best for them. I have in 

mind this idea of playing one place against the other. That is what happened in the event of the liquor 

store in Hafford. There was another community not very far from Hafford, a large community – Blaine 

Lake – who were also trying to get a liquor store there and these two communities have been played one 

against the other, with resulting hostility and animosity arising out of this whole thing. Now there is no 

reason why that policy should be followed. I would also like to mention the matter of the personnel of 

that liquor store in Hafford. There were a large number of applications from returned men for this 

position, but the Government did not see fit to give the veterans any preference. I know the situation and 

I know the applicants and they came and complained about it. Now I suppose the Minister in charge has 

heard about this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: – I haven‟t heard a word about it. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – Well then you likely will hear during the next election. You will find out sooner or 

later, because the Legion members in that particular area came to me and told me about it. What the 

Government did was appoint a partisan supporter – a C.C.F. supporter – and I do not begrudge the jobs 

to the C.C.F. supporters but I believe that it has always been the custom of all the governments of this 

country to give the veterans, especially those who were in action and as a result of that were wounded, 

the preference, if they had the qualifications to fill the job. I hope that some effort will be made to rectify 

the situation there. 

 

Some people wonder how it is that the C.C.F. have stayed in power as long as they have. It is not a 

wonder to me any more because I have made some study of this whole situation and I would like to 

present this case to the Legislature. From the very inception of this Party, as soon as it got into power the 

whole aim of this Party has been to perpetuate itself in power. All their actions are geared to the idea 

that at all costs they must stay in power. From the very outset they organized a political machine the like 

of which has never been seen in this country. The key word in this political machine is propaganda. 

From every possible source of the Government, through Crown Corporations, through films, through 

radio and TV broadcasts; every undertaking seems to be organized with 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 
29 

the question – what good will it do the C.C.F.? This everlasting flood of words has captured and 

enslaved human minds in Saskatchewan and it is difficult for the average individual to shake off this 

C.C.F. fog. It seems to be the technique used in all socialist states – to build up and elevate their 

leadership. In Saskatchewan, through the years, the partisans have built up and elevated their leader – 

Tommy Douglas – so that some of the lesser lights of the Party, today, are ready to fall upon their knees 

and worship this personality. To them there is no one like Tommy Douglas. 

 

Premier Douglas: – Try attending a C.C.F. convention and see. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – To them there is no one like Tommy Douglas – they swear by him. 

 

Premier Douglas: – At him, you mean. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – With his genial nature and his oily tongue this Leader has been able to live up to all 

their expectations. They are very happy with this setup, but let me tell the ardent C.C.F. supporters that 

there is nothing to be happy about. There is nothing to be happy about in such a situation – when the 

whole Party depends upon one kingpin. Other parts of the world have had similar situations. The Nazis 

worshiped their Hitler and the Fascists worshiped their Mussolini, and with what tragic results. 

 

Premier Douglas: – The Liberals and their Mackenzie King! 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – That was a wonderful person. Mackenzie King had more wisdom in his small tow 

than you have in your whole body. 

 

Premier Douglas: – It‟s better to have it in your head than in your small toe. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – And there is another part to the story that is vital to the C.C.F. witch doctors. It was 

very interesting to watch the Leader of the C.C.F. party and his subordinates in the Government 

perform. It reminds one of the great medicine men you sometimes see at Exhibitions, standing on the 

platform on the midway, usually, dressed in some fantastic garb; they are usually wearing Indian 

headgear, and selling some gadget or some cure-all. You can stand nearby and watch; at first one or two 

people come near and begin to listen; then, by and by, more people gather, and as the witch doctor 

warms up a large crown gathers and the medicine man starts selling his products – usually offering two 

or three for the price of one. The listeners hesitate, but someone he has planted in the crown begins 

buying, and then the victims follow. These people get home and try the products but they don‟t work the 

way they did in the hands of the witch doctor. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: – Your constituents must be proud of you. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – In fact, it doesn‟t work at all. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: – A perfect description of Korchinski! 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – In fact, this particular product that the individual had bought from the witch doctor 

doesn‟t work at all. He is a disillusioned individual, a victim of the witch doctor and swears that he will 

never do it again, but when the next Exhibition comes he again falls 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 

30 

victim to the witch doctor. 

 

Now what are these witch doctors selling at the present time? At the present time the C.C.F. witch 

doctors are trying to foist upon the unsuspecting public what they call a „planned economy‟ – economic 

democracy and social planning. Those are the two cure-alls that the Premier, the Leader of the C.C.F., 

and the lesser lights of the Party are trying to sell to the unsuspecting public. Now what are these 

products? 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: – How he got elected I‟ll never know! 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – How is it that they do not open the box and show the customer what is meant by this 

planned economy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: – You tell us. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – Every rational being and individual has a plan of action, be it economic or otherwise, 

whether he has it written down or whether it is just in his mind. Only people who are irrational cannot 

formulate any plan. Surely the C.C.F. witch doctors are not that naive as to believe that the public is 

gullible enough to swallow the idea that there is no economic planning in this country, except with the 

C.C.F. But, Mr. Speaker, their planned economy, if uncovered and examined, would reveal some 

startling aspects. Under this planned economy the individual would have no freedom of choice at all. 

Planned economy means price control, wage control, rationing, control of labour, directing labour to 

places of occupation; planned economy means control of the farmers, telling the farmer how much, 

when and what to grow, and when and for how much to sell his products. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: – We have that now. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – The planned economy proposed by the C.C.F. is nothing else but a proletarian 

economic state. Planned economy failed with the Labour Party in Great Britain; it failed in New 

Zealand; it failed in Australia; it turned into a bloody dictatorship in Russia and in Communist China . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: – Here we go! 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – . . . where, upon the bones of millions of victims, arose the most vicious regimes that 

this world has ever heard of. The Planned Economy that the C.C.F. advocates has failed wherever it has 

been tried and there are only two places where it would be successful and that is in Heaven among the 

angels, where you don‟t need it; and in hell among the evil spirits where they have it already. 

 

When they talk about economic democracy – what do they mean by it? I think I could use the words of 

the hon. member from Arm River (Mr. Danielson) to express what they mean by it; I think those are 

„weasel words‟. Economic democracy are weasel words. Do they mean a state where every individual 

will have complete freedom in economics? That is the laissez faire philosophy, but which the C.C.F. so 

loudly condemn. Do they mean that they are going to have a state where a few wealthy individuals are 

protected by and promoted by the Government, to add more wealth to the millions they already have, at 

the 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 
31 

expense of the labourers and consumers, as is already happening in the cement industry? As will happen 

in the steel setup? Or do they mean the distribution of poverty which one may expect under their 

planned economy? Why don‟t they open up the box and show their cure-all economic democracy? 

 

Another bad medicine which the C.C.F. witch doctors are selling is the so-called social planning. What 

is this cure-all? Are they going to start planning our society? The basic unit in our society is the family. 

Are the C.C.F. contemplating the setting up of a family Planning Board or Bureau? Are they going to 

plan families as the farmer plans a herd of Shorthorn cattle? Are they going to tell the people of 

Saskatchewan who they should marry, and how many children they should have? 

 

Mrs. Cooper (Regina City): – Don‟t be silly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: – You‟re lucky to be at large. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – Are they going, by this social planning, to promote birth control? What do they 

mean by social planning? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: – You‟d better not go near a doctor. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – I think they had better clear the fog and tell the people . . . 

 

Mrs. Cooper: – Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege, I would like to ask – is it permissible, in a 

budget debate, for a member to completely ignore the budget and talk on other matters? 

 

Premier Douglas: – He doesn‟t know anything about the budget. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – I am talking about the budget . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: – We have just had birth control – it is too late for you, but go ahead. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – Mr. Speaker, I am glad that this is getting across to the Premier. I may say to the 

very, very junior member for Regina – so junior that hardly anybody ever notices her . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: – That‟s a despicable thing to say. 

 

Mr. Speaker: – I am asking the hon. member to withdraw that remark. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – I don‟t think – I heard everybody referring to the junior member so I just repeated 

what I heard. 

 

Premier Douglas: – Mr. Speaker, I think the members of this House have the right to ask for a 

withdrawal – to say to any member that she is so junior that nobody takes any notice of her. He did not 

withdraw the statement. 

 

Mr. Speaker: – The hon. member for Redberry must withdraw the remark. 



 

March 4, 1959 

 

 

32 

Mr. Korchinski: – The junior member for Regina has not asked to have it withdrawn. 

 

Premier Douglas: – The Speaker has. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: – Upon your request, Mr. Speaker, I will withdraw anything that may have been 

derogatory in this particular statement. I think that the Premier has been disturbing me so much with his 

untimely remarks that I am getting confused myself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that after these few preliminary remarks I will ask you permission to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: – To a date six months hence! 

 

(Debate adjourned) 
 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:10 o‟clock p.m. 


