



















































Hansard: March 18, 1959


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

24th Day 

 

Wednesday, March 18, 1959 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

VISITOR FROM U.S.A. 

 

Premier Douglas: —Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to the members of the Legislature a visitor 

who happens to be in the city of Regina. He is Mr. Marion J. Bushemi, who is a representative in the 

Legislature in the State of Indiana. Mr. Bushemi is visiting in the city and was interested in looking over 

our building. I believe he has been introduced to you already, Mr. Speaker. I took the liberty of asking 

him to sit behind the rail, as I thought he would be interested in watching the proceedings here. 

 

He has just come from the Session of the State Legislature of Indiana, and is now interested in seeing 

how we conduct business in the province of Saskatchewan. I thought perhaps, later, when the House 

adjourned, some of the members would welcome this opportunity to have a chat with him, and find out 

what is happening in the great state of Indiana. 

 

I am sure I am speaking for all members when I extend to Mr. Bushemi our pleasure at having him here, 

and express the hope that he will take back to the State of Indiana the best wishes of the members of this 

Legislature. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to call the attention of the House to our guests in the west 

gallery here this afternoon. They are 67 Grade VIII students from the Mayfair School in Saskatoon. We 

welcome them, and also their principal, Mr. Kyle, and also their vice-principal. 

 

I would also like to take this opportunity of commending, and indeed expressing the appreciation of the 

members here to, the officials of the Canadian National Railway, to the Saskatoon Home and School 

Club, to the principals and staff of the various public schools in Saskatoon, in giving us the privilege of 

having several hundred boys and girls from the public schools in Saskatoon visit us this Session. Insofar 

as we on this side of the House are concerned, we think we are very fortunate. For a few minutes each 

day we have the opportunity of looking into the happy and intelligent faces in the gallery, in contrast to 

our usual view, Mr. Speaker! 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Leader of Official Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, we, too, appreciate very much 

the students from different parts of the province who find it possible to visit 



 

March 18, 1959 

 

 

2 

the Legislature from time to time; but really, it is unfortunate that some of the intelligence that exists on 

this side of the House, both on the floor and in the gallery, does not rub off on some of my friends 

opposite. If that were the case I am sure that some of the legislation and some of the arguments which 

have been presented by my friends opposite probably would have had a good deal more weight and a lot 

more public support than some of the arguments which have been put forward so far in this Session. 

 

LIQUOR LICENSING BILL: RECORDING 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, it is my 

understanding that the debate or discussion on Bill No. 11 in Committee of the Whole was recorded, on 

Monday evening and Tuesday evening. I am wondering if these debates are going to appear in Hansard, 

or what use is going to be made of them, if they have been recorded. 

 

Premier Douglas: —Mr. Speaker, the Clerk tells me that on his authority the debates on Bill No. 11 in 

Committee of the Whole have been recorded with the thought that they might be of some interest, and if 

the Public Accounts Committee wanted to have them reproduced, Public Accounts Committee can so 

order. Otherwise, no use will be made of them. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I suggest, if I might, Mr. Speaker, that if they are reproduced, that they be made 

available to all members of this Legislature. 

 

Premier Douglas: —They would be. They would be put out in the regular Hansard. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Thank you. 

 

REVISION OF CERTAIN STANDING ORDERS 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Douglas (Weyburn), seconded by the Hon. Mr. Fines: 

 

That Mr. Speaker with Members of the Select Standing Committee on Standing Orders be constituted 

a Select Special Committee to consider the desirability and advisability of revising Standing Orders 5, 

13 and 46, and specifically, that the said Committee be instructed that it have power to consider and to 

report with recommendations thereon: 

 

1. Amendments of Standing Order 5 to provide that the Assembly shall adjourn on Fridays at 5:30 

o’clock p.m., instead of on Wednesdays; 

 

2. Amendment of Standing Order 13 to provide that Tuesdays and Fridays be Private Members’ days, 

instead of Tuesdays and Thursdays; 



 

March 18, 1959 

 

 

3 

3. Amendment of Standing Order 46 to provide that the Mover of the Budget motion for Committee of 

Supply be given a reasonable opportunity to exercise his right to close the Budget Debate. 

 

Premier Douglas: —Mr. Speaker, this motion makes recommendations to the Committee, chaired by 

yourself, on the matter of three suggested changes in the Standing Orders of the House. The first is to 

have the House adjourn at 5:30 on Fridays instead of Wednesdays. A great many of the members 

throughout the Session have suggested they would prefer to have Friday evening off rather than 

Wednesday evening off, because many of them like to go home over the week-end, and if they are going 

home, they have to catch either the ‘Twilight’ or the bus, as there is no longer a midnight train. If we are 

going to make it a habit of not sitting Friday evenings, it might be better just to amend the Standing 

Orders, and we will not be able to sit on Friday evening, except, of course, with the unanimous consent 

of the House. This is one suggestion which is being made. 

 

Another suggestion being made is that we might use Tuesdays and Fridays for Private Members’ days 

instead of Tuesdays and Thursdays, as it is at the present time. 

 

The third suggestion here is that some provision be made for allowing the Mover of the motion to go 

into Supply some time toward the close of the debate, for closing the debate. As matters now stand, on 

the eighth day, one-half hour before adjournment time, the vote must be taken. This, of course, 

precludes the possibility of the Mover closing the debate, which is the normal courtesy and the normal 

provision accorded any mover of any motion. When the Standing Order was drafted some two years 

ago, no provision for that was made. 

 

I think these are three recommendations which the Committee might very well take under advisement, 

and make a recommendation back to the House. I would, therefore, like to move this motion, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Leader of Official Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the Premier a 

question, before you put the question. What are the reasons for having Private Members’ days on 

Tuesdays and Fridays rather than on Tuesdays and Thursdays? Why Friday instead of Thursday? 

 

Premier Douglas: —It was felt that since Tuesdays and Thursdays are both full days, it might be better 

not to take an undue percentage of the total amount of sitting time in the week. It might be better to have 

Tuesdays and Fridays, which would give a full day, and a half day. It is not something we feel strongly 

about, but we do feel it might be a better division of time. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask a question. In regard to the closing 

time of the budget debate, which is supposed to allow time for the Provincial Treasurer to conclude the 

debate, is that matter left open again, then? Is there anything in this resolution to say that you shall 

conclude the debate from the floor of the House, and that the Provincial Treasurer shall start to speak at 

a certain time? 



 

March 18, 1959 

 

 

4 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, the way it is now, the Orders provide that thirty minutes before 

closing time the debate shall close. That means that any member may get up an hour and a half before 

closing time and keep the floor right through for an hour and a half, and prevent the mover of the motion 

from having an opportunity to reply. If the Standing Orders are changed, I presume it would provide that 

one hour before closing time on the eighth day, the debate will close except for the right of the mover to 

reply, and that the vote shall be taken thirty minutes later. In other words, it would give the last thirty 

minutes of the time that is now allocated to the budget debate for the mover to have an opportunity to 

reply. That is the suggestion that is made. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out that, in my opinion, during the debate which 

just ended, there was an effort made by a certain speaker to take all the time that was allotted in the 

budget debate. Whether he had a lapse of memory and quite half an hour too soon, or not, I don’t know, 

but he certainly did make a mistake. I, for the life of me, cannot see why the Provincial Treasurer, 

despite the fact that it is a common practice that the mover of a motion shall have the right to close the 

debate as well, should have the opportunity of answering the criticisms that are presented to him any 

more than any other member should have the opportunity of answering criticisms that are leveled 

towards remarks that he has presented, in any particular debate. In any case, there are several other 

changes that I think ought to be made, and should be brought to the attention of the Select Standing 

Committee on Standing Orders. For that reason I would like to ask leave to adjourn this debate. 

 

[Debate adjourned] 

 

SECOND READING 

 

Road Allowance Crown Oil 
 

The Assembly resumed, From Friday, March 13, 1959, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 

the Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: 

 

That Bill No. 68 — An Act respecting Crown Oil within, upon or under Road Allowances be now read 

the second time. 

 

Mrs. Mary J. Batten (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, when I adjourned this debate a few days ago, I said 

at that time that the hon. Minister had stated that this Act respecting Crown oils within, upon or under 

road allowances did not impose a royalty or a tax, and for that reason I felt I had to study it further, 

because I was under the impression that it had done, in effect, both these things. I am very sorry that I 

have to say that further study has only confirmed my original view of this. I simply cannot see how this 

Act and the assessment which is made in the Act of oil that is being produced in Saskatchewan, is 

anything else than an increase in tax and an increase in royalties. 

 

I have two objections to this Bill. The first is the very principle of the Bill, where the Crown is put in 

quite a different position from anybody 



 

March 18, 1959 

 

 

5 

else in the province of Saskatchewan. There are other people who own oil and other mineral resources in 

the province, and they cannot simply go up to a producing well, and there is absolutely nothing in the 

law of our land, that gives them the right to go to a producing well and say, “You’re draining part of my 

land, and, therefore, I am going to have a share, or I’m going to ask the Court to give me a share, of 

what you produce.” This type of principle is quite contrary to anything that presently exists in the law, 

and I don’t see why the Crown should have the privilege that is denied every other citizen of this 

province It certainly is true that people who have land adjacent to a producing well are having their 

resources depleted by that well, in all probability. 

 

Secondly, I don’t think this is a correct assessment — a correct relationship between the oil that is being 

drained from under the road allowances and that which is being produced. I think this was pointed out in 

detail by the hon. member for Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson), when he pointed out that at least four or six (I 

believe) of the wells are not adjacent to any part of the road allowance, and if they are draining oil from 

anywhere, it is from other people’s sub-divisions and not from those of the Crown. Therefore, there is no 

true realistic and scientific relationship between them. I think we have to admit, quite frankly, that 

nobody knows where the oil is coming from. All we know is that it is coming out of a certain well. If the 

Crown is sincere in its desire to utilize its resources that exist underneath road allowances (and they 

certainly have that right; that is, the people of Saskatchewan own that), they can enter into pooling 

agreements whereby they can get a part of that oil. I would certainly be in favour of such an 

arrangement. Quite contrary to that type of procedure, we are going to go ahead and enforce our rights, 

whether these people want to agree to it or not. 

 

The hon. Minister pointed out that this is a situation similar to that of a landlord and tenant, where the 

tenant pays a crop share. I cannot see the parallel at all, because, after all, if you rent your land, the 

tenant knows that he is renting it and he knows he is going to pay you rent, whereas the people who have 

come on to freehold land to rent it, never knew they had the Crown (as owner of the road allowances) as 

a landlord, and that the Crown was going to get some rent out of it. This is nothing more than 

expropriation of part of the resources which these people are obtaining under a valid lease, either from a 

freehold owner or from the Crown. I think my estimate is correct when I think this is an increase in 

royalties, quite contrary to the agreement which this Crown, in right of the province, has with the oil 

companies who are leasing these Crown lands. 

 

In addition to this (and this is what I am principally concerned with) is the freehold land. As far as I can 

find out there are over 22 million acres of surveyed freehold land in Saskatchewan. These freeholders 

and going to be subject to this tax, this assessment, and are going to have to pay a part of this producing 

well to the Government. The Government already can collect tax, and does collect a large amount of tax, 

from producing wells, and I think this is quite within good principles of good taxation. There is nothing 

to prevent the Government from increasing that tax, if the revenue is not sufficient, instead of doing it in 

this — what I consider — invalid way of proceeding. But even more than that, what worries me about 

this is not so much that the producing wells are going to have to pay more money to 



 

March 18, 1959 

 

 

6 

the Government. Perhaps those wells that are producing and doing well would be quite agreeable to do 

that, or at least they would do it. What worries me is the people who own freehold land, and have leased 

this land; they are going to be subjected to the fear that the oil companies, the people who are going to 

do the leasing and the proving, are simply not going to bother proving any further land, they are not 

going to go on with any further exploration. 

 

I think that is the greatest fear that we in Saskatchewan have. Because of the socialistic tendencies of 

this Government, we have always been afraid, and oil companies have been afraid, and other people 

have been afraid, that something like this would happen. Whereas on one hand the Government has 

encouraged oil companies to come in, on the other hand they pull something like this out of the blue, 

which is quite contrary to agreements they have made, and which might very well be the very thing that 

would keep people from coming in and exploring for further oil and gas resources. I think that is the 

greatest thing we should guard against. I think, first of all, that the sanctity of the contract that this 

Government has made should be preserved. I do not think the royalties should be increased, and I 

certainly do not think that people should be pushed out of exploration because of a threat of this kind. 

 

One per cent of a producing well does not seem like very much. There is absolutely nothing to prevent 

this Government from increasing that any way they see fit, because, once the principle of taxation has 

been introduced, it can go on and on. More than that, I think this is a vicious type of principle of 

taxation, because not only can they get a percentage of the proceeds in money, but they can get a 

percentage in kind, and there is absolutely nothing, if this goes on, to prevent them doing the same thing 

with water or anything else. They can say that because a farmer received water from the road allowance, 

whether he does it deliberately or whether it seeps into his land, they should have a part of his water. I 

know that is very far-fetched, Mr. Speaker, but this Bill is far-fetched, too. It is just as far-fetched as can 

be to say that four walls producing in the centre of two quarter-section are producing some Government 

oil, as it is to say that a farmer should be taxed because he gets water from the road allowance and so 

produces a crop. 

 

This principle, I think, is a vicious one. I think this is an indirect tax — a round-about way of doing 

something that the Government does not seem to have the courage to come out and do in a forthright, 

straight-forward way. I have absolutely nothing against the Government increasing taxation, if it sees fit, 

on producing wells. I have nothing against the Government increasing the scale of royalties, if it sees fit; 

but I certainly have against them proceeding in this manner, and I will not support this Bill. 

 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to make one or two comments on this 

particular Bill in which we are giving consideration to a desire of assessing a one per cent production 

tax. 

 

The Minister says it is not a royalty and it is not a tax, but at least it is a way of bringing an additional 

$1,000,000 to the treasury. I 



 

March 18, 1959 

 

 

7 

don’t object to the Treasury attempting to get another $1,000,000 from taxation, in whatever form it 

deems necessary. I would point out to the Minister that we have had the royalty rates changed and re-

assessed from time to time, which has increased the revenue to the province. I think the last time was in 

1947 — when I looked it up, the other evening. The new royalty rates were announced at that time 

estimating an increase in revenue from the oil industry of $1 ½ million. The Minister said at that time 

that he was instituting a sliding scale of royalties — and he might correct me if I am wrong; I am 

speaking more from memory; I think it was a sliding scale of five per cent to 16 per cent. He had 

discussed this with the oil companies, and I think he had their consent. 

 

I believe he stated at the time some of the reasons for that. He said that it was preferable to do it in this 

manner, rather than a straight royalty of, say, 12 ½ per cent across the board, because we would have 

many low-producing wells in the province. You may have some stripper wells that have given 

production in the field, but they are running out, and the higher royalty rate across the board would 

cause the companies to abandon these smaller wells, these stripper wells, before they should have done, 

probably, and it would be a loss of revenue not only to the companies but to the province itself. So the 

sliding scale was instituted, and it was based on the production of the well. If the production of the well 

was low, the royalty was low. If the production of the well was high, the royalty would be 

correspondingly high. That netted us, I think, some $1 ½ million in taxes. I think that was proper. 

 

I want to say here in this case that the Minister’s statement in introducing the sliding scale of royalties 

was to the effect that this would prevent the small wells from being abandoned with a resulting loss of 

revenue both to the companies and to the Provincial Treasury. I think it is time we look into oil 

development in the province — not that I am holding any particular brief for the oil companies; but we 

are all, as legislators and as citizens of the province, interested in the development of our natural 

resources, particularly in gas and oil. We have made a comfortable start. We have encouraged industries 

to come in. I think the Minister said, the other day, and properly so, that these people who are invited in 

to develop the resources of our province and are spending huge sums of money of risk capital in order to 

do so, should receive a prize or a bonus of some nature. I think that is a good inducement. Here, when 

we have a position in the oil industry in the province which is suffering, as elsewhere in Canada, 

somewhat of a recession, I think the time is not appropriate, even if I agreed to this method of instituting 

this particular tax or royalty, or whatever the Minister chooses to call it. I think the effects on the 

industry will result in even lower prices being paid to the Provincial Government for proven and semi-

proven acreage, when bids are being made. I think this levy will be a deterrent to continued exploration 

in the province. I think the oil industry right today in this province is in somewhat of a precarious 

position due to uncertainty of the markets, due to embargoes on oil, due to other factors which the 

industry faces now. I am afraid this will create uneasiness. The industry will not know from day to day 

what Government move will be made next. 

 

I want to read information which I took to be a proper assessment of the position from ‘The Monetary 

Times’ — a neat little article which I think was submitted by Mr. Robert Tyre, who is a Saskatchewan 

correspondent, 



 

March 18, 1959 

 

 

8 

and who speaks with some voice and some authority on this matter, because I presume it is checked with 

the Government Bureau of Publications. I take it as very accurate information issued through 

Government channels. I want to point out his assessment of the oil position of Saskatchewan. I am going 

to give you the drilling statistics: 

 

The first six months of 1958 indicates a slower pace of exploration as compared to 1957. The licenses 

issued for the first six months were 355, as against 628 to the end of June, 1957. 

 

Then he spoke of the rigs operating or drilling for oil within the province, and he said: 

 

As at the end of June, 1957, there were 72 oil rigs operating within the province. As at June, 1958, 

there were 31 oil rigs operating in the province; or in June, 1958, we had 41 less oil rigs drilling for oil 

and gas in the province than we had in June, 1957. 

 

Then he spoke of the wells finished, and he said: 

 

January to June, in 1957, there were 596 wells completed. January to June, 1958, 358 wells; so for the 

first six months of 1958 we had 238 wells less brought into production than we did during the first six 

months of 1957, of unfinished wells. Completed oil wells, January to June, 1957 — 434; January to 

June, 1958 — 245. So we had a drop of completed wells of 189 the first six months of this year 

compared to the first six months of last year. 

 

Then he turned to new oil producers: 

 

The first six months of 1957 we had 438; the first six months of 1956, 238 — a drop there of 200 new 

oil producers during that six-month period. 

 

Then, speaking of the discovery rate and exploratory drilling, the same gentleman in this article said: 

 

In the first six months, the rates slipped to 16 oil and one gas compared to 23 oil and one gas for the 

same period in 1957. 

 

I took that as an accurate assessment, and gave the reasons why I did so, in order that I could assess for 

myself some accurate picture of the conditions of the oil industry in this province apart from the press 

reports and the propaganda that is published today about the great flourish in oil industry in the 

province. 



 

March 18, 1959 

 

 

9 

Speaking of the gas picture in the province, he gave these statistics: 

 

Saskatchewan gas is so scarce that the Power Corporation started delivery in September of the first 

210 billion cubic feet of gas from south-west Alberta … 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, gas is not mentioned in the Bill under consideration. The hon. 

member is out of order. It has no relation to the Bill at all. 

 

Mr. Cameron: —I am speaking about the deterrent effect on the oil industry, and the oil industry 

includes the gas industry, because it is one industry. If we talk about a well, I don’t see how we can say 

we can’t talk about this, and we can only talk about it because it is one industry, and I am speaking 

about the effects of this deterrent on industry, on the gas and oil industry. So if I am not permitted to 

speak about gas, I cannot complete the assessment of the picture of the oil industry in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member is out of order in discussing gas. 

 

Mr. Cameron: —Mr. Speaker, I won’t discuss gas, if that is your ruling, but I am saying there is only 

one gas well produced in Saskatchewan during those six months. Apart from that, I just want to close the 

gap by saying that the Borden Commission (I think it was) said that we may end up as a ‘have not’ 

province in regard to the gas resources. I say, in view of those statistics, even if I did agree with this 

legislation, I think it would be inappropriate to create an extra burden and to cause an air of uneasiness 

when we have oil rigs leaving the province, and one-half of the oil rigs of the western Canadian industry 

on storage lots and not in use right today in the Canadian oil industry. With new fields and new publicity 

in the northern areas and the possibility of finding oil there, I question the wisdom of bringing in a 

special tax of this nature at this time. 

 

I want to say further that I think we are treading on dangerous ground in that we are making a breach of 

a contract. Those agreements were entered into with this Government, properly signed, sealed and 

delivered, and this was the agreement under which they were to operate. I notice that the Premier, 

speaking to the Mines Ministers’ Conference (I think it was in September, 1957) made a statement to the 

effect that all agreements would be kept; all agreements between the Saskatchewan Government and 

private individuals, with particular reference to oil and gas, would be honoured. He said: 

 

My colleagues and I, having signed an agreement, would not be part of any government repudiating an 

agreement to which we gave our word, our pledge, and our faith. Those who come into the province in 

good faith will be accepted in good faith, and their confidence in this province and its people will 

never be betrayed. 



 

March 18, 1959 

 

 

10 

I say that, in view of that strong commitment given by the responsible Premier of this province 

particularly to the oil industry in the province, these contracts should be looked upon as a sacred thing, 

and once the commitment is given, that commitment should be obeyed to the letter, and if they have 

faith in us, we must have faith in them. I say this legislation is a breach of that trust and that faith, and 

will have a tremendous deterrent on the gas and oil development of this province. For that reason I 

cannot support the motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, arrangements have been made for the House to adjourn for a 

special occasion in a few minutes. It is obvious that I cannot deal with this question in reply to the points 

raised by the hon. members opposite in the time available. Therefore, I would like to have permission to 

adjourn the debate. 

 

[Debate adjourned] 

 

Premier Douglas: —Mr. Speaker, the ceremony welcoming the Richardson rink will be held at 3:30 

o’clock, and as we need some time to get the guests into their places, I would move the House do now 

adjourn. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 3:25 o’clock p.m. 

 

TRIBUTE TO THE RICHARDSON BROTHERS CURLING RINK 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:25 o’clock p.m., on motion of the Hon. Mr. Douglas (Weyburn), in order 

that Members of the Assembly might congratulate, and pay fitting tribute to, members of the Richardson 

Rink of the civil Service Curling Club, Regina, on their magnificent and outstanding achievements in 

winning the Dominion curling Championship at Quebec City, and subsequently defeating the Scottish 

champions in all five games of The Scotch Cup series, played in Scotland, earning in their progress to 

victory great credit to themselves by their skill on the ice and by their deportment off it, and bringing 

glory to the Province of Saskatchewan whose representatives they were. Presentations were made to the 

victorious curlers, on behalf of the Assembly and Province, in recognition of their great achievements 

and in appreciation of the honour they had brought to Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker and Members of the Legislative Assembly, I want to introduce 

to you the famous world champions in curling, the Richardson brothers. 

 

I regret very much that Ernie Richardson, the skip of the rink, was detained in eastern Canada because of 

the illness of his wife. We all hope that her progress towards good health will continue and that soon she 

and her husband will be back home in Regina. 

 

First I would like, in the absence of Ernie Richardson, to have you meet his very proud father, Mr. Mel. 

Richardson. 



 

March 18, 1959 

 

 

11 

The third man on the rink is Mr. Arnold Richardson. 

The second man on the rink is Mr. Garnet Richardson. 

The lead man is Mr. Wes. Richardson. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Ladies and gentlemen — and that I hope takes everyone in — I am sure we are all 

equally happy to have this opportunity to do honour to four young men who have brought honour to our 

province. If there should be any doubt in their minds as to the interest with which we followed their 

progress through the various competitions I, as Speaker of the Legislature, can bear witness that the 

House permitted, without protest, several breaches of the rules in order that the members might be 

informed whenever another game had been won for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

When Mr. Brockelbank interrupted to tell us what the Richardsons had accomplished in Scotland, he 

remarked that I might look a little happier about it, sitting up there in the Speaker’s chair. But I can 

assure the Richardsons that the Scotsmen in Saskatchewan are just as happy as other residents in 

Saskatchewan that they did so well over in Scotland. to prove that I would draw to their attention that 

they were piped in by the music of the bagpipes, that I am a humble Scotchman acting as Chairman on 

this occasion, and when I look at my program I find that the first speaker is a Douglas and the second a 

McDonald; in fact there is only one person of whose nativity I am doubtful. 

 

In any case, friends, this is indeed a happy occasion and the people of Saskatchewan, I know, from north 

to south will be glad that their representatives here are a part of this gesture of recognition of such fine 

sportsmen that come from Regina. I know the Regina members feel like adopting them themselves, but I 

think they belong to Saskatchewan. 

 

We have a number of guests here, and I am not going to ask them to stand, but we are honoured by 

having here other members of the Richardson family. I can add to what Mr. Brockelbank has already 

said that the Assembly regrets the absence of Mr. Ernie Richardson owing to the unfortunate illness of 

Mrs. Richardson. I am sure that I can speak for everyone present in voicing the hope that her recovery 

will be complete and immediate, and that she will be able to come home very soon. 

 

We have other members of the Richardson family and you will have an opportunity of meeting them 

later in the Library. 

 

We have with us, also, His Worship the Mayor of Regina; I cannot look at him because I don’t know 

where he is sitting. We also have with us representatives of the following organizations: The 

Saskatchewan curling Association; the Regina Bonspiel Association; a representative of the Dominion 

School Curling Association; the Regina Curling Club and the Regina Chamber of Commerce. All of 

those are here with us and we are glad they are here sharing with the members of the Legislature the 

privilege of honouring our four Saskatchewan sons. 

 

I am not going to say any more. I was told to be very brief; that is an injunction which is not generally 

necessary in my case. I cannot say the same for those I am going to ask now to follow me. 



 

March 18, 1959 

 

 

12 

I will first call upon the Hon. T. C. Douglas, the Premier and member for Weyburn, Saskatchewan. 

 

Premier Douglas: —Mr. Speaker, I shall certainly heed your injunction to be brief, as I always do when 

the House is in session. 

 

This is a very happy and momentous occasion not only for this Legislature, but for the entire province of 

Saskatchewan. We are privileged this day to welcome back our victors who have brought such honour to 

this province as well as to themselves. It is not often that four young men, who have not been noted in 

the curling world outside of their own community, in one year win the southern Saskatchewan 

championship, then go on to win the Provincial championship, and then go on to win the Macdonald 

Brier Tankard, which is emblematic of the Dominion championship. Then they journeyed to Scotland, 

where people are raised on oatmeal and curling, as well as some beverages that are well known, and they 

beat the Scottish people at their own game. I think this is rather significant. The Scottish race don’t seem 

to be standing up so well. I think perhaps that is because so many of the McDonalds and the Douglases 

have left Scotland. They are feeling the effects of it, although their story is that when they got rid of the 

McDonalds and Douglases, sheep stealing stopped. 

 

I feel, of course, that had Mr. Johnson, who played the bagpipes for us today, gone with the Richardsons 

and played the bagpipes over there, they would probably have won their games with even bigger scores, 

because I am sure that the inspiration of the bagpipes would have done much to help you young men in 

your curling. I must say that hearing the bagpipes in the Chamber here today was a marvelous antidote 

to the Irish oratory that we had to listen to, yesterday, on St. Patrick’s Day. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 

that if ever I saw to persons who were supposed to symbolize peace-loving Irishmen, the last two I 

would have picked were the two who spoke yesterday on behalf of St. Patrick. 

 

It is a great honour and a great privilege for us to pay tribute to the Richardson rink. I, personally, of 

course, am especially proud because, although the city of Regina is claiming the Richardsons, I cannot 

forget that originally they came from Stoughton, which is in the Weyburn constituency. Therefore I have 

a deep personal feeling of pride and pleasure at the honour which they have brought to the province. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that I am speaking for all who are gathered here when I ask you to 

convey to the members of the rink the great pleasure we have all had at following their success, the pride 

that we have in the honours they have brought to us; but above all — not just the fact that they have 

been good curlers — they have been modest winners, they have been good sportsmen, and they are a 

very fine example of Saskatchewan’s manhood. We are proud of them and we welcome them home. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — — Thank you, Mr. Douglas. I want to draw attention to the trophies which have been 

won by the Richardson rink, which are on the table in front of us. The larger one is for the northern 

Provincial championship and the smaller one is for the southern Saskatchewan championship. 



 

March 18, 1959 

 

 

13 

We are about to be favoured by an address from the McDonald side of the House. I now introduce Mr. 

A. H. McDonald, Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — — Mr. Speaker, the Richardson family, ladies and gentlemen. Sometimes it is most 

difficult for a speaker who follows the Premier to answer all the questions that arise in one’s mind 

during his remarks, but I can assure you that that does not apply on this particular occasion and on other 

occasions similar to the one we are celebrating here, this afternoon. I find it is most difficult to add 

anything to the remarks of the Premier on occasions such as this. 

 

It was my understanding of my ancestry, along with the Douglases, that we were chased out of Scotland; 

it wasn’t a matter of leaving! A few years ago when we paid honour to the Campbells in this Legislature 

on a similar occasion it reminded me of one of the reasons that the McDonalds left Scotland, and that 

was because the Campbells were very severe on us at one time and pretty near annihilated us. We are 

pleased to have moved our home to Canada. 

 

I think the four members of the Richardson rink to whom we are paying our respects today, have 

accomplished something that all Canadian s and all Saskatchewan citizens are called upon to do from 

time to time, and that is to sell this western area of Canada and the province of Saskatchewan to as many 

people in other parts of the world as possible. I am sure that on your recent trip to Scotland you have 

played a great part in selling Saskatchewan to the Scottish people and to people throughout the world 

who were able to avail themselves of the activities that were going on in Scotland on this particular 

occasion. 

 

We welcome you back to the city of Regina and to the province of Saskatchewan, and I am sure that, if 

it were possible, every one of us are just as proud on this occasion as you must be. We want to say to 

you now that we sincerely hope that your Skip and his wife will return to the city and the province in the 

near future, and we hope that we will have the opportunity of meeting them when they are able to return. 

We hope that this is not he the end of your curling endeavours. We hope that you will be back in the 

playdowns another year, and I am sure that all of us, and all the citizens of Saskatchewan — except 

maybe some curlers — would wish that you could repeat the performance again next year. 

 

Mr. Speaker:— Thank you very much, Mr. McDonald. Your words have been very appropriate. Now I 

understand why the McDonalds were chased out of Scotland. 

 

The next gentleman I will call upon is Mr. L. N. Nicholson, representing Mr. A. P. Weber, Leader of the 

Social Credit group. 

 

Mr. L.N. Nicholson:— Mr. Speaker, honoured guests, ladies and gentlemen. After having listened to 

both speakers ahead of me I think that it is impossible for me to add to what they have said; but I think 

that I might, at this time, straighten out some of the confusion that is in 



 

March 18, 1959 

 

 

14 

Mr. Speaker’s mind. Yesterday was Irishmen’s day and today, apparently, is Scotchman’s day — the 

Douglases and the McDonalds apparently hold claim to Scottish blood. For your information, Mr. 

Speaker, I am a third generation Irishman, but this happens to be one occasion when I don’t mind 

associating with Scotch people. 

 

A short while ago, when the Richardson family were curling the Grimes boys at the Arona, I went down 

and watched the first game and it brought back memories to me of about ten or twelve years ago when 

the town I live in (the town of Nipawin) had their first auto bonspiel. When that bonspiel was first held 

you could go and watch the teams curl and you could definitely tell whether they were from 

Saskatchewan or Manitoba by their delivery. Furthermore, in those years curling was an old man’s 

game; it was not a spectator’s game. We found that the Manitoba people had a monopoly on the 

Macdonald Brier, and they also slid out of the hack when they delivered their rocks. Since that time our 

younger people of Saskatchewan have become very interested in curling; they have develop a little of 

the slide, so that they can deliver their rocks with a little more accuracy and by doing so they are just as 

tough, and apparently tougher, than Manitoba or anywhere else. 

 

In closing I would like to say to the Richardson boys that we are all very proud of you, not only that you 

have won, but we all know you were goodwill ambassadors for Canada and particularly for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker:— Thank you, Mr. Nicholson. Now I am quite sure that all members of the Legislature 

who represent our citizens of Saskatchewan want our successful curlers, the Richardsons, to carry away 

with them some memento of their great achievement and also a memento of the friendship of the 

members of the Legislature and the people those members represent. 

 

We have prepared a little gift, and I am going to ask the Hon. C. M. Fines, the Provincial Treasurer and 

member for Regina; the Hon. C. C. Williams, Minister of Labour and member for Regina; Mr. D. T. 

McFarlane, member for Qu’Appelle-Wolseley; and Mr. I. Elias, member for Rosthern, to come forward 

and make that presentation. 

 

[Each of the Richardson curlers was presented with a silver tea service and tray] 

 

I am now going to call upon Mrs. Marjorie Cooper, member for Regina, who has a duty to perform. 

 

Mr. Cooper:— Mr. Chairman, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, I have a very pleasant duty 

to perform. First of all, I join with the others in saying how very honoured we feel to have the 

Richardsons with us today and how proud we are as Regina citizens, and how proud I am as a Regina 

member, of all the great honour you have brought here. 

 

I wanted to say just a word to some of the unsung heroes, today, who certainly have also had a part in 

winning these honours; and I am talking 



 

March 18, 1959 

 

 

15 

about the wives and families of the boys. We know that their wives have had to put up with being 

‘curling widows’, and they have done that very cheerfully and I think most of the time, instead of being 

curling widows, they were right out there with the boys, cheering them on. 

 

Besides the wives we have with us the parents of the boys, and we are very honoured to have them with 

us today — Mr. And Mrs. M. H. Richardson of Regina; Mr. And Mrs. J. W. Richardson of Stoughton; 

and Mr. and Mrs. Richardson from Victoria, British Columbia, who, I believe, flew here for this special 

occasion and we are delighted to have them. 

 

And then we have one more person whom we want especially to honour. We have the grandmother of 

the boys here. Mrs. Richardson has lived in Regina for twelve years and prior to coming to Regina she 

lived in Stoughton. I think she is one of the proudest grandmothers in Canada today. We know she has 

every reason to be proud, and we know she probably, like all grandmothers, had a great deal to do with 

turning these boys into such fine boys as they are today. 

 

And so I have the pleasure of presenting these flowers to the grandmother of the Richardson boys. 

 

In the absence of Mr. Ernie Richardson, Skip of the Richardson curling rink, Mr. Arnold Richardson 

expressed to the members of the Legislature and the people of the province of Saskatchewan the 

gratitude and thanks of himself and his family for the warm reception and lovely gifts. He spoke of the 

wonderful time he and his brothers had had, first at the Dominion championship playdowns in Quebec 

City, and later when they had the privilege of curling in Scotland. 

 

Mr. Speaker invited the guests and members of the Assembly to go to the Library where tea would be 

served and an opportunity afforded to meet and congratulate the Richardson brothers. 

 


