



















































Hansard: March 17, 1960


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

26th Day 

 

Thursday, March 17, 1960 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Hon. J.H. Sturdy (Minister without Portfolio):  Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I should 

like to call the members’ attention to the fine group of students occupying the two upper rows of seats. 

They are from the Churchill School in Saskatoon, and Mr. Paul is their principal. I think we should take 

this opportunity of expressing our appreciation to the school board in Saskatoon, to the teaching staff 

and also the Canadian National Railway, for permitting and fostering these visits to Regina. We 

sincerely trust the students will enjoy their visit here as much as we enjoy having them. 

 

ST. PATRICK’S DAY 

 

I am sure you would think it is a tragic omission if I failed to bring to the attention of this Assembly the 

significance of this blessed day, the 17th of Old Ireland! For many years past it has been the privilege of 

the hon. member from Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) and myself to speak on this occasion. Naturally, Mr. 

Speaker, I am saddened by the thought that neither the hon. member for Cannington nor myself may be 

given this privilege in the future – I, by reason of retirement, and the hon. member through the fortunes 

of political war. But may I assure you, Mr. Speaker, that whatever the future may hold for the both of us, 

we shall continue to uphold the dignity and splendour of old Ireland, and also to foster her traditional 

role of promoting peace and harmony among men. 

 

I am sorry that my hon. friend is not in the House. Possibly for that reason I can speak more candidly, 

and in praise of the McCarthy Clan. I know it will be a matter of great interest to the members 

assembled here to learn that the Clan McCarthy built the Blarney Castle, and so gave rise to that 

romantic tradition of the Blarney stone. 

 

It is also recorded in the archives at Dublin Castle that the McCarthy held the first concession on the 

Blarney Stone, and a fine private enterprise concession it turned out to be. It appears that the McCarthys 

would lower a customer from the parapet down to the Blarney Stone, so that the customer could kiss it. 

The customer would be lowered by his heels for a penny, but in order to be assured that he would be 

drawn up again, the price was hiked to a shilling, or whatever the traffic would bear. If there was an 



 

March 17, 1960 

 

 

2 

argument about it, the poor lad never came up at all, at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have been to Ireland on occasion – several occasions, in fact. I could never see any point 

in kissing the Blarney Stone when there were so many lovely and co-operative colleens in that country. 

 

I say in all seriousness, Mr. Speaker, that I am pleased to report that peace and quiet reigns in old Ireland 

today. All the Englishmen who gave rise to so much disharmony in the past, have now become 

successfully integrated into the social and economic life of the country. Of course, in so doing a great 

number of casualties took place, but those that survived have now turned out to be more Irish than the 

native Celts themselves, as witness my own family that came from England to Ireland, some 300 years 

ago. 

 

I know the members of this House are inclined to scoff at my protestations that the Irish are a peace-

loving country, but I present this as evidence that they are. In the last Great War, Ireland declared its 

neutrality. I am prepared to admit, however, that neutrality has its advantages, because you can then 

select the side of the warring nations on which you wish to fight, and whichever side happens to take 

your fancy. 

 

I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that the members of this Assembly would wish to join with Mr. McCarthy and 

me in a silent prayer of Thanksgiving for the existence of old Ireland, and all it has contributed in days 

gone by, to a peace and harmony of mankind. I would also like to thank the Minister of Public Works 

for suitably decorating the Chamber on this auspicious occasion. I should point out, however, that these 

are merely a facsimile of the shamrock, because the shamrock grows no place in the world except in the 

old sod. 

 

Mr. J.W. Horsman (Wilkie):  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my Irish friend who is not here today, the 

member for Cannington (Mr. McCarthy), I just want to tell you what happened to him. He is attending a 

Golden Wedding this afternoon. As a matter of fact, he is the master of ceremonies. But if you can 

imagine an Irishman attending a Golden Wedding on the 17th of March almost anything could happen, 

couldn’t it? We hope he will be able to attend the Legislature again tomorrow, but in view of the 

circumstances, there remains a sort of a doubt in my mind as to whether he will make it or not. 

 

I’m not Irish myself – just a very little Irish. I wouldn’t even try to pretend that I was Irish, and I often 

wonder what it is that these Irish are so darn proud about. As far as I know, Ireland is famous for two or 

three things; for the way they can grow potatoes; for the Blarney Stone, and for the famous 

Donnybrooks they have once in a while, and for being the birthplace of St. Patrick. My hon. friend 

across the way was speaking a moment ago, and said he didn’t see why, when a person went to Ireland, 

they should kiss the Blarney Stone when there were so many fine colleens around there. In his case, Mr. 

Speaker, these colleens could not have been too fussy! 



 

March 17, 1960 

 

3 

Mr. Franklin E. Foley (Turtleford):  Mr. Speaker, faith and begorra! Since the hon. members 

opposite have cast some questions as to the future of the hon. member for Cannington, may I, too, say a 

few words on his behalf this afternoon. Now, it is said there are only two kinds of people on St. Patrick’s 

Day – those who are Irish, and those who wish they were. So in this particular case, I think today 

belongs to the Irish, and with regard to the future of the hon. member for Cannington, I am very 

confident that in the words of that old song, Mr. Speaker, for the next campaign it will be McCarthy 

lowering the boom on all opposition. 

 

Premier Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, I am sure that you and I, as members of this Assembly, would not 

want to leave unchallenged the statements made by the member for Wilkie (Mr. Horsman), to the effect 

that Ireland is famous for being the birthplace of St. Patrick. Every student of history knows that St. 

Patrick was born in Scotland, and he was sent to Ireland to Christianize the Irish. This is a task upon 

which the Scottish people are still engaged, even to this day. 

 

CORRECTION OF STATEMENT 

 

Hon. T.J. Bentley (Minister of Social Welfare):  Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, while the 

House is in such a good frame of mind due to the holiday aspects of it, I would like to make a correction 

on a statement which I made yesterday. Yesterday I announced a number of houses built in the two 

neighbouring provinces east and west, as 28 for Alberta but I wish to make the correction here, as it was 

actually 34 during the last 12 years, six more than I announced. And in referring to Manitoba, it was one 

more than I announced, making a total of five for Manitoba. 

 

MOTION RE TESTING OF ALL NUCLEAR WEAPONS 

 

Moved by Mr. Johnson (Kerrobert-Kindersley), seconded by Mrs. Cooper: 

 

“That this Assembly, alarmed at the continuing threat of nuclear warfare to the future of mankind, and 

at the continuing threat of nuclear testing to the health and security of all people, urges the 

Government of Canada to provide vigorous leadership in the councils of the world for an immediate 

and permanent end to the production and testing of all nuclear weapons, as the necessary first step 

towards disarmament in which lies our only hope for survival in a nuclear age”. 

 

Mr. Eldon A. Johnson (Kerrobert-Kindersley):  Mr. Speaker, before proceeding with this motion, I 

would like to deal with some events and situations that have taken place in recent history that have led 

me to believe that this motion is necessary. On August 6, 1945, 



 

March 17, 1960 

 

 

4 

a single American bomber flew over the Japanese city of Hiroshima. The result of its passage a few 

minutes later was to transform that formerly healthy city into an incredible holocaust, in which some 

100,000 perished, and an equal number were injured. Three days later, a similar event took place over 

the Japanese city of Nagasaki, and in this city some 70,000 people were killed, and again approximately 

an equal number were injured. Thus, these events ushered our world into what we now refer to as the 

‘atomic era’, for the bombs that were used on these two cities, used a destructive force that had not 

previously been used before in any kind of warfare. These explosives derived their force that was known 

to exist, from the nuclei of atoms, for it has been discovered and established that the energy in atoms is 

almost fantastic in proportion to its size. In comparing it with another explosive that is common, that of 

TNT, the uranium atom in dividing, yields about 10 million times the amount of energy that is yielded 

by a single molecule of TNT. 

 

That this is a new phase in warfare, that it had an immensely and incredibly destructive affect, is now 

world history. In giving my opinion that it was unnecessary to drop these bombs on cities, I am 

expressing a sentiment of a good many people who feel that the war could have been brought to an early 

and by dropping these bombs, say on an uninhabited island. The force of the atomic explosion is so 

demonstratively powerful that I have no doubt that could have convinced the Japanese people that the 

war should be brought to a conclusion. 

 

I merely mention this because, in my own views these atomic explosions and subsequent tests have 

indicated a tremendous disregard for humanity, for not only are the results of the actual explosion 

fantastically devastating, but there is also an insidious and powerful poison that is generated and 

conveyed all over the world, as a result of atomic explosion. 

 

These atomic explosions that I mentioned were the result of fusion. To elaborate on that, a fusion was 

due to the splitting of the nuclei of atoms of uranium 235. As I have mentioned, it yields a tremendous 

and fantastic amount of energy. However, these bombs – we call them small bombs because that is their 

condition now, relatively; these single bombs have energies in the range of 20,000 tons of TNT. But 

even this explosive force was not satisfactory, and it was soon possible to develop bombs that were still 

more powerful, by putting a shell of lithium deutride on an atomic bomb, and it was possible to create 

what is now known as a hydrogen bomb. This type of bomb derives its main energy from the fusions of 

hydrogen atoms into helium, and thereby creates the same process that goes on in the sun; the same 

process of fusion that provides this world with heat and light, and practically all of its energy. 

 

To make some comparisons again to the relative power of this energy, it is well know that the burning of 

hydrogen and oxygen in the formation of water is a tremendously hot flame, and yet the transformation 

of hydrogen nuclei into helium provides a heat that is some 50 million times the amount of 



 

March 17, 1960 

 

5 

heat that is generated by the burning of hydrogen and oxygen of a similar weight. Even though the 

hydrogen bomb is tremendously destructive and tremendously powerful, it has been possible to improve 

(and I use that word rather incorrectly) upon this type of bomb by putting again a shell of uranium 235 

about a hydrogen bomb. Thus we have created a bomb in which the processes of fission, fusion and 

again fission are employed, where the atoms of fusion material create a heat that is great enough to start 

a chain reaction in the hydrogen deutride, and that again ignites the shell of uranium 235. Such is the 

magnitude of these bombs that we could refer to them as super bombs; that their force is measured in 

millions of tons of TNT, and hence a word that is becoming popularized, that of megaton. It is a term of 

explosive force. 

 

The largest bombs that so far have been exploded have been in the range of 20 megatons. To try to make 

a comparison to let us realize the comparison with events that took place in World War II. During World 

War II a bomber raid of 1,000 planes, each bearing four one-ton block-busters, was in itself a raid 

sufficient to devastate a city, and yet it would take some 14 years for this fleet, flying every night, with 

each plane laden with four ton block-busters, in order to deliver an amount of energy equivalent to one 

of these super-bombs. Nor do I think that these 20 megaton bombs are the ultimate. So far it is the 

largest that has been exploded, and apparently the reason for not making them any longer is that there is 

not much point in it, for a single super bomb is capable of destroying any city in the world, even if 

merely dropped in its vicinity. 

 

The apparent and obvious destructive force of atomic bombs needs little comment, but I would like to 

dwell on some of the insidious and silent effects of explosion of atomic bombs, for they yield a material 

that cannot be perceived by our normal senses, by sense of taste or smell, and yet when these bombs are 

exploded, they yield radioactive material approximately equal to weight to the amount of the fission 

material that was in the bomb, and this radioactive material is distributed throughout the world by the 

winds that blow, and the atmosphere, and the stratosphere. This radioactive material is washed down on 

to the vegetation of the earth. It is washed into the soil, and thereby it finds its way into animals, and 

human beings. It even finds its way into the bodies of the fishes in the sea. 

 

You might ask, what are the effects of this poison? As a matter of fact, there are several. Strontium 90 is 

most often spoken of, and also Cesium 137; Iodine 131, Carbon 14. I will deal first with Strontium 90. 

Strontium 90 comprises about 3 per cent of these radioactive materials that are produced. It, like 

calcium, is a bone-seeking material, and it lodges in bones of people and children. Its effect there in the 

bones of the people who have been unfortunate enough to accumulate it, is to cause leukemia and 

cancer. It has been irrefutably proven that Strontium 90 vastly increases bone cancer and leukemia. Dr. 

Linus Pauling, an eminent scientist and Nobel prize-winner, 



 

March 17, 1960 

 

 

6 

has estimated that if one teaspoonful of Strontium 90 were distributed among all the people in the world, 

then it would cause death to all in four years. Such is the potency of this one radioactive material. 

 

Perhaps we should examine the effects of some of the others. Let me first refer to a matter that is of 

great importance to biologists; in fact, it is a matter of tremendous importance to all of us. It is the 

possession in all living things of immensely complicated molecules called ‘genes’. It is through these 

genes that we inherit our characteristics, and it is through these genes that we pass on characteristics. Of 

course, there are genes that are called ‘good genes’ while some genes are harmful. It has been proven 

beyond any trace of doubt that these genes can be injured by radiation, should it strike the reproductive 

organs. If genes should be injured, the result is to cause an effect on genes that is referred to as a 

mutation. I might say that mutation is practically always injurious. Some biologists and geneticists 

estimate that, out of 1,000 mutations that possibly one may be beneficial, and the rest are definitely 

harmful. These mutations may have effects such as causing diseases such as haemophilia; it may cause 

characteristics such as dwarfism and mental deficiency. I say this because these radioactive materials, 

especially Cesium 137, are, in the process of decay, continually emitting rays, and if these radioactive 

elements find their way into a human body, then such a body is very apt to experience injury due to this 

radioactivity, and due to the injury of the genes. This is a particularly serious condition because in 

previous ages the process of mutation and change was that of evolution itself, and the unfit tended not to 

reproduce and to die at an early age. However, in our society we try to protect those who are 

unfortunate, and so we can see the vast increasing effect of this radioactive material on our human race. 

Yet we find the tests of these atomic weapons still being continued, and the world still being poisoned. 

 

The same can be said for Carbon 14. Carbon 14 can also lodge in any part of the body, and thereby 

cause cancer. Iodine 131 can lodge in the thyroid, wherein it may cause cancer. These radioactive 

materials which have been circulating about the world are, indeed, a serious hazard, and as Dr. Linus 

Pauling estimates, for every test that has taken place, there will be some 15,000 children injured, who 

otherwise would have been healthy. 

 

Lord Bertrand Russell, also comments that to contaminate the atmosphere and the surface of the earth 

with radioactive material, is the most wicked thing that we have ever done. 

 

I have been dealing with some of the obvious effects of atomic explosions. There are also other effects, 

apart from our bodies and hereditary cancer. The fact that atomic bombs are being manufactured and 

tested, also tends to create hatred and fear, and this itself is something that beyond doubt 



 

March 17, 1960 

 

7 

is very harmful to this world. Yet the reason they have been testing is for the purpose of so-called 

defence. Yet everyone realizes that there is no defence against a nuclear bomb. There is no defence 

against a nuclear bomb – a theory that some nations subscribe to is that if they thought they were about 

to be attacked, or if they were attacked, then they would retaliate instantly. The only result of this could 

be to turn the whole world into a holocaust, and it is conceivable, that quite inadvertently, a war cold be 

caused which would cause the end of civilization as we know it. Previously atomic bombs had been 

possessed by only two powers, and that was a fairly simple situation. There is no reason to think that the 

holding or possession of atomic bombs can be held to that number. Already two more powers have 

obtained atomic bombs, and there is actually little to prevent other nations from also obtaining them. the 

more nations that have atomic weapons, I think the greater the possibility of some mischance, or some 

maniac starting a war that could be the end of this beautiful world. 

 

The only solution that I can see to this precarious situation is that there must be disarmament, as a step 

towards peace. Even though the very existence of atomic bombs, the testing, is a great reason for a good 

deal of apprehension, I think there is also room for considerable optimism. For example, even today 

there are some of the wealthier nations giving assistance to those less fortunate. I admit that in many 

cases this assistance is a mere bagatelle compared to the amount of money that is spent on armaments 

and atomic weapons, and also unfortunately this assistance is often given, not from a spirit of altruism, 

but for the purpose of thwarting an opposing ideology. Nevertheless, I think it is encouraging that people 

are having some consideration for those less fortunate, and I think no one can deny that projects such as 

our Colombo Plan, the Aswan Dam, loans for steel mills in India, to mention only a few, are beneficial. I 

think those very facts are quite encouraging. 

 

I think it is also encouraging that we do have a World Parliament of Nations, but here again I think that 

our United Nations Organization is deficient, because it does not include all nations of the world. 

Nevertheless, it is a world Parliament and a world meeting grounds, wherein we can at least meet to 

discuss some of our problems. Also, it is encouraging that our United Nations Organization has ancillary 

organizations, such as the World Health Organization, CARE. I think the very fact that those exist is 

room for considerable optimism. 

 

Furthermore, I am of the opinion that our nation, Canada, is in a position to play a part that is far beyond 

the actual population of our country, for we do belong to that very large group of middle powers. We 

have no armaments; we are not capable of committing any aggressions; we ourselves have recently 

emerged from being a colony; we are geographically located between the world’s two greatest powers; 

and also we have men who have played a very important part in our United Nations Organization. I 

mention only men such as Brock Chisholm, and the Hon. Lester B. Pearson, both of whom have played 

very influential parts in our United Nations. 



 

March 17, 1960 

 

 

8 

Furthermore, I think there is another event that is very encouraging, and that is the problem confronting 

us has been faced by a large number of scientists of the world, and with your permission, Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to read the appeal of 11,000 scientists as presented August 15, 1958 to Mr. Dag 

Hammarskjold, Secretary general of the United Nations. The position reads as follows: 

 

“We, the scientists, whose names are signed below, urge that an international agreement to stop the 

testing of nuclear bombs be made now. Each nuclear bomb test spreads an added burden of radioactive 

elements over every part of the world. Each added amount of radiation causes damage to the health of 

human beings all over the world, and causes damage to the pool of human germ plasm such as to lead 

to an increase in the number of seriously defective children that will be borne in future generations. So 

long as these weapons are in the hands of only three powers, an agreement for their control is feasible. 

If testing continues, and the possession of these weapons spreads to additional governments, the 

danger of outbreak cataclysmic nuclear war through the reckless action of some irresponsible national 

leader will be greatly increased.” 

 

An international agreement to stop the testing of nuclear bombs now could serve as the first step 

towards a more general disarmament, and the ultimate effective abolition of nuclear weapons, averting 

the possibility of a nuclear war that would be a catastrophe to all humanity.” 

 

We have in common with our fellow men a deep concern for the welfare of all human beings; as 

scientists we have knowledge of the dangers involved, and therefore, a special responsibility to make 

those dangers known. We deem it imperative that immediate action be taken to effect an international 

agreement to stop the testing of all nuclear weapons.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, because I believe that nuclear tests are harmful to all humanity; because I believe that they 

themselves create fear and tension as well; because I believe that disarmament is the only goal to true 

peace, and because I believe that our Government of Canada can play a very important part, I therefore 

move the above resolution, seconded by Mrs. Cooper, as it appears on the Order Paper. 

 

Mrs. J.E. Cooper (Regina City):  Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to be able to second this resolution. 



 

March 17, 1960 

 

9 

I believe that all over the world people are watching with a good deal of interest, and a lot of concern, 

the disarmament talks that are now going on in Geneva. I know we are all hoping and praying in spite of 

differences of approach, some good progress will be made during the talks. I agree with the mover of 

this Motion that there is reason for a good deal of optimism; possibly more reason for optimism, than at 

any time for many years. The reason upon which I base my optimism is that I believe the representatives 

of all the great powers of the world are well aware of the universal destruction and devastation that 

would take place, if we got into an atomic war, and also the devastation that can and will take place if 

we continue testing atomic weapons. I think these representatives also realize that a continuation of the 

arms race that we have today will eventually bankrupt the nations of the world. 

 

Another reason for optimism, Mr. Speaker, I believe, is that the people of the world, are aroused today 

as they never were before, to the very great danger that is ahead of us, and the threat to the whole human 

race if we continue producing and testing atomic bombs. I think we owe a very great debt of gratitude, 

Mr. Speaker, to the scientists of the world, as said by our mover of the resolution, something over 

11,000 scientists in 50 countries of the world that have been expressing openly and vigorously their 

great concern, and urging the nations of the world to cease producing and testing atomic weapons. These 

scientists, of course, are the people best equipped to tell us of the dangers, and to warn us of the dangers, 

and although they may not agree entirely upon the degree of danger, they all admit there is great danger. 

When warning comes from people of this kind, then it makes the rest of us sit up and take notice. 

 

I have been very pleased and very optimistic, because so many of our churches have come out strongly 

in opposition to continuing to produce, and to test these weapons, and I have also been pleased to see 

recently so many of our university professors and students who have joined the rising chorus of protest, 

against the sort of suicidal policies which we have been following. 

 

Dr. Brock Chisholm put it this way. He said the world has already a stockpile of armaments, great 

enough to destroy civilization, and why do we need more? 

 

The mover of this resolution has already pointed out the effects of radiation and atomic fall-out on the 

human race. It seems to me that in light of these facts, no nation nor any group of nations has the moral 

right to subject the people of the world to such horrible hazards. Warfare used to be confined to 

opposing armies, but today hundreds of millions of innocent people, men, women, and children, face 

possible annihilation or horrible lingering death from radiation. Not only this, but there is a new factor 

which seems to be entering this grizzly array of weapons; bacteriological weapons. I don’t know how 

many of you have read the article 



 

March 17, 1960 

 

 

10 

in Maclean’s magazine by Knowlton Nash, which says, “Have Germs Already Made the H-Bomb 

Obsolete”. I will just read a very little bit from this: 

 

“One ounce of germs could affect 28 billion people with fever. Eight ounces of one substance could 

wipe out all humanity. Nerve gases can be tailor-made to blind, deafen, paralyse and kill.” 

 

Then he goes on to say: 

 

“What the Americans and Russians are doing in this whole field of psycho-chemicals, nerve gasses, 

and germ warfare is cloaked in the greatest of secrecy, but those who have peaked behind the hush-

hush curtain in the United States, say the developments are incredible. A single ounce of toxic agent 

which causes a fever would be enough to affect 28 billion people, says Brigadier General J.H. 

Rothchild, another ex-officer of the Chemical Corps. Eight ounces of another toxic substance could 

kill every human being on earth, according to Sir Robert Watson-Watt, distinguished British scientist 

living now near Toronto. 

 

These potentials, of course, could not be realized, but they indicate how horrible germ warfare can be. 

The scientists estimate that 20 people could be killed by germs or gasses, for the cost of killing one 

person with atomic or hydrogen bomb. 

 

In the United States, military officials are seeking congressional permission to use germ and chemical 

warfare in any future warfare, without waiting for an enemy to use them first. The Canadian 

Government, on the other hand, though producing them for defence research tests, wants their 

manufacture and use banned by international agreement. Prime Minister Diefenbaker urged such a ban 

during a foreign policy debate in parliament last month”. 

 

These things, Mr. Speaker, seem to be almost beyond human comprehension – the sort of threat, not 

only to our generation, but to little children yet unborn. When we are faced with the prospects of 

hundreds of thousands of little children being born into the world with gross physical deformities or 

mentally incapacitated, it goes almost beyond imagination. It seems to me that the fact that any world 

power could consider under these circumstances, either testing atomic bombs or using atomic bombs, or 

germ warfare, that this shows the utter moral bankruptcy of our generation. It is frightening to me to 

contemplate how thin the veneer of our civilization really is, when world leaders could be discussing or 

thinking in such 



 

March 17, 1960 

 

11 

terms. It seems that science has unfolded the secret of the atom before the world has achieved the 

necessary degree of moral responsibility to be trusted with this great power, and we saw this at 

Hiroshima. 

 

Because of these factors today, we live in a world that seems to be tottering on the brink of a precipice – 

a world of fear, and insecurity and suspicion, and hate. Because we live in fear, we try to solve our 

problems and to reassure ourselves by hiding behind higher and higher stockpiles of armaments that 

become obsolete almost before they are off the assembly line. We refuse to face the fact that there is no 

defence against modern warfare, and the policy we are following is suicidal; it leads to bankruptcy, both 

economic and moral bankruptcy, and in the end will be totally ineffective. 

 

Prof. Einstein put it this way. He says: 

 

“The atomic bomb has altered profoundly the nature of the world. There is no defence in science 

against the weapon that can destroy civilization. Our defence is not in armaments, nor in science nor in 

going underground. Our defence is in law and order. Our problem must be solved by international 

agreement, international law. This is the path to sanity and freedom, and this is the only path, even for 

self-preservation.” 

 

But in spite of all these warnings, Mr. Speaker, the countries of the world continue to waste the world’s 

resources, and spend billions and billions of dollars on armaments, and we are told that the amount spent 

each year for military purposes equals the total income of two-thirds of the people of the world. For 

instance, in Burma, the average income per person is $41 a year. In the United States alone the amount 

spent for military purposes alone is $41 billion, and in Canada, I believe around $7 million. 

 

It is stated that we are doing this to protect our freedom, but I agree with Linus Pauling when he says, 

“We must not forget the problem of freedom, but it is war that is the greatest enemy to the freedom of 

the human individual”. War and militarism, and when we have won the battle against war, it will be 

possible to attack the problem of freedom and human rights in a truly effective way. This, I think, Mr. 

Speaker, is what we need today. A positive program for peace – not a negative program for the 

destruction of the world. 

 

Mankind doesn’t lack the brilliance to evolve such a program. Surely a race of people that has the 

brilliance to produce the kind of weapons that we have today, to send rockets to the moon, and time 

those rockets to within a few seconds of when they will reach the moon, to send satellites to orbit the 

sun, if we have the brilliance to do that sort of thing, Mr. Speaker, surely the world doesn’t lack the 

brilliance to seek out and root out the causes of war. Surely it is not beyond the capacity of other fields 

of science. 



 

March 17, 1960 

 

 

12 

Science has solved the problem of production until we could live in a world of plenty for all of us. 

Surely it is not beyond our competence to solve the problems of distribution, which is one of the great 

root causes of war. I think we all realize that we cannot continue for long to live in a world at peace, 

where half the world is hungry and half the world is over-fed. To live in a world where the great 

problem of the west is the problem of surplus, while the problem of the rest of the world is the problem 

of starvation. We have hungry people today looking towards the west; looking in our windows; looking 

at our surpluses, and asking a lot of questions, Mr. Speaker. Surely it is long past time to forget our 

armaments race, futile as it is, and to set out on a vigorous campaign to root out the causes of war which 

are poverty and insecurity, and race prejudice and fear. These are the seeds of war, and until we learn the 

great lesson of our Christian faith, that we are our brothers’ keepers, whether they be black, white, 

yellow or brown we will continue to live in an uneasy world and a world that is dominated by fear and 

insecurity and hate. 

 

This is why I feel, Mr. Speaker, that this Assembly should assure the Government of Canada that we are 

steadfastly behind them, in any endeavour they will make, in the councils of the world, to reduce 

tension, to stop the production and the testing of atomic weapons; to halt the arms race, and to assist the 

under-privileged nations of the world. So, Mr. Speaker, I take much pleasure in adding my support to 

this motion. 

 

Mr. J.W. Horsman (Wilkie):  Mr. Speaker, I am sure in my own mind that everyone in this House 

will support this Motion, but there have been many difficulties in the way of outlawing these atomic 

weapons. Many things have been said about the causes of war. I have always thought, Mr. Speaker, that 

the principal cause of war was in the heart of man himself, and until we can educate him away from 

those ideas, we will still likely have wars. 

 

The previous speaker just mentioned the poor nations of the world. I don’t think the poor nations of the 

world ever start any trouble, like the nations of Asia, for instance – southern Asia. People who are 

starving to death, have no means for establishing atomic bombs, or anything like that. They never have 

caused wars. It has always been the advanced nations that have done these things, and there has been 

over the ages, improvement in weapons in war, the same as there has been improvements in everything 

else. Usually, if you study history, you will find that the nations with the best armaments, other things 

being somewhere near equal, usually won the battle. That was the reason that so much effort has been 

put into arms all down through the ages. Even during the last war, every nation strived to find out how to 

divide the atom. Finally, they did discover how to do it, and when mankind found how to divide the 

atom, he released upon the world a power that was so great and terrible that it is almost beyond human 

comprehension. The first thing this great power was used for, of course, was to destroy someone 



 

March 17, 1960 

 

13 

else, or as a destructive weapon in war. 

 

There isn’t any doubt in anyone’s mind that atomic energy is the greatest discovery in modern times. All 

we have to do is use it for the right purposes. Regarding the testing of atomic weapons, we don’t need to 

test them any longer. they have been tested now until we know what they can do. We don’t need to test 

them. Only a few weeks ago, Russia fired a missile 8,000 miles through the air and landed it within half 

a mile of its target. They don’t need to test any more atomic weapons. All they need to do is put an 

atomic warhead on a missile of that kind. Further testing is unnecessary. 

 

The nations are in conference now, trying to formulate some plan of disarmament. This isn’t the first 

disarmament conference they have had. They have had many, and the trouble has always been that 

Russia, for instance, would not allow the other nations to inspect their country after an agreement was 

reached. Apparently the same trouble exists yet. Here I have a newspaper article by Lieutenant-General 

Burns, who is in Geneva, and he said: 

 

“Canada sees the ten-power disarmament conference’s first task as a destruction of the complex of 

secrecy, suspense, and fear that stands in the way of effective disarmament measures. Every country 

claimed its armaments are for defensive purposes only, yet fear of aggression persisted. It was a fear 

of the unknown of what the adversary might be doing, resulting from the frequent surrounding 

armaments and other preparations for war. 

 

In Canada’s view the only way to remove the fear was mutual disclosure of information on 

armaments. This would create a degree of mutual confidence that would permit steps to be taken 

toward an effective disarmament program. 

 

Burns said the world is faced with the alternatives of a continuation of the armed race which could 

lead only to nuclear war, or a resolve to control and abolish nuclear weapons, and move towards the 

peaceful world. The Canadian Government regards disarmament as of the utmost importance and is 

determined to bring these negotiations to a certain successful conclusion, to gain substantial and early 

result.” 

 

I think that before anything is done on this line, that the nations must agree to an inspection. I think they 

will have to before they make a deal of any kind. We are living in a new age, the atomic age, you might 

say. Young people – people living today, will realized before they grow up the great advantage that will 

be derived from this great power. We are 



 

March 17, 1960 

 

 

14 

sending rockets into space now around the moon and the earth. It is just a forerunner, to me of 

interplanetary travel, and there will be some great power, such as this, or a greater power, that may yet 

be discovered by scientists that will take us to the other planets. I think that human ingenuity is probably 

yet almost in its infancy. Anyone that would prophesy the end of human ingenuity would be making a 

very long statement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I haven’t very much to say about this, but I do think, and I have thought for some years 

that perhaps nuclear weapons were a deterrent to war, and if it had not been for these weapons, the 

nations might have been fighting again before now. Man has in his hands, of course, the power to 

destroy the earth and everyone on it, but I have more faith in mankind than to believe that will happen. I 

think the nations will get together, but they must have that confidence; they must have this suspicion 

removed from their minds before they will ever agree. 

 

There have been a good many things happen since the war that perhaps haven’t given us too many 

reasons to have confidence in some countries. Since the war, for instance, Russia has absorbed 100 

million people under her sphere of influence, against the wishes of the inhabitants of those countries. In 

the same period, Britain, Imperialist Britain, has given freedom and nationhood to at least 500 million 

people. There’s the difference between the two outlooks. I hope that Mr. Krushchev is an honest man, 

but unless he is willing, and the Russians are willing to submit to inspection of their country, I am afraid 

that we will never get together in a way to reduce these armaments. 

 

That is about all I have to say on this motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to unanimously. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. McIntosh: 

 

“That Bill No. 55 – An Act to provide for Assistance to Certain Municipalities in the Establishment or 

Improvement of Waterworks and Sewerage Systems – be now read the second time.” 

 

Mr. Alex Cameron (Maple Creek):  Mr. Speaker, when I adjourned the debate on the above motion, 

I did so with the thought in mind that we would like to have a little more clarification of some of the 

regulations to be brought down under the Bill. I understand since that time it has received an airing and a 

discussion in the House, and that was my purpose of adjourning the Bill at that time. Since that has been 

forthcoming, and there has been some indication that these regulations will be tabled, and some 

information as to policy has been discussed. . .  



 

March 17, 1960 

 

15 

Premier Douglas:  I think the material has been circulated, has it not? 

 

Mr. Cameron:  Since this has been done, Mr. Speaker, I have no further purpose of debating it on 

this second reading at all. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

SECOND READING 

 

Bill No. 75 – An Act to amend the Local Improvement Districts Act. 

 

Hon. L.F. McIntosh (Minister of Municipal Affairs):  Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendment to The 

Local Improvement Districts Act, are largely to bring The Local Improvement Districts Act in line with 

The Rural Municipal Act, with the amendments proposed or passed in The Rural Municipal Act. There 

is just one difference I think I might mention, that from time to time the Local Improvement Districts, in 

order to meet the current temporary expenses, visit the banks to borrow money. The suggested 

amendment here is that there might be times when the Provincial Treasury is flush, and provisions are 

made here to enable the L.I.D.’s to approach the Provincial Treasurer in case he has some money that he 

would like to lend out at the bank interest. That is the only difference between the amendments here and 

the amendments proposed in The Rural Municipal Act. Therefore, I move second reading of Bill No. 75. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

On Motion of the Hon. Mr. Douglas (Weyburn) the Assembly then adjourned at 5:20 o’clock p.m. 


