



















































Hansard: March 09, 1960


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

20th Day 

 

Wednesday, March 9, 1960 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mrs. J.E. Cooper (Regina City):  Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I 

would like to call the attention of the hon. members to a very fine groups of grade VII students from the 

Argyle School, Regina, with their teacher, Mr. Key. I know the members all will be glad to welcome 

them here, and we hope they all find it a very pleasant and profitable afternoon. 

 

Mr. Kim Thorson (Souris-Estevan):  Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I 

would like to call the members’ attention to the fact that among the many visitors in the gallery are a 

group of young men from the city of Estevan. They are all members of the Estevan Chamber of 

Commerce and have come here today to witness the proceedings of the Legislature. I know we are 

welcome this group of young men from one of the finest and most progressive communities in this 

province. 

 

Hon. J. Walter Erb (Minister of Public Health):  Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I, too, 

would like to draw the attention of the members of this House to a fine group of young people in the top 

row of the Speaker’s Gallery. These are the grade IX and X pupils from the Milestone High School and 

are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Ring. I am sure that the members join with me in the hope that 

they will find their afternoon here one of profit and pleasure. 

 

Local Government Continuing Committee – Interim Report 

 

Premier Douglas: Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with I would like to lay 

on the table an interim report to the Government of Saskatchewan 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

 

2 

of the Local Government Continuing Committee on the allocation of assets and liabilities during the 

reorganization of local government s. It is really a working paper which was submitted to the 

Government which I though might be of interest to the members; therefore, I am tabling this. 

 

While I am on my feet, Mr. Speaker, may I draw attention to a very fine group of young people from the 

Western Christian College at Weyburn, who are accompanied by Miss Thorkelson and Mr. Mitchell, 

and say how delighted we are to have them here and express the hope that they will enjoy their visit to 

the Legislature. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed, from Tuesday, March 8, 1960, the adjourned debate on the proposed Motion of 

the Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer), That Mr. Speaker, do not leave the Chair (the Assembly to go 

into the Committee of Supply): 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Weyburn):  Mr. Speaker, when I adjourned the debate last night, I had already 

extended my congratulations to those members of this Assembly, including yourself, who are 

withdrawing from public life at the end of this term of the Legislature. I did not include, of course, those 

members who may be retired by the enthusiastic consent of the electorate. Who they are we won’t know 

until some time later. 

 

The debate on the budget has ranged over a wide variety of subjects, all the way from trade unions in the 

United States to the advisability of forming a new political party and, therefore, I will be pardoned if I 

have to move some distance from the budget to discuss the various items that have been brought before 

the House in the course of this debate. However, I assure the House that I will come back to the budget 

before I have completed what I have to say. 

 

It has been apparent for some time that the Liberal party, and particularly the Leader of the Liberal 

party, have been threshing about trying to find an issue for the anticipated provincial election. When the 

present Leader of the Liberal party was selected, last fall, he announced that the issue in this 

forthcoming election would be Socialism versus Free Enterprise, and went on to say what he was going 

to do about the public enterprises now owned and operated by the people of Saskatchewan. I noticed, 

yesterday, that the member for Humboldt (Mrs. Batten) was regretting the fact that the impression was 

abroad, which she thought was created by the C.C.F., that the Liberal party would do away with some of 

the Crown corporations. Now, she need not blame the C.C.F. because that impression is abroad; she can 

blame the Leader of the Liberal party. I have in my hand the extract from the 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

3 

Saskatoon ‘Star-Phoenix’. . .  

 

Mrs. Batten:  Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege. I think my words were to the effect that the 

C.C.F. hierarchy and the members of the Government were trying to spread that impression, not that 

there was the impression. 

 

Premier Douglas:  Well, that’s quibbling. The impression has been spread by the Leader of the 

Liberal party, and I hold in my hand the extract from the Saskatoon ‘Star-Phoenix’ of August 27, 1959, 

which says. 

 

“Mr. Thatcher said he would favour the sale of most of the minor Crown Corporations in the province 

if a Liberal Government were elected next year. He said also he would favour the sale of the 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance to private enterprise if he were assured that it would continue to 

operate in Saskatchewan.” 

 

Now, the member for Humboldt tried to refute this by quoting a resolution from the convention which 

followed this statement. The fact remains that, the morning after the convention, the Leader of the 

Liberal party announced that he would pay no attention to the resolutions passed by the convention, but 

that he and a committee of the party were going to select the program. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition):  Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. . .  

 

Premier Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, there is no question of privilege. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald:  I meant on a point of order. You’ll sit down and I’ll state my point of order. 

The point of order is, Mr. Speaker, that the statement the Premier has attributed to the present Leader of 

the Liberal party is not in accordance with the facts. 

 

Premier Douglas:  That is not a point of order. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  His remarks were confined to the resolution that he would produce a program, the 

same way as the C.C.F. produce theirs or any other political party. 

 

Premier Douglas:  No, our convention produces the program not the leader of the party. In fact the 

Regina ‘Leader-Post’ in an editorial, September 30, goes on to state that the resolutions passed at the 

Liberal convention are not a manifesto, that they cost too much money, and that the program for the 

party would be selected by Mr. Thatcher and the committee. 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

 

4 

The fact is, that this attempt to have the issue of public enterprise versus free enterprise has met with 

such an unfavourable reaction that the Liberal party are now trying to back down. They have 

demonstrated that, both they and the Social Credit party in this House, in this debate, as they have kept 

harping about the size of the self-liquidating debt which has been accumulated to put in power and gas 

and telephone services in the province, despite the fact that this debt does not fall on the taxpayers of 

this province. It will be paid off by the people who use the services of power and gas and telephones. As 

a matter of fact, in any province which has utilities, the people who use the services pay off the debt. 

 

Government Members:  Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas:  In the province of Alberta, where power and gas and telephones are under private 

utilities, they borrow money. Who do you think is going to pay both the interest and the capital debt? 

Why, the people who use the services. The only difference is that, whereas in Alberta and British 

Columbia the people who use the service and retire the debt don’t own the utility when it is finished, in 

this province, when our people pay off the debt, the utilities will belong to the people themselves. So 

they decided this isn’t a good issue. 

 

Then the Leader of the Liberal party started picking new issues: economic stagnation in the province. 

This, of course, became so silly that he has finally had to drop it. Here is the February issue of a 

magazine called ‘Trade and Commerce’. On the editorial page the editor said he had just completed a 

tour through western Canada, and the thing that impressed him most was the industrial activity in the 

province of Saskatchewan, where he found more optimism than anywhere else in the west for the 

prospects for the coming year, both in construction and manufacturing and processing. 

 

The people of this province are getting a little tired of the attitude of the Liberal party for the last 15 

years, and that attitude is, “If we can’t run this province we’ll ruin it.” And it’s not working. The people 

of this province are proud of the progress which they are making. 

 

Then the Liberal Leader thought he would pick another issue, and when I announced that the 

Government was planning to implement a prepaid contributory medical-care program, all the Liberal 

party had to do, if they agreed with us, was to say, “Well, we’re in favour of that too.” But the Liberal 

Leader rushed in first to call this ‘state medicine’, saying it would be like the British medical plan, 

although I had specifically stated that the British medical plan would not be adaptable to our 

circumstances. He rushed in to say he had a medical plan of his own, and I will give you his own 

description of it: it was 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

5 

contained in the ‘Leader-Post’ of October 9, 1959. He said: “It would be a voluntary-type medical-care 

plan which would represent a private enterprise undertaking.” 

 

Now, he has never elaborated what that means, and not one member of the Opposition since this House 

started has stood up to tell us what a “voluntary-type medical-care plan which would represent a private 

enterprise undertaking” really is. The fact, of course, is that he has found now, throughout the country, 

that people want a prepaid medical-care plan similar in structure to the hospital plan; and the other night, 

the Liberal Leader, speaking in Regina, said the medical-care plan is not an issue any more: “We’ll have 

a plebiscite and that will settle it.” 

 

But where does the Liberal party stand on this? Are they for a public plan operated like the hospital 

insurance plan, or are they in favour of some private enterprise plan that they have never defined? They 

talk about a plebiscite. It would be very easy for the Liberal party to submit in their plebiscite a plan 

whose cost would be so high, and it would be so unacceptable, that the people would turn it down. We 

have had some experience of Liberal Plebiscites. There was one, if I remember, about “not necessarily 

conscription, but conscription if necessary.” 

 

So the Liberal party decided this is not an issue, and now they’ve got a new issue. They say now the new 

issue is the proposed merger of a new political party which would include the C.C.F., the trade unions, 

organized farm groups and other liberally minded people. And they said THIS is the issue. Not only do 

the leaders say this, but one after another the members in this House got up and said, “What about this 

new party? Why, if people vote C.C.F. in this forthcoming el they don’t know what they are voting for. 

Six months or a year later there may be no C.C.F.; so people don’t know what they are voting for.” 

 

I want to tell the members of the Opposition a little of the history of the C.C.F. that they are not familiar 

with. This organization in this province was born in 1932 by bringing together United Farmers of 

Canada (Saskatchewan section) under the leadership of Mr. George H. Williams and the Independent 

Labour Party of Saskatchewan under Mr. M.J. Coldwell. They formed the Farmer-Labour party. In the 

year 1933, the first national C.C.F. convention was held here in the city of Regina. The Farmer-Labour 

party of Saskatchewan affiliated with the National C.C.F. organization. But under our constitution, as it 

was then and as it is now, the provincial organization retains complete autonomy, and its decisions are 

made by its constituents at provincial conventions. So we retained the name ‘Farmer-Labour Party’. 

Those members who were elected to this Assembly in 1934 continued to sit in the House as Farmer-

Labour members. It was not until we went to the country in 1938 that we changed the name in this 

province to 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

 

6 

the Saskatchewan C.C.F. This has been done elsewhere. In the province of Quebec, the provincial 

branch of the C.C.F. there is known as the Social-Democratic party, but it is affiliated nationally with 

the C.C.F. organization. 

 

There is nothing magic about this talk of a new political party. Ever since 1933 we have looked for the 

day when other organized economic groups of farmers and industrial workers would come into the 

C.C.F., whether it continued under that name or some other name. This has been the trend in every 

modern country in the world. In Great Britain there had been a small Independent Labour Party at the 

turn of the century. In 1906, the Trade Union Congress of Great Britain, which by its constitution, could 

not come into a political party any more than the Canadian Labour Congress can come into a political 

party, advised its affiliate members to join in a new party to be called the Labour party. Four years later 

the British Committee-operative Movement, both in England and Scotland, joined the British Labour 

party. Most members sometimes forget that 86 seats every year are set aside in Britain for a committee-

operative member to run in on behalf of the British Labour party. 

 

That was the development in Britain and in most European countries. In Canada and the United States, 

however, under the leadership of Mr. William Green, trade unions were advised to stay out of politics. 

This has been the policy on this continent until recently. In the last two or three presidential elections in 

the United States the labour movement has actively supported one political party. And in this country 

there has been an increasing realization on the part of organized workers that, if they are to get their fair 

share of the national income and if their economic interests are to be protected, they must eventually 

take political action. A growing number of farm organizations have recognized the same thing. 

 

One of the reasons why I would be in favour of some enlarged organization is because all my adult life I 

have been interested in the plight of the farmers and particularly the prairie farmers. At the turn of this 

century, 50 per cent of the population of Canada lived on farms. By 1941 this had dropped to 31 per 

cent. The Gordon Commission says that this has now dropped to 14 per cent and that, by 1980, this will 

have dropped to 8 per cent. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition, himself, the other day, said that the city of Toronto has as many members 

in the House of Commons as the province of Saskatchewan. This is true. What chance are the farmers of 

this country going to have in the Parliament of Canada where the laws of this nation are made, unless 

they find economic allies? Are they going to find their economic allies with the Manufacturers’ 

Association? Or with the mortgage companies? The only place they can find allies are with those people 

who have a common affinity with themselves, because the farmer depends for the sale of his products on 

the purchasing power of the workers; the worker depends for the sale of his products upon the 

purchasing power of the farmer. 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

7 

Whether it happens soon or whether it happens later, the relentless trend of history will finally make it 

inevitable that organized agriculture and organized industrial workers will take political action, and it is 

our hope that they will take it in conjunction with the C.C.F. movement in Canada. I don’t know 

whether this will take one year, two years or twenty years; but when it does come, I want to make it 

abundantly clear what the position of the Saskatchewan C.C.F. is. I want to, therefore, read this 

statement: 

 

“Let me make clear the position of the Saskatchewan C.C.F. regarding any new national party which 

may be formed as the result of discussions now taking place between the national C.C.F. organization 

and the Canadian Labour Congress. Such a move will not in any way affect the status of the 

Saskatchewan C.C.F. We are now affiliated with the National C.C.F. organization. The annual 

convention of the Saskatchewan C.C.F. will decide whether or not to affiliate with the new party if and 

when it is formed. If it is decided to affiliate with the new party the position of the Saskatchewan 

C.C.F. will remain unaltered. This will not affect the provincial autonomy we now enjoy under our 

constitution, and our policy will continue to be set by our annual and constituency conventions. Those 

members who are elected to this Assembly as C.C.F. members will continue to sit in the Assembly as 

C.C.F. members. If we form a government we will continue as a C.C.F. government until such time as 

we go before the electorate in another provincial election. 

 

“The assertion that those who vote for the C.C.F. in the next election don’t know what they are voting 

for because the C.C.F. may go out of existence, is merely an attempt to deceive the voters. Those who 

vote for the C.C.F. will know that the members elected are the same; our platform will be the same, 

and the name of our party will be the same, the Saskatchewan C.C.F. 

 

“The fact that our provincial convention may or may not decide to affiliate with an enlarged national 

federation for the promotion of those social and economic ideals we hold in common, will in no way 

alter our status or our policies in this province. 

 

“Twenty-eight years ago we began as an amalgamation of farm and labour groups. We have proven 

that such an amalgamation can work together to improve the lot of both the farmer and city dwellers. 

If at any time other groups holding similar views to our own, wish to join our ranks, we will welcome 

them. However, this will in 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

 

8 

“no way change the personnel, program or the name of the party. If the people of this province elect a 

C.C.F. government in the next election, then a C.C.F. government it will remain for its entire term of 

office.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am making this statement with the full authority of all my colleagues in this Assembly, 

and with the complete approval of the provincial executive of the Saskatchewan C.C.F. organization. I 

want to say that this statement is not a declaration of any new policy. It is a clarification for the benefit 

of those who are not familiar with the C.C.F. constitution. The C.C.F. provincial organization has 

always had complete autonomy, and their policies are set at the annual provincial and constituency 

conventions. No broadening of the base of the national organizations will alter the status or program of 

the C.C.F. party in Saskatchewan. I may say that this stand is in line with the expressed declaration by 

the joint committee of the C.C.F. and C.L.C., which is to the effect that in any national organization 

which may be formed, each provincial group shall continue to exercise complete provincial autonomy. 

 

Have you ever noticed, Mr. Speaker, that people who are very good at minding everybody else’s 

business usually aren’t so good at minding their own? My friends across the way have spent almost half 

the time of the debate in this Legislature telling the C.C.F. how to run their affairs. Maybe the 

Opposition should look at their own internal affairs. Here is a party that was in office for 34 years in 

their inaction and ineptitude. They have wandered in the political wilderness for 16 years. Have they 

ever stopped to ask themselves why? I can tell them. It was because the people of this province know 

that this is a party without a philosophy and without a program. In 1948 they went to the country 

shouting “socialism, bureaucracy, regimentation”, and people laughed at them. In 1952 they went to the 

country screaming “economic stagnation.” Remember Mr. Tucker saying that not a barrel of oil would 

be produced in Saskatchewan as long as there was a C.C.F. government! People didn’t believe him. In 

1956 they went to the country promising that they would give the farmers back the $500 they had paid 

to install power, but the farmers knew perfectly well that to do that they would have to borrow $25 

million or so, which would add to the debt which the farmer would have to pay back through their power 

rate: not only $25 million of principal but over a 20-year period, another $25 million in interest. 

Therefore, they knew that either they had to borrow the money or they had to raise the power rates. The 

farmers weren’t fooled by that. Maybe the Opposition weren’t bright enough to see it, for the farmers 

were. 

 

Government Members:  Hear! Hear! 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

9 

Premier Douglas:  The fact is that they haven’t got any consistent philosophy. They can’t fool people 

when they stand up in debate and say, “We’re going to cut taxes, but we are going to increase 

expenditures.” It doesn’t fool anyone. They stand up and say, “We will let the farmers drive their trucks 

with purple gas,” and the farmers know that this means a loss of some $2 1/2 million in revenue and 

that, if you cut your revenue, you have to cut your expenditures, and that, if you cut expenditures on 

municipal roads by $2 1/2 million, the municipality would have to put 4 mills on all the farm lands in 

Saskatchewan to make up the difference. They know that. 

 

They talk about Alberta, but the farmer knows that in Alberta they pay $10 more for a farm truck 

licence; they pay $45 more for the insurance on a farm truck  $55, and it is estimated that purple gas 

would save the average farmer $24 a year. The farmers also know that in Saskatchewan on any truck 

that is over 10 years of age, they only pay $10 for a licence, whereas in Alberta they pay $35 and in 

Manitoba $60. They also know that in Alberta they can only use a farm truck to draw their own produce, 

whereas in Saskatchewan they can draw other people’s produce and do work for the municipality. 

They’re not fooling anybody. The fact is, of course, that the real thing against the Liberal party is not 

what the C.C.F. say about them. 

 

The member for Humboldt yesterday was very sad about the things the higher hierarchy of the C.C.F. 

were saying about the Liberal party. The greatest thing the Liberal party has to live down is its own 

record. The people have long memories, and the record of the Liberal party smells to high heaven and 

the people know it. The people of this province have not forgotten that the Liberal party voted against 

The Farm Security Act, they voted against The Trade Union Act, they voted against giving 18-year-olds 

the vote, they voted against car insurance and described it as the greatest “political hoax” that had ever 

been introduced in this province. 

 

Yesterday the member for Humboldt said that these false impressions had been created for instance, that 

the Liberal party would be a threat to the civil servants. Mr. Speaker, we don’t need to say that. The 

people remember that, every time a Liberal government came in, there were wholesale firings and that 

patronage took over, that the civil servants were never allowed to organize a bargaining agency as they 

have now under the trade union agreement. She said that the myth had been created that they were anti-

labour. We didn’t create the myth. People know the speeches that are made, like that of the member for 

Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson); people know that in the only Liberal government in Canada, in the province of 

Newfoundland, last year was passed a piece of legislation the like of which can not be found in any part 

of the British Commonwealth, legislation which gives the Cabinet the right to disorganize a trade union 

and take away its trade union status even though 90 per cent of its membership wants that trade union. 

People have not forgotten that. 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

 

10 

Then the hon. member for Humboldt thought that they weren’t getting credit for their health program. It 

is not what we say about the Liberal health program. The people of this province know that, in 1919, at 

the convention at which the Rt. Hon. W.L. Mackenzie King was chosen leader of the Liberal party, the 

Liberal party pledged itself to bring in comprehensive national health insurance and when they left 

office in 1957 after being in power for over 30 years, what did they leave behind? – A national hospital 

insurance act which had not paid one dollar for anybody’s hospital bills in Canada, because they put a 

‘joker’ in the act and said this could not be paid until a majority of the provinces of Canada, representing 

a majority of the people, came into the plan. In other words, those who had hospital plans could not get 

any benefit unless either Ontario or Quebec came in. It was not until a Conservative government came in 

that the joker was taken out and we got some payments, but we lost millions of dollars because of the 

joker the Liberals had put in that act. They passed the act, but they made absolutely sure that under the 

act they weren’t going to have to give us any money. 

 

I noticed, yesterday, the statements that were made both by the member for Pelly (Mr. Barrie) and the 

member for Humboldt about all they were going to do for old-age pensioners, mothers’ allowance cases 

and for the needy. Again, Mr. Speaker, if the public are sceptical, it’s because the public have good 

memories. This country is almost a hundred years old and yet, in its entire history, there has never been 

a Liberal Government in Canada who has ever paid one dollar of supplementary allowance to an old-age 

pensioner. 

 

Government Members:  Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas:  There has never been a Liberal Government in Canada that has ever provided 

health services to any of these public assistance groups. Now that they are out of office they say, “Oh, 

look what we’ll do for you.” Well, the people have followed the policy of ‘once bitten, twice shy’. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  Why didn’t you have courage to make this Speech where someone could answer 

you? 

 

Opposition Member:  You’re lacking it today. 

 

Premier Douglas:  It’s rather significant that this debate is almost finished and the Leader of the 

Opposition has never opened his mouth on the budget. For a very good reason: he has nothing to say. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  I’ll tell the Premier why I didn’t. I was waiting for you. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! Order! 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

11 

Premier Douglas:  Now, Mr. Speaker, we have finally come to the point. . .  

 

Mr. McDonald:  If I had the opportunity to answer it, I would be only too pleased and happy to do 

so. He hasn’t got the courage. He won’t say that where anybody can answer it, in the House or outside. 

 

Premier Douglas:  I was just going to say something nice about the Leader of the Opposition, now 

you’ve spoiled it for me. I was going to say the Liberal party had followed this irresponsible attitude, but 

that recently the Leader of the Opposition had been trying to take a more responsible position, and I was 

genuinely sorry (and I have said so in this House) when he announced his retirement last fall. Then the 

Liberal party had to look for a new leader, and the two main contenders were, first, the hon. member for 

Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) who took a very fine position and said that the Liberal party would not get 

anywhere screaming against Socialism and talking against labour and being negative in its criticisms, 

the Liberal party was only going to get somewhere if it had a definite policy and a progressive program, 

and with that I agree. Instead of that, however, the Liberal party chose an ex-Socialist M.P. – I think I 

can call him an ex-Socialist M.P. if he is going to keep on referring to me as the Socialist Premier of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In an article in the Winnipeg ‘Free Press’, September 21, 1959, and in an article in ‘McLean’s 

Magazine’, written by Mr. Blair Fraser, these articles said that, during this leadership contest, a group of 

well-heeled individuals in the city of Regina had put up $50,000 for the Liberal party but where were 

some strings attached. One of the strings was that Mr. Thatcher must be chosen as leader. There were 

some other strings that I will discuss at some other time, but this was the main string. The Liberal party 

had to choose between following a constructive program or following a policy of opportunism. They 

chose the policy of opportunism and expediency which, in my opinion, must inevitably lead to the sea of 

oblivion. 

 

Liberal speakers have spent a good deal of time in this debate telling us what is wrong with the C.C.F. I 

want to make two simple prophecies and they can take them or leave them as they like, but I think they 

ought to ponder them. The first thing I am going to say to them is that, in the forthcoming election, the 

Liberal party isn’t going to be fighting to form a government, it’s going to be fighting to stay as the 

Official Opposition… 

 

Government Members:  Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas:  . . . because it is going to have two other parties breathing down its neck and, 

unless it can show a greater sense of responsibility than it has shown in the past, it could easily be 

replaced in this House as the Official Opposition. 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

 

12 

The second thing I want to tell them (and I know whereof I speak) is that the present Leader of the 

Liberal party will so completely wreck their party that within two years the remnants will be coming 

either to the present Leader of the Opposition or to the member for Maple Creek asking him to pick up 

the fragments and “put Humpty Dumpty together again”. 

 

These ‘straw men’ that the Liberal party has tried to use as issues, it seems to me have very easily been 

knocked over. There are only two issues when an election takes place. The first issue is the record of the 

present Government, and the second is the program which the Government will be presenting to the 

people of the province. 

 

Let me say just a few words about the record of the present Government. I have in my hand a little 

yellow card containing the 11-point program upon which those of us who sit to your right, Mr. Speaker, 

were elected in 1956. I cannot go into detail on each of these 11 points, because I want to leave some 

time for my colleague, the Minister of Travel Information (Hon. Mr. Brown); but let me just touch on 

each point briefly. 

 

Number one in that program was that we undertook to spend $100 million on a provincial highway 

program in this term of office. We have already spent $95.3 and there is now an appropriation before the 

House which will mean an expenditure of $122.3 million. 

 

The second thing we promised was that we would contribute an average of $3 million a year for 

municipal roads. Well, Mr. Speaker, we have spent already on municipal roads $19.2 million, or an 

average of $4.8 million. If you add bridges and ferries, it is a total of $23.4 million, or $5.8 million a 

year, and there is another $7.1 in this budget. On grid roads alone in the past four years in this term of 

office we have spent $17 million; the municipalities have spent nearly $10 million, making a total of $27 

million that has been spent on the grid system. 

 

Item number three said that we would increase substantially the Provincial Government’s contribution to 

the cost of education. In the year when we made that promise our contribution to education was $13.4 

million; in this budget it will be $28 1/2, — more than double. What is even more important, at that time 

our contribution represented 31 per cent of the total cost of primary and secondary education and this 

year, it will represent some 45 per cent of the cost of education. 

 

Item number four said that we would bring up to 65,000 the farms supplied with electricity and would 

double the generating capacity of the province. This is one target we are going to fall short of. We are 

now past the 55,000 mark; by the end of the year under review we will be coming close to 60,000, but 

we will not reach the 65,000 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

13 

in this period. We have increased the generating capacity of the province from 286,000 kilowatts in 

1956 to 585,000 kilowatts in 1956 to 585,000 kilowatts on the first of January this year. 

 

Number five: we promised to bring natural gas to all the cities and intermediate towns and villages. All 

the cities of the province are now served with natural gas. In all, there are 68 communities now receiving 

the benefit of this service, and 22 more communities will be added this year. There are already some 

60,000 people in the province who are getting the benefit of natural gas. 

 

Item six: we said we would continue the rapid development of oil, mineral and forest resources. Mineral 

production has gone up from $122.7 million in 1956 to $213.7 last year, an increase of $91 million. Oil 

production has gone from 20.3 million barrels to 47.7 barrels, more than double. Our forestry production 

has remained at the fairly stable figure of $8 million. 

 

Item seven said that we would expand existing drainage, irrigation and reclamation projects, and during 

the four years under review we have spent already $7.2 million. If you include what is in the present 

budget it will be $9.1 on this program, and I may remind the House, Mr. Speaker, that we have kept our 

promise to proceed with the South Saskatchewan River Dam Development project, just as soon as we 

could get an agreement from the Government of Canada. 

 

Item eight said that we would extend the Hospital Plan to include outpatients and other health services. I 

want to remind the House that outpatient services were extended to cover tissue pathology in 1956, to 

include outpatient service within 24 hours of injury in 1958, and that outpatient service for minor 

surgery is to be set up this year. We extended the Hospital Plan to cover Uranium City and the northern 

areas. We have reduced the waiting period for newcomers from six months down to three months. We 

have set up, in the past four years, four new Health Regions and the last Health Region, Saskatoon rural 

will, it is anticipated, be set up this year. We are building under this budget a new regional mental 

hospital at Yorkton, and we are increasing the grants to the Anti-Tuberculosis League. 

 

Number nine said that we would expand social welfare benefits. We put in housing projects – 50 units at 

Weyburn, 110 units at Regina. We put in land assembly projects – 265 units at Moose Jaw, 177 at Swift 

Current, and 79 at Weyburn. We are increasing under this budget the grants for nursing homes and 

hostels. We now have housing accommodation for elderly citizens, under our housing program, for 

some 3,400 people, 326 more are under construction, 200 more will be provided for this year. We are 

building a 100-bed geriatric centre at Swift Current under this budget, and we have increased the basic 

mothers’ allowance during our present term of office. 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

 

14 

Number ten said we would continue to attract new industry to provide employment and create local 

markets for farm products. In the past four years 320 new companies have been established in 

Saskatchewan; 42 of these were major concerns, representing a total investment of over $120 million. 

Our manufacturing in this 4-year period has gone up from a value of $298 million to $341 million and, 

at the present time, our non-agricultural labour force in Saskatchewan is the highest in our history. 

 

Item number eleven said that we would protect and improve working conditions of wage earners, 

especially those in the low-income brackets. I point out to you that we have increased the minimum 

wage during our present term of office; we have provided for three weeks’ annual vacation with pay for 

those who have had five or more years’ continuous service with the same employee; we have abolished 

ex parte injunctions in labour disputes, and we have made further improvement to The Workmen’s 

Compensation Act. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is the platform on which we were elected, and I am perfectly content to take that 

record back to the people and ask for their endorsation on having done what we were asked to do. 

 

I said the second issue would be on the program which we are not submitting to the people, part of it 

through this budget and in the announcements in the Speech from the Throne. I can only mention it 

briefly as it has been elaborated on by other Ministers and will be further discussed when legislation is 

before the House. But they number such things as crop insurance, under which we will match the 

contribution of the Federal Government 50 per cent for administration costs, and we will also contribute 

20 per cent of the premium income which we will put into a disaster fund to help insure our contingent 

liability. 

 

Number two: a family farm improvement program to help improve the farmsteads of this province. We 

will start this year on sewer and water for 1,500 farm homes. Some people opposite have said that this is 

not very many. This is how we started the power program. When we started power we tried to electrify 

1,500 farm homes the first year, 3,000 the next year, and kept stepping it up until we reached the figure 

of 7,500 farm homes per year. We will start this year on a sewer and water program for farm homes, and 

I want to say that already, in the municipalities where discussions have been held with the ratepayers, 

there has been a most enthusiastic response and a very excellent sign-up. 

 

This budget will also provide for assistance to towns and villages to put in sewage and water systems. 

This will be of great assistance to these communities. This, of course, is a continuing program. 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

15 

The fourth thing that this budget will provide is assistance to rural telephone companies by which we 

will pay one-third of the cost of telephone poles on lines that are being replaced, and wherever rural 

telephone companies want to form a qualified maintenance unit we will contribute $2.50 per telephone 

installation to help to hire a full-time person to maintain their lines. 

 

The fifth thing is that we will continue, and step up, our contribution to the municipal road program, 

particularly the grid road system, and we are introducing this year the re-gravelling of the grid roads 

when they are four years old. This will be a continuing program until all the grid roads have been re-

gravelled. 

 

This budget makes provision for supplying a building for a headquarters in any district where a 

community wants to form a regional library. 

 

This budget provides for one of the most extensive highway construction programs in our history. 

 

This budget also will provide for taking gas to more and more communities, and my colleague the 

Minister for Information and Travel will be saying something about that in a few moments. 

 

One of the advantages of public enterprise, Mr. Speaker, is that we do not just go to the communities 

where you make a lot of money. We will, now that we have supplied the cities, start to take the benefits 

of natural gas to smaller communities which a private company would pass by; into communities where 

we are not gong to make money, communities who may not even contribute anything to the main 

transmission pipeline, but will just barely pay the operating costs. We have always contended that 

whether people live in a hamlet or a village or a town they have some right to the amenities of life; and 

only under a public utility system can this be adequately provided for them. 

 

This budget will provide for the first publicly owned hydroelectric plant in the province to be established 

at Squaw Rapids. This is a tremendous undertaking. This will provide power not only for our farms and 

our towns and our cities, but will supply power for the industry that we feel certain will be developed in 

that part of the province. 

 

This budget will provide for new buildings at the University and for extension to Regina College, which 

later is to give academic degrees and degree courses. Our University is growing rapidly and more and 

more of our young people are going on from high school to university and to higher institutions of 

learning. This budget is helping to provide not only more money for operating costs, but more money 

for capital investment. 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

 

16 

This budget also provides for the beginning of establishing a prepaid province-wide medical care 

program. This is a program which follows in logical sequence with the other things we have done. As I 

said in the House before, this province has moved a long way in 40 years. It has dealt with tuberculosis, 

cancer, polio; set up municipal doctor plan, union hospital districts, one medical care program in the 

Swift Current region; set up the first province-wide hospital insurance plan. Now we fell the time has 

come to find some way by which, through a contribution from each individual and subsidized out of the 

provincial treasury, a fund, sufficient to see that every person in the province can get the medical care 

they require when they require it, irrespective of their financial ability to pay, may be established. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is the real issue in an election, not whether there is going to be a merger or a new 

party. This is the program to which those of us who sit in this group are committed, and this is the 

program against which the gentlemen opposite, one after another, have said they are going to vote. 

 

When you take the vote some time this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, let them not forget this budget is an act 

of faith in the future of Saskatchewan, and particularly in the future of rural Saskatchewan. This budget 

is an attempt to take some of the wealth which has come out of industrial development and divert it into 

rural areas because of the farmers’ drop in income; to use some of this wealth from industrial 

development and resources development so we can improve the standard of living of our people, give 

them some of the amenities of life and, above all, give them a greater measure of social and economic 

security. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because I believe that this program, which will be made possible in part by this budget, 

will do must to make Saskatchewan a better place in which to live, and will give our children after us the 

hope of living in a better land, I will support the motion. 

 

Hon. Russell Brown (Minister of Travel & Information):  Mr. Speaker, as I rise to take part in this 

debate in its dying moments, I am sure that I have the whole-hearted sympathy of everyone in the 

House, the members on the floor, and the people in the Gallery. I find myself in the position of having to 

follow the Premier and the speech he has just made. As a matter of fact, I was beginning to wonder 

whether or not I was going to be permitted to take part in this debate, and I have been trying to make up 

my own mind whether or not there was some fear on the part of our Whip that, in participating in this 

debate, I might be even more boring than some of the people opposite who spoke during the last few 

days, or whether or not they were, in fact, keeping the best until the last. I was disabused on that after 

listening to the speaker who just preceded me. 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

17 

During the last three years when I have risen in this House, I have tried to report to the best of my ability 

on some of the activities for which I am responsible. I might say that I have, or course, responsibility for 

a department of government but, unfortunately, during the last few years I have not found it possible to 

say very much about the Department of Travel and Information simply because I have found it 

necessary, every session, to spend some time dealing with the activities of the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation, and attempting to straighten out some of the ridiculous statements, and clearing up some of 

the criticisms which are levelled at the Corporation by my hon. friends opposite. I cannot understand just 

why the Opposition find it necessary to attack the Corporation at every opportunity, to try their best to 

discredit it in the eyes of the public, unless it is simply because, first, it is a large corporation, probably 

the greatest undertaking in the province of Saskatchewan, and they are of the view that anything that is 

big and successful you should attack, or, second, because they are beginning to realize more and more 

over the years, that the position of the corporation in the eyes of the public of Saskatchewan is such that 

it is necessary for them to attempt to discredit the Corporation simply for selfish political purposes. 

 

The Corporation is responsible, of course, for spending a larger amount of money each year, than any 

other department or agency of government, and I want to say that we have attempted, over the years, 

with these large sums of money which have been provided for corporation purposes, to build and 

operate one of the finest, most modern and efficient power and gas utilities in the Dominion of Canada. I 

am satisfied that the record of the Corporation in development and in efficiency of operation is second to 

none of any utility which you may care to examine across the Dominion of Canada. 

 

I want at this time to pay tribute to the staff of the Corporation from top management down to the last 

lineman who goes out in all weather to make sure that power is available to our people when they 

require it. I have found through association with them over the years, that they are absolutely dedicated 

to the spirit of public service, and I want to commend them for the very fine job that they have done, and 

to assure them that the job that they have done, and will do, is certainly appreciated by the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Last year when the Provincial Treasurer rose to make his budget address he informed the House that he 

would be borrowing on behalf of the Power corporation some $36 1/2 million. That $36 1/2 million, 

together with some funds which were available within the Corporation itself, enabled us to mount a 

program last year, which cost in the neighbourhood of $42 million. This amount of money was spent on 

many hundreds of different projects throughout Saskatchewan: on generation, on transmission facilities, 

on distribution facilities, on gas lines, gas distribution systems and administration. I am not going to 

attempt to give you all the detail with respect to all of the projects on which this money was spent, but I 

would like to give you a rough idea of some of the major expenditures which we undertook, last year. 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

 

18 

Some $9 1/2 million was spent on generating facilities in the province. Of that, we spent approximately 

$2,700,000 towards the completion of the Queen Elizabeth power station in Saskatoon, which was 

officially opened by Her Majesty the Queen, last July. That pretty well completed the work in 

connection with the installation of two 66-megawatt units in that station. We spent, too, last year, in the 

neighbourhood of $4,870,000 on Boundary Dam. Again this allowed us to press forward with the 

installation of two 66-megawatt units which were slated as the amount of capacity to be included in the 

first development of that plant. We spent about a half a million dollars on development work on the 

Squaw Rapids project and, as you know, we announced that we would commence active work on that 

project during the year 1960. We also spent something like $400,000 on development work with respect 

to the power installations at Coteau Creek on the South Saskatchewan River project. 

 

On transmission we spent, last year, something like $8 1/2 million, and this was devoted to about 65 or 

70 different projects. One of the main ones in which you may be interested was work on the Boundary 

Dam to Yorkton 138 KV line. This line, some 154 miles in length, took something like $1,300,000. Last 

year, too, we completed a line, a 138 KV link from Pasqua to Chaplin, taking it closer to the city of 

Swift Current, with power from the Boundary Dam generating station. This entailed about 59 miles of 

138 KV line at a cost something in the order of $490,000. Last year, too, we proceeded with work on the 

link between the Manitoba and Saskatchewan systems which we announced in the Speech from the 

Throne last year. We built 90 miles of line from the Boundary Dam station to the Manitoba Border, and 

this line of course has been insulated for 230 KV, and cost approximately $1,000,000. We spent about 

$4 1/2 million on our distribution system, and this included expenditures on installations in new villages, 

hamlets, resorts, and one of our major expenditures was in connection with the inclusion of oil wells in 

the oil fields in the various areas of Saskatchewan. Some money was spent on the rebuilds and 

extensions to our system, and, of course, we added a large number of farms to the rural system last year, 

spending on that something like $3,690,000. 

 

Last year our gas program amounted to something like $13 1/2 million, and you will recall that we 

announced that we would be building a north-south connection to joining the northern and the southern 

systems, this to cost something like $2 million. We announced too, that we would build a line from 

Regina to Yorkton at a cost of something like $2 million. We also announced that we would be building 

a line from St. Louis across to Melfort and Tisdale, for the purpose of serving those two major centres 

and some of the smaller communities along the way. This called for an investment of just over $1 

million. Last year, too, we built a transmission line from Wilkie to Unity in order to assure continuation 

of supplies to Unity, and in order to make some use of the storage field in that 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

19 

area. We also spent about $720,000 for the purpose of providing a transmission line from Alida to 

Steelman in order that we could accept delivery o dry gas from the new flare gas plant which was to 

come into production in the Alida district some time towards the end of 1959. 

 

As the Premier announced when he was speaking a few moments ago, last year we provided service not 

only to the City of Yorkton (the last in the province to be served), but also we included some 21 other 

communities in the natural gas system. 

 

That is a brief review of what we did in 1959, and I would like to turn now to our program for 1960. I 

am sure this will be of interest to members of the House, not only because a great number of them are 

awaiting with interest the announcement of the points to which we will take natural gas service this year, 

but also I do know that there are questions in the minds of a number of members with respect to 

reinforcement of the supply of electrical energy in their area. 

 

The Provincial Treasurer, in this year’s budget address, advised the House that it would be necessary for 

him to borrow on behalf of the corporation, not $36 1/2 million, but this year, to carry out the program 

which is necessary in order to continue our work in providing sufficient generating capacity, 

transmission line, distribution system, and to continue with our program of taking natural gas to other 

communities in the province, it would be necessary for him to borrow $49,600,000. Again I would like 

to remind hon. members that this amount of money will be spent on some hundreds of different projects, 

both gas and electrical, in all areas of the province, and I certainly don’t intend to take the time to detail 

all of those projects. I would like, however, to give the House some idea of the main areas of 

expenditures during this year. 

 

Again starting with generation, I would like to say that we expect to invest some $12 million in our 

generating facilities this year. Of this amount approximately $9 million will be spent on the Squaw 

Rapids hydro project. This year our expenditures on the Coteau Creek project will increase to some 

extent, and we will likely spend just over $1 million on our work on that particular project, and part of 

this will go for the Corporation’s payments towards the Province’s cost of the dam itself. This year we 

will only have to spend about $300,000 on the Queen Elizabeth Station, and that will practically 

complete the work on that plant. On the Boundary Dam Station we will be spending something like 

$337,000, and again this is just an amount to permit us to clean up the last remaining details in order that 

those plants will be fully operative and ready to go. We will be spending, too, something like $400,000 

in smaller amounts, on our existing stations in various parts of the province. 

 

For transmission, this year, projects total somewhere between 75 and 80, and we will be spending 

something over $9 million on our 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

 

20 

transmission facilities. A few of these: $337,000 to complete the Boundary Dam to Brandon tie which, 

as I mentioned a moment ago, is to be energized at 230 kilovolts. We will be spending $527,000 to 

complete another 57 miles of 138 KV line between Chaplin and Swift Current. I am sure the member for 

Swift Current and other members in that part of the province, will be glad to know that this project is 

going to go ahead because, quite frankly if we were not able to build this line into that area this year, 

there was some doubt in our minds, at least, as to whether or not we would be able to provide sufficient 

energy from other lines to the area during the coming winter, sufficient energy to keep from having to 

apply some sort of a rationing system. 

 

The rest of the money will be spent mainly on switching stations in connection with the various power 

stations, and in connection with some of the major transmission lines which we will be building during 

the year. We will be spending a considerable amount of money on 72 KV lines in various areas of the 

province. These, generally, are designed to improve the capacity in those areas, and I might just mention 

– from Prince Albert to Shellbrook, North Battleford to Lashburn, Pasqua to Buffalo Pound, Canora to 

Kamsack. All of these will call for expenditures ranging anywhere from $200,000 to $450,000. 

 

We will, too, be spending some money on sub-stations; about a half a million dollars. These again are 

necessitated by the building of the 72 KV lines, and mainly they will be built at Oxbow, Estevan, 

Weyburn, Nipawin, Kamsack, Lashburn, Shellbrook, and a number of other points. About a million and 

three-quarter dollars will be required this year to rebuild some of our sub-transmission lines which are 

rapidly becoming out of date, and are not capable of carrying the loads which are required due to the 

increasing consumption by the consumers in those areas. Distribution will call for expenditures of about 

$3,900,000. Again I would like to point out that one of the major expenditures which will be required is 

in the various oil fields throughout the province. The remainder of the money will be spent on major 

improvements and extensions to existing distribution systems in the various communities which we now 

serve. This year we expect to be able to provide service to another 3,400 farms: these will be broken 

down about half in selected municipalities in connection with our operation “complete coverage”, and 

the remainder will be singles in non-selected R.M.’s in various parts of the province. 

 

I might point out, Mr. Speaker, that the question of the cost of farm installation comes up periodically in 

this House, and it is interesting to note here that, this year, the investment on behalf of the Corporation 

for this particular section of the cost of farm service will go up from around $800 to $990 per farm. This 

is not the full cost of providing service to the farmer; this is only with respect to the immediate service 

from the existing system. 

 

This year we will be spending something like $2,300,000, on administration on our capital expenditures 

in connection with adminis- 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

21 

tration. The major items here will be a little over a million dollars for vehicles and about $600,000 for 

tools and equipment. We plan this year only one major building, and that will call for an expenditure of 

about $205,000. This is simply to complete the service station on service centre in the city of Regina. 

We will be putting up one or two smaller buildings in various communities throughout the province 

where our activities have increased; but I would like to point out that we are including nothing in this 

year’s budget for expenditures on the head office building in the city of Regina. I will come back to that 

a little later, because there are some things I would like to say with respect to that particular project. 

 

I would like to turn now to the gas program for 1960. I would like to say here that I agree 

wholeheartedly with the Premier when he says that the gas program and the gas policy which has been 

developed by the Government and the Corporation is proving to be one of the most popular programs 

that we have ever mounted in the province of Saskatchewan. I don’t think there’s a day goes by but I 

have correspondence, phone calls, or delegations from various communities throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan, all anxious to know when they can expect to receive natural gas service. We cannot, of 

course, begin to meet all of their requests or demands immediately, because, first, it would be impossible 

to try to carry out that kind of a program in a single year, and second, I am sure, even the hon. Provincial 

Treasurer who has been so successful in the past in finding for us the money we required for our 

programs, would have a considerable amount of difficulty in borrowing the amount of money we would 

require if we were, in fact, to attempt to take service to all of the communities which desire it in the 

length of time which they would permit us to do so. 

 

I am sure there are a lot of people anxious to know, so I am going to outline just what we intend to do by 

way of adding new communities this year. I would like to start out by mentioning the new transmission 

lines we will build this year, and the new communities which will be added to the natural gas system. 

 

First, we will be building a six-inch transmission line from Yorkton up through Canora and Kamsack, 

and those two communities will be added to the natural gas system, this year. We will, too, be adding 

the town of Indian Head to the system by a lateral running from our present transmission line between 

Regina and the City of Yorkton. We will also be adding fort Qu’Appelle to the system, again by a lateral 

from that Regina-Yorkton transmission line. We will also add Qu’Appelle to the system this year by a 

further lateral from the present system. We will, too (and I am sure the hon. Member for Nipawin will be 

pleased to hear of this) be adding the town of Nipawin to the natural gas system by a four-inch line 

running from the area of Tisdale to the town of Nipawin. We will also be building year a transmission 

line from somewhere in the Moose Jaw area running south down through the town of Assiniboia, and we 

will be including the town of Assiniboia in our system and, as well, we 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

 

22 

will be providing service to the town of Ormiston and the town of Claybank, the latter two, of course, 

this year, because of the industries in those communities which require the use of natural gas for their 

manufacturing operations. This line will provide an opportunity in later years to run laterals from the 

main line in order that we will be able to take service to such communities as Mossbank, Gravelbourg, 

LaFleche, and the other communities in that area. 

 

Again this year will be making a tap from the Trans-Canada pipeline east of Regina. Last year we made 

a tap towards the Manitoba-Saskatchewan border, and we added to the system the town of Moosomin, 

and the hon. the Leader of the Opposition and I had the pleasure of sharing a platform in Moosomin, last 

year, at the time we held a flame-lighting ceremony. Again, this year, we will be making a tap from the 

Trans-Canada, and from this tap we will be running a lateral alongside of the Trans-Canada, and will be 

adding the towns of Wolseley, Grenfell, and Broadview to our system in the eastern part of the 

province. . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  You’d better vote for this, “Hammy”! 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  We’ll be doing it. 

 

Hon. Russell Brown:  I know that there are a number of other communities in that vicinity, and I am 

sure that the gentlemen who are representing the constituencies will no doubt have pressure brought to 

bear upon them. I have already had some experience with it; but there are a number of other 

communities in that area all of which are deserving of natural gas service, and all of which, I may say, 

are included in the long-range plan of the Corporation, and these communities will be added in later 

years. It is of great regret, as far as I am concerned, that funds are not sufficient this year to permit us to 

add the other communities this year. 

 

Premier Douglas:  That would help to keep the debt down. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: It would keep the debt down, yes. We have to keep the debt down. Going on then, 

Mr. Speaker, we will also be adding a number of communities to the existing transmission lines in 

various parts of the province, and this is in accordance with the policy which we have established during 

the past few years. The usual procedure is to build a main transmission line to a major market one year, 

possibly picking up one or two of the larger centre that same year, and then filling in in later years as 

funds were available for picking up these other communities. So, this year we will be adding the towns 

of Elrose, Kyle, Pense, Tompkins, Riceton, Smiley, Midale, Balcarres, Stoughton, and Lang to the 

natural gas system in the province. 

 

I want just to say that, while this appears at the present time to be the extent of expansion which we 

would undertake in view of 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

23 

the money which will be available to us, there is a possibility that as we get better estimates or more 

accurate estimates of the cost of these projects which I have enumerated, it will be possible for us to find 

some little additional funds. If that should be the case, it will be our intention then to announce other 

communities within the range of the funds which we find available in a very short while. At the present 

moment this seems to be about as far as we can go this year with the money which we will have 

available to us. 

 

Moving from that, I would just like to mention briefly where the remainder of the money which is 

earmarked for the gas system will be spent. The total amount which we will spend this year, I imagine, 

will be about $12,665,000, and in some of the major areas of expenditure we will have to spend a little 

over a million dollars this year for meters. It will take about a million dollars this year to add to the 

present systems additional customers in the various cities and towns and villages which we now serve. 

We will be spending this year about $1,300,000 on development of gas storage, on system 

improvements, regulator stations, and items of that nature. About $278,000 will be spent on engineering 

services, and we will be spending a little over $1,100,000 on gathering systems in the various fields 

from which we obtain gas at the present time. This will provide for additional well connections in some 

of the fields which have been in operation for some time, and it will provide funds for the drilling of 

new wells to be brought into the system mainly in the Hatton-Many Islands field which, of course, the 

Corporation purchased just a short time ago. 

 

One of the major expenditures which we are going to be faced with, this year, with respect to the natural 

gas system is the addition of compressor stations in order to maintain the required pressure for the 

distribution of gas throughout our system. Of course, the farther we go afield with our transmission line, 

the more pressure we will require at various points throughout the system in order to maintain the 

pressure required to see that the communities at the ends of the lines are provided with an adequate type 

of service. We will have to spend this year something like $2,000,000 on compression stations. The 

main one of these will be in the Hatton Field, and it will cost something like $800,000. We will have to 

add a station at Success, and that will cost us about $613,000. We will spend this year, too, about 

$300,000 on a small gasoline plant at Success, in order that we can pull out from our lines the wet 

gasoline which accumulates from the operation in that area. We will also be spending about a quarter of 

a million dollars on a compressor station in Unity, in order to maintain the required pressure in that area. 

 

Our transmission lines which I mentioned – our main one this year, from Yorkton to Canora and 

Kamsack, a six-inch line, will call for an expenditure of something like $720,000. The Moose Jaw-

Assiniboia line, with a larger capacity, will call for an investment of about $1,300,000. 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

 

24 

The smaller line from Tisdale to Nipawin will cost about $700,000. The other expenditure on 

transmission lines will be about $90,000 to complete the work on the St. Louis-Tisdale line. 

 

I think possibly, Mr. Speaker, it might be in order here to mention this matter of building a line from 

Tisdale to Nipawin. I think I should do so before some of my hon. friends opposite get up and question 

whether or not it is desirable to build this line, or whether or not we may be, in fact, making an 

investment which would be redundant in the event that the iron ore developments proceed in the 

Nipawin-Choiceland area. I think it has been said in this House before, certainly it is public knowledge, 

that there is every prospect of the iron ore deposits being developed in that area, and that, in the event 

that these deposits are developed, they will require, to carry on their operations, an amount of natural gas 

quite likely equal to the total consumption in Saskatoon, which is the Corporation’s largest market at the 

present time. So, I think it is obvious to all concerned that, if that is the case and they are going to 

require that amount of natural gas, a four-inch line from Tisdale to Nipawin would not be sufficient to 

serve the town as well as the iron ore development, and that is quite true. The situation is, of course, that 

because of the location and the distance from Nipawin to the ore deposits, if we built a larger line into 

the area of the iron ore development, we would still have to run about the same distance from there over 

to Nipawin with a further line as we would have to build one from Tisdale to Nipawin. So, actually, 

there is no loss by building the line at this time and it does provide us an opportunity to take service to 

the town of Nipawin probably a little bit earlier than if we should wait until some decision is made with 

respect to the iron ore development in the area. 

 

I would like to suggest that this program, and particularly the gas program (but not just the gas 

program), the entire program which I have outlined very briefly, will indicate to all members of the 

House that the expenditures which are to be made this year are definitely designed to improve the 

situation with respect to power and natural gas in many areas of the province. I would like to point out 

that, it has been said before in this House by practically every member of the Opposition, whether it be 

the Official Opposition or my Social Credit friends, they have all indicated in their speeches that it is 

their intention to vote against the motion. They are going to vote against the motion, and they are going 

to vote against the budget. Well, to vote against the motion they are, in effect, voting against this kind of 

a program on the part of the Saskatchewan Power corporation, and I am sure the people in those 

constituencies in which lie these towns that I have indicated will receive natural gas service this year, 

will be greatly interested to know that their member voted against natural gas going to their community 

this year. 

 

Mr. McFarlane:  People will vote against it, anyway. 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

25 

Hon. Mr. Brown:  Now I know that my hon. friends are going to point out, as they have on a number 

of other occasions during this Session, that simply because they say that they are voting against the 

Throne Speech or the Budget Speech that does not necessarily mean they are opposed to all of the things 

which are contained in the Throne Speech or in the Budget. I’m going to concede that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll 

go along on that with them; but I would like to suggest that that still doesn’t get them off the hook. That 

still doesn’t get them off the hook because, not only have they said they were prepared to vote against 

the Throne Speech and they were prepared to vote against the Budget, but they have also made one of 

the major issues during this Session the fact that we have a rather substantial indirect debt in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Now, I would like to suggest to them that they cannot have it both ways, and 

I think the Premier pointed out to them a few moments ago when he was speaking that you can’t have it 

both ways. No one of the Opposition side of the House has come up with any suggestion as to how they 

would carry out the expansion of the power system, the natural gas system, or the telephone system in 

this province without borrowing money for those purposes. 

 

Premier Douglas:  They wouldn’t; they don’t believe in it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown:  They don’t believe in it; but nevertheless, they have to get up and state sooner or 

later whether or not they would, in fact, see that these programs were continued in the event they took 

over the government of this province. They have either got to get up and say that they would be prepared 

to carry on the kind of programs which have been undertaken in the last few years, and admit that all of 

this ridiculous talk about the debt of the province is just so much political eyewash, because there is no 

other way in which these programs can be carried on. They have either got to admit that, Mr. Speaker, or 

they are going to have to tell the people of this province that they are prepared either to sell the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation to private enterprise and to sell the Saskatchewan Government 

Telephones to private enterprise, or that they are, in fact, prepared to curtail the development of these 

corporations and leave the people of this province hanging in the air with insufficient power to meet 

their needs. The question is just as simple as that. 

 

I get awfully sick and tired of all of this prating about provincial debt, indirect debt. They say it doesn’t 

make any difference whether it is direct or indirect, it is a debt. Well, to my mind there is a very distinct 

difference between direct debt which has to be paid out of the tax dollar paid by the people of this 

province and the debt which has accumulated in order to build up a utility to provide the power and gas 

needs to the people of this province; a debt which is offset by assets considerably more than the amount 

of that debt. I would suggest that the people of this province are not being fooled for one minute by my 

hon. friends’ talk about the public debt of this province. I spend a lot of time with the people around the 

province of Saskatchewan, and I 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

 

26 

find that, rather than the views which are shared by the hon. members opposite, the people of this 

province are quite well aware of the fact that not only is the Saskatchewan Power Corporation doing a 

tremendous job on their behalf, but they also realize the only way that this job could be done is by 

borrowing the funds to carry out the work which is needed. 

 

I would like to turn now to the operations of the Corporation, and give the House a little bit of an idea of 

what happened in 1955. I would like, too, at this time to do something which I have not done before, Mr. 

Speaker, but which I think may be of interest to the members of the House. I would like to give them an 

idea of the forecast of the Corporation’s operations for the year 1960, the year which we are now in. 

Only yesterday, I tabled the Annual Report of the Corporation for the year 1959, and I don’t suppose 

anyone has had too much time to read the Report, or to absorb the information which is contained 

therein; but I would like to make reference to a few of the things which are contained in the report. 

 

The year 1959 was, of course, another year of substantial growth of the Corporation. During the year we 

had some 158,000 customers for the electrical utility; during the year we generated for the first time over 

1 billion kilowatt hours of electric energy, and we sold just under 1 billion kilowatt hours to the 

customers throughout the province. The average price per kilowatt-hour received by the Corporation 

was something like 2,609 cents. The total revenue during the year amounted to $23,909,000 and some 

odd cents. We had over 50,000 gas customers during the year, and we sold to those customers something 

like 29 1/2 billion cubic feet of natural gas at the average price per MCF of 55.1 cents. The total revenue 

from the gas division amounted to just over $11,000,000. The total revenue, then during the year was 

something like $35 1/2 million dollars and the net revenue approximately $3 1/2 million or about 10 per 

cent of the total revenue. 

 

During the last few years we have established within the Corporation budgetary procedures in order that 

we may be able to maintain day-to-day control of the operations of the Corporation, and we have 

established an operating budget which sets out at the beginning of the year what we expect to happen 

during that year. This includes forecasts of the activities, the amount of power which will be generated 

and sold, the amount of natural gas which will be purchased and sold, and the amount of money which 

will be expended for the various operations of the Corporation, as well as the total revenue which we 

expect during the year, and an indication of the net revenue at the end of that period. I would like, then, 

to give you a bit of a forecast of the operations for 1960, as they are indicated by our operating budget 

for this year. 

 

During 1960, we again expect to have an increase in sales of electrical energy, generally referred to as 

load-growth, of between 18 and 19 per cent, and this is the kind of increase we have been experiencing 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

27 

during the past few years. It is the kind of increase which has necessitated, as has been said before, the 

doubling of the generating capacity of the Corporation about every four years. That will call for the 

generation of about 1,282,000,000 kilowatt-hours of energy, and we expect to sell something like 

1,100,000,000 kilowatt to the customers throughout the province. This will be sold to an estimated 

170,000 customers, and we expect our revenues to rise again during 1960 and reach the figure of 

something like $27,168,000. 

 

During 1960 it is anticipated that our gas customer load will rise to about 62,000. We should sell 

something like 31,000,000,000 cubic feet of gas, and this, I would point out, is not too much of an 

increase over the past year. The reason for that is that, this year, we will be using less gas in our power 

plants for power generation. We expect our revenue from the gas utility during the year to be, at the end 

of the year, something over $13,000,000. The total revenue that we anticipate for the year will rise to 

about $40 1/2 million. This will be an increase over last year of about $5,000,000, or an increase of 

about 14 per cent. But here is the interesting point that I want to bring to the attention of the House. 

Because of the very heavy increase in depreciation and carrying charges which will have to paid on our 

facilities, due to rapid inclusion in our system of new facilities, power lines, and generating stations, 

which, until such time as they do on line (and that could be delayed for a period anywhere up to four 

years) are non-revenue producing; because of this, our net income forecast for 1960 will drop to about 

$1,600,000. I mention this particularly, not that I am concerned about it, because it is the normal 

situation with the capitalization of the Corporation rising at the rate that it is, but I mention it particularly 

because I want to make reference to some of the suggestions which have been made by my hon. friends 

opposite with respect to what the Corporation should do on behalf of the farmers of this province. 

 

It was suggested by my hon. friends that the Corporation’s earnings have been such, during the past 

years, that a cut in rates would be warranted and should be made and passed on to the customers, 

particularly the farm customers of the Corporation. I believe the figure was mentioned, by my friends 

the hon. Leader of the Opposition, of something like 10 per cent. He pointed out that, in 1958, it 

appeared as if our net earnings for that year ran around 12 per cent, and he said then: “Well, of course, if 

that’s the case, there’s no reason why you can’t cut your rates 10 per cent and you’d still be all right.” 

 

I would like to point out that, if we had followed that suggestion and had, in fact, cut rates 10 per cent, 

our earnings for 1959 would have been reduced to about a million and three quarter dollars. That would 

not have been too serious; but it was obvious to us that we could not expect to maintain our revenues to 

the level of 1958 in view of the increasing investment which we were having to make every year. I 

would like to point out that, had we followed that suggestion and reduced our rates, while we would 

have got by the year 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

 

28 

1959 without a loss, for 1960, with revenues which would appear to be something like $1,600,000 on a 

total revenue of over $40,000,000, had we reduced our rates by 10 per cent, at the end of 1960 we would 

not have had a surplus earning at all, but we would, in fact, have operated at a very substantial loss. I am 

wondering, then, if I come back into the House next year with a statement which indicated that, rather 

than having broken even or a little better, we had, in fact, piled up a deficit, exactly what my hon. 

friends opposite would say to me again. 

 

I have said this before, Mr. Speaker, and I’m going to say it again, that one of the reasons we have been 

able to go out on the money markets in eastern Canada and the United States and obtain the amount of 

money which we require for the Power Corporation activities every year, has been because the 

Provincial Treasurer was able to take down to the financial interests the operating statements and the 

balance sheets of the Saskatchewan Power corporation and prove to them that this Corporation was well 

founded, well operated, and was in a good sound financial position. If the day ever came that he had to 

go down to the money markets with a statement which indicated that, rather than having operated with 

some sort of a surplus we had, in fact, operated at a loss, that day would be the day that the money 

would dry up insofar as we were concerned, and we would not likely be able to borrow another nickel 

on behalf of the Corporation. We know full well that we are going to have to continue to borrow these 

large sums every year, and we certainly could not take the change of that kind of situation developing. 

 

That is one of the reasons we have tried to point out to our hon. friends opposite, over the years, that it is 

not quite so simple as they may think to operate a utility of this kind, and certain you can not operate on 

any kind of a stable basis if you are going to turn around and, for simply political purposes, start to toss 

away revenue which is required, by great reductions and rebates of the construction charges. It is 

obvious, too, that, had we followed the suggestion of the opposition that we should (as they put it) 

follow the example of the privately-owned utility of the city of Moose Jaw and undertake to repay to the 

farmers on our system the construction charges they were asked to pay in the first instance, at the rate of 

$2.50 per month – that again at the end of the year 1960, because of the reduction in our net earnings if 

we had, in fact, had to pay out that kind of money to the farmers by way of rebate on their construction 

charges, again we would likely find ourselves operating with a deficit rather than a surplus. I might say 

that it is interesting to me to see that the Opposition have changed, to some extent anyway, their offer 

with respect to this question of construction charges. It used to be that they told us that we should go out 

and repay the $500 construction charge in one lump sum. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  Oh, no! That’s never been done. Read it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown:  Oh yes, you did; often enough. 

 

Some Government Member:  That has never been done, and you know it. 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

29 

Hon. Mr. Brown:  They wanted us to do it all at once, and they suddenly discovered that they could 

not go out and borrow $25,000,000 or $30,000,000 to pay off a debt of that kind. 

 

Some Government Member:  It’s you that said that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown:  They have come up with a new gimmick now, Mr. Speaker. Now, instead of a 

lump-sum bribe, the farmers of Saskatchewan are being offered bribery by instalments. Now, they say, 

“We’ll give you it back at so much per month”, and they point to what has been done by the National 

Light in the city of Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can recall your standing up in this House when you had the responsibility for the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation and making the statement that you dislike having to make 

comparisons with other utilities. I know now what you mean, Mr. Speaker. Having been in a similar 

position for some time, I agree with you that there really is no basis of comparison for utilities because 

of the varying circumstances. I also agree with you that it is not good for one utility to try to criticize 

another and to try to make comparisons with it. We have found our relationship with the other utilities, 

not only in Saskatchewan but in other provinces, to be of the very highest, and the last thing I want to do 

is to create any ill-will with the people in the utilities in this province. However, I would like to point out 

that it is not really surprising that National Light are able now to offer a rebate of $2.50 per month to the 

farmers to pay their construction charges. After all, they only have about 200 farm customers which they 

serve. The amount of investment which they have to make by way of transmission lines to serve these is 

hardly worth mentioning. They can, in fact, add them to the city of Moose Jaw as an appendix to the city 

of Moose Jaw, and serve them with very little additional cost, and at about the same rate. I am very sure 

that if anyone suggested to the operators of National Light that they might undertake to spread out the 

200 farmers which they serve at the present time, and to undertake to take power to 60,000 or 65,000 

farms scattered in all of the areas of the province of Saskatchewan, and to build all of the necessary 

transmission lines required to get the power out to those 60,000 or 65,000 farmers; to suggest to them 

that they would be able to do this, or should be prepared to do it, without cost to the farmer, or at the rate 

which they are able to provide these few farmers which they now serve, the answer you would get 

would be simply, “Don’t be ridiculous, it just couldn’t be done.” And, of course, Mr. Speaker, it could 

not be done. 

 

To try to compare the operations of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation with the National Light and 

Power in the city of Moose Jaw is like attempting to compare apples and oranges; there just isn’t any 

similarity at all. However, we do hear a lot about this, and I am going to suggest that, as has been said 

before, the farmers of this province are not the simple-minded individuals which our friends across the 

way would like to think. They have some idea of what is involved in taking power to them. They have 

some idea of the cost involved. On 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

 

30 

the whole, I think they are satisfied that the power service which they have obtained, and that the price 

which they have been asked to pay, has been fair and reasonable. And, of course, one thing they cannot 

overlook and will never overlook is the fact that, while our friends opposite like to talk about what they 

would do now, in all the years in which they had the opportunity of doing something about rural 

electrification, they sat on their hands and suggested that they, the farmers, really didn’t need power 

lines; they suggested instead, they be supplied with wind chargers. 

 

I would be interested in knowing, and I’m sure the people of Saskatchewan would be interested in 

knowing, where the Opposition do stand with respect to the Power Corporation. I know the hon. 

member for Humboldt, Mrs. Batten, stood up yesterday and said – I’m not quite sure of the words, and 

I’m sure she’ll correct me if I’m wrong; but she said something to the effect that they would continue 

the Power corporation, but they would operate it more efficiently. Something like that. 

 

Mrs. Mary Batten (Humboldt):  That’s what I said. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown:  That’s a nice easy statement to make, and I don’t blame the lady for making it; but 

I just wish once in a while somebody would go beyond just making a simple statement like that and give 

us some indication of exactly how they would run it more efficiently. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  Sit down right now and we’ll tell you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown:  I want to correct that statement. You know you’re wrong. You set up the Power 

Commission? You had nothing to do with setting up the Power Corporation. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  It was a public utility. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown:  I just want to correct you. Of course they don’t need to tell us what our friends the 

Social Crediters would do, because they let the cat out of the bag at their convention when one of the 

gentlemen (from my constituency as a matter of fact) got up and suggested that they ought to put a little 

icing on the cake. Among other things they were going to sell the Government Insurance Office, and one 

gentleman got up and proposed, when he didn’t know the Press were in the room, that they should come 

out and advocate the sale of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Now, that was a nice piece of icing. 

So we know where they stand. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  That’s your story. That’s spending money! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown:  They don’t deny it. At least they are honest enough not to deny it when it is true. I 

would like now to take a look at the future. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  Give us 30 minutes, and we’ll tell you. 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

31 

Premier Douglas:  You’ve only had seven days. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown:  Gentlemen, I had to sit for here for days and suffer through it, and I am sure that I 

am not any more boring than some of the people across the floor that I have had to listen to. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  Tell us about these two. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown:  About what? What are they? 

 

Mr. McDonald: About good public utilities. This is the way they ought to be run. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown:  Is that so. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  That’s right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown:  Well, I’d like to move along, Mr. Speaker, and take a look at the future insofar as 

power development in the province is concerned. 

 

Mr. McFarlane:  Call it 5:30, “Russ”. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  He can’t it’s only four. Do you want some more notes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown:  No, I’ve got lots of them here. As a matter of fact I could spend a couple of hours 

trying to educate you chaps. It wouldn’t bother me at all, but I’m afraid it wouldn’t do any good. 

 

The Provincial Treasurer, when he was speaking, make a comment, which our friends opposite have 

taken exception to on a number of occasions, when he was talking about the provincial debt. I am not 

going to try to repeat the exact words the Provincial Treasurer used, but certainly he did suggest that he 

would be disappointed if the indirect debt of this province did not rise during the next few years. He was 

referring, of course, to the fact that, in all likelihood, we would be called upon to borrow considerable 

money during the next few years to be invested in the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Our friends did 

not like that; I don’t suppose they knew exactly what he meant. As a matter of fact, that statement was 

absolutely correct, and I agree with him. I will be disappointed, too, if we do not see an increase in the 

debt on behalf of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation in the years ahead, because one of the best 

indications, and one of the best yardsticks, of the economic growth of any area is increase in the amount 

of electrical energy which is consumed by the people. If you find you have no increase in the 

consumption of energy, then you find that you have an area in which you have a certain amount of 

stagnation, and that things are rapidly drawing to a standstill. 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

 

32 

I am happy to say that our forecast of the increase in consumption of electrical energy here in 

Saskatchewan, over the years, has proved to be absolutely correct. A number of years ago the forecast 

indicated that the increase in consumption would be in the order of 20 per cent per year, and, as I have 

said, that would necessitate doubling the generating capacity of the system about every four years. We 

have projected our forecast into the future, and I am quite confident that these forecasts for future 

demand are as accurate as those which we experienced in the past, and again, at least for the next decade 

in Saskatchewan, it is indicated that our load growth will continue at the rate of about 20 per cent per 

year. This means, then, that we must look forward to increasing our generating capacity at a very 

substantial rate, and very quickly. 

 

We did announce, last year, that the Squaw Rapids project would be started in the year 1960. At that 

time I have an indication that this would not be the only hydro project which would be undertaken here 

in Saskatchewan. There may be some doubt in your mind, Mr. Speaker, as to why we can anticipate a 

continuation of the kind of load growth which we have experienced during the last few years. In that 

connection I simply would like to point out that power is comparatively new here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. We still have a per capita consumption in Saskatchewan which is the lowest in the 

Dominion of Canada. It is quite obvious that, over the years ahead, this consumption will continue to 

rise until it at least reaches somewhere of the order of the national average. That alone means there is 

going to be considerably greater demand on our generating facilities.; We must remember that, when 

power first became available to the various parts of the province, on our farms and in our hamlets and 

villages, the people might have been quite content if they had had electric lights, and probably a little 

electric energy with which to operate an electric radio, rather than try to get along with the old battery 

set. This situation does not obtain very long because, once people have available power, they soon turn 

to the use of electrical energy for many other purposes. I am sure all of the married men will realize that 

it is a difficult job to try to deny their wives the use of deepfreezes, refrigerators, televisions and such, 

toasters, electric kettles, washing machines and so on down the line. All of these things are, added as 

rapidly as the consumer can afford to install them. All of this means an increasing demand for electric 

energy. 

 

Then, too, we expect to have a considerable increase in the population of this province, in spite of the 

horrible forecast of our friends opposite. There will be a considerable demand by new industries here in 

Saskatchewan, and there will be a great demand for energy for further development of our resources. 

General commercial development itself indicates a substantial increase in demand for power. Therefore, 

looking to the future, during the next decade we see the necessity of building here in the province of 

Saskatchewan, not only the Squaw Rapids hydro project, but I am going to predict there will also be 

three other hydro projects on the river in that area – or rather two other projects, 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

33 

as well as the Coteau Creek project, or the South Saskatchewan River Dam hydro station. Four hydro 

projects will come into existence during the next 10 yeas to provide something like 995 megawatts of 

additional capacity for the Corporation’s system. This will be broken down something like this: the 

hydro project on Coteau Creek, installed capacity of something like 187 1/2 megawatts; Squaw Rapids 

projects, which is the first to be developed, will produce a total of about 268 megawatts; the Fort a la 

Corne project, which is a very good one, a total of something like 315 megawatts, and at Nipawin itself 

we will have a plant with an installed capacity of something like 225 megawatts. 

 

If you want to put a price tag on these projects along, Mr. Speaker, when you are considering the 

necessary investment of the Corporation during the next decade, you can start with about $200 million 

for these four projects I have mentioned. Add to this possibly $30 million to $40 million for the 

necessary transmission lines in order to take the power into the areas where it is required; add to this the 

other expenditures which will be necessary to maintain an expanding system of this order; add to that a 

continuous heavy expenditure in the natural gas system, and you will arrive at a figure very close, I 

would suggest, to $400 million to $500 million which would be required during the next 10 years. 

 

I am going to suggest that all the talk about the undesirability of increasing the indirect debt of the 

Province will not mean very much, when you consider that these projects will have to go ahead. Either 

that, or somewhere along the way, we will have to start to ration power to the people of Saskatchewan, 

because we won’t have sufficient capacity to meet their needs; or I suppose, you could turn them over to 

a private utility. 

 

I would like to take a little look, just for a moment, beyond 1970. While we are going we might as well 

go all the way. How far would you like me to go? 

 

Mr. McFarlane:  How many farmers are involved. . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Brown:  My friend is nattering over there, as usual. I wonder what’s the matter with my 

hon. friend from Melville, he hasn’t giggled recently – I see he’s out of the House. 

 

Mrs. Batten:  You haven’t been very entertaining! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown:  I’ll bet he went out and phoned to tell the people in Balcarres that he just got them 

natural gas! As a matter of fact, they have all been out of the House, Mr. Speaker. I hope he was kind 

enough to give me just a little bit of credit, anyway. 

 

Now moving on, I would like to suggest that, in our view, while the load growth in the province may 

slow up a bit beyond the year 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

 

34 

1970, we must expect to have to provide additional generating capacity even after the four hydro 

projects are in operation. These projects will not exhaust the entire possibilities of the Saskatchewan 

River, and it appears, from studies which we have conducted during the past year or so, that there are 

some further very excellent hydro sites between Coteau Creek and Fort a la Corne. These in all 

likelihood will be developed in the years beyond 1970, and I am going to suggest to you that, with the 

development of these projects between Coteau Creek and Fort a la Corne, eventually here in the 

province of Saskatchewan we will have an almost continuous lake running from Squaw Rapids down to 

the area of the city of Swift Current. As a matter of fact, I am advised by the people who have been 

carrying out investigations for us, that with the proper use of pump storage there is an extremely 

excellent possibility of actually moving water from the North Saskatchewan River right down to the 

central part of the province of Saskatchewan, if it is required. We were discussing this at a Board 

meeting the other day, and the vice-chairman of the Board, the hon. Minister of Mineral Resources, said 

to me, “I suppose when you get up to speak in the Legislature, that you will be telling the House that 

what you are going to do is make water run up-hill.” Well, in effect, it could be done with that kind of a 

system. 

 

That is a general idea of what we may expect by way of future development of the generating capacity 

and the other facilities in the province. There is not much more I want to say on that, except one thing to 

which I wish to refer and that is one of the hon. members opposite – I think it was probably in a previous 

debate, and I know I am out of order in referring to it, Mr. Speaker, but it struck me as rather odd, 

because the gentleman criticized us for building all of our plants in the same Time Zone. I will agree 

with him, and I am glad to know that he recognizes the fact that there is some advantage in operating a 

utility if you do have your plants in different time zones. But when he criticizes us for building them all 

in the same Time zone, he forgot to tell us how we could move the hydro sites or the coalfields into the 

Time zones into which we wanted the plant, because of course, it is obvious that you have to build the 

plant where the sources of energy are. The two sources of energy which we enjoy in Saskatchewan are 

the cheap lignite coal in the Estevan area, and now the hydro sites in the northern part of the province. I 

would be happy, indeed, to build them where they would be most advantageous, but I still have not 

figured out how it could be done. If the gentleman would help me on that, I would appreciate it very 

much indeed. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  What sort of energy do you use in Saskatoon? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown:  Mostly Alberta coal and oil and gas. As a matter of fact, we do have a lot of our 

stations in different Time zones, but the only ones we have in the Central Standard Time zone are the 

two at Estevan. 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

35 

Mr. Speaker, I have not much more time before we have to take a vote on the motion. However, there is 

one matter I would like to touch on briefly, because it has been criticized quite considerably, both within 

the House and outside. I mentioned the fact that we announced, some time ago, the Corporation was 

buying, for a figure in the neighbourhood of $20 million, an entire gas field called the Hatton-Many 

Islands Gas field, which lies astride the Saskatchewan-Alberta border. Immediately we made this 

announcement, our friends across the way, and some of their cohorts, labelled this as “ridiculous, 

extravagant, senseless” and about everything else they could lay their tongue to, without, of course, 

giving any thought to reasons why we decided to make this purchase, or the advantages of the purchase. 

 

It has been suggested that one of the reasons we were foolish to buy it was because, after all, we didn’t 

know for sure whether the gas was there. About all I can say to that is that we have obtained the best 

advice possible from competent geologists and the gas engineers, and we have checked the estimates 

which have been made not only by our own people, but by the Department of Mineral Resources, the 

officials in Alberta, and everyone else, and we are quite satisfied that the amount of gas which is 

supposed to be there is, in fact, there. As a matter of fact, I would point out that the whole project was 

based on a figure of gas available much less than the engineering studies indicate there is actually in the 

field. It was suggested, too, by one of my friends opposite that, after all, we were crazy to buy this field 

because there might be an earthquake, and the blooming old gas might go and move, and we wouldn’t 

be able to recover it when we wanted it. Of course, if you follow that line of thinking, I suppose we 

should not build any power plants, any highways; we should not put any pipelines in the ground, 

because after all, there might be earthquakes, and the darn things would be ruined and we would lose 

money. 

 

I would like to point out that the reason we bought this gas field was a very good one, because we have 

been checking the reserves available to the Corporation during the next 30-year period, in order to find 

out how much more gas we would have to get our hands on, if we were to have sufficient gas to meet 

our needs over that 30-year period. Our studies indicate that Saskatchewan requirements over the next 

30-year period will be something like 4 1/2 trillion cubic feet of gas. We estimated that the 

Saskatchewan reserves which are available at the present time, and giving some consideration to the 

prospective reserves which may be proved up in the future, indicate that there is only about 970 billion 

cubic feet of reserves available at the moment. We have to look, then, for something like 3 1/2 trillion 

cubic feet in order to insure ourselves of sufficient supplies to meet our needs in the years ahead. If you 

take into consideration the amount of gas in the Hatton Field, we are still a long way from having 

sufficient reserves tied up. I say then that, in the first place, it was a very smart move for the Corporation 

to buy an entire gas field 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

 

36 

and have it available to us, because it does improve our reserve position. Certainly because we own the 

entire field and can produce it any time we like, gives us a certain amount of flexibility in the operation 

of other gas projects. 

 

This was not the only reason why we wanted to buy the field. If it were only that, there might be some 

basis for the criticism to which we have had to listen. Let us take a look at the price of this gas, because 

this is very important. The price we pay for gas, under most of our contracts at the present time, is about 

10 cents per MCF. This won’t remain so because all prices are going up, and we are gong to have to 

expect to pay anywhere from 17 cents to 18 cents, within the course of a few years, for our gas supply. 

Any saving then that we can make by purchases at this time is money saved on behalf of the consumers 

of gas in this province. But when you take the amount of gas – we reduced it to about 550 million cubic 

feet for our purposes, and the amount we expect to produce over a 20-year period (and this is a period 

over which the field will be amortized), this gas at its present worth is costing us about five cents per 

MCF; and even at the end of 20 years, when the whole deal has been amortized, and after we have paid 

the interest and all the other charges with respect to that deal over the 20-year period, that gas will only 

cost us in the neighbourhood of eight cents per MCF. Besides that, after the 20-year period is up, there 

will still be left in the field somewhere between 100 and 200 billion cubic feet of gas which can be 

produced. This gas will come to us at practically no cost because the field has been amortized, and our 

only cost will be a very minor cost for producing that gas from a few new wells. This, then, will give us 

all of that gas, as I say, at practically no charge. 

 

It is estimated that the total savings on this one project alone, over a period of years or at the end of the 

period, will run somewhere between $17 million and $18 million. My friends suggest that is a ridiculous 

kind of a deal to enter into. I am sorry I cannot agree with that. I would like to suggest this. I only wish 

that I had an opportunity to arrange about three or four more deals such as this, because I could say then, 

in all sincerity, that, if I never did anything else on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, I would have 

done something there that would have meant a tremendous amount of money in their pockets in the 

years ahead. 

 

In concluding, I know that even with the explanations I have given as to the reasons why we entered into 

this Hatton purchase, some of my friends are going to say, “Yes, but here you go, tying up all this 

money when you didn’t need to do it. What you should have done was not bought the field; you should 

have bought more gas from the Trans-Canada Pipelines.” Well, it is quite true that we could have 

increased our take from Trans-Canada Pipelines, and, as a mater of fact, unless we are able to arrange 

more deals of this kind, unquestionably we will have to increase our purchases from Trans-Canada. I 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

37 

want to point out that the price we have to pay Trans-Canada Pipelines for natural gas at the city of 

Regina is not 8 cents per MCF, it is not 10 cents per MCF, but it is 21.3 cents per MCF. Our Hatton gas 

will cost eight cents. If you add about five cents to that price for cost of transmission from the field to 

the city of Regina, you still have a very substantial saving on about 550 billion cubic feet of gas over the 

next 20-year period. So we have, then, obtained a large supply of gas which we badly need. We have got 

it at a very, very attractive figure. We have improved our bargaining position with respect to later 

purchases, and we have provided ourselves a lot of flexibility in the operation of our gas fields and our 

natural gas system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is much that I could say about the budget. At a matter of fact, there is a lot more that 

I could say about the operations of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, but I just want to say this. I 

think most of the things needed to be said about the budget have been said. I think it is obvious to any 

reasonable-minded person in this House and in this province that this budget is designed to do a 

tremendous job on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan; to continue the advance along the road of 

progress on which we set our feet a number of years ago. Particularly because the budget does provide a 

substantial amount of money to continue the development and the extension of the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation, Mr. Speaker, I shall support the motion. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

Yeas—34 

 

Douglas (Weyburn) Sturdy Thibault 

Brown (Bengough) Brown (Last Mountain) Stone 

Bentley Howe Willis (Elrose) 

McIntosh Douglas (Rosetown) Kramer 

Brockelbank Kuziak Berezowsky 

Fines Williams Neilbrandt 

Walker Erb Davies 

Lloyd Heming Meakes 

Nollet Johnson Wood 

Cooper (Mrs.) Thurston Thorson 

Gibson Dewhurst Harrop 

Willis (Melfort-Tisdale)   

 

Nays—17 

 

McDonald Loptson Foley 

Batten (Mrs.) Coderre Klein 

McCarthy Barrie Weber 

Horsman Korchinski Elias 

Cameron Gardiner Nicholson 

Danielson McFarlane  

 



 

March 9, 1960 

 

 

38 

The Assembly, accordingly, resolved itself into the Committee of Supply. Progress was reported. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. without question put. 


