



















































Hansard: February 12, 1960


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

2nd Day 

 

Friday, February 12, 1960. 

 

The House met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. Franklin E. Foley (Turtleford): — Before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I would like 

to draw the attention of the hon. members to a group of High School students from the community of 

Glaslyn. They are my Grade 11 and 12 students from the Glaslyn Central High School who have been 

down for the last couple of days visiting the city of Regina, and who had the privilege of attending the 

opening of the Legislature yesterday. They have certainly enjoyed their tour and have appreciated their 

visit to the Legislature. I am sure all hon. members will extend them a cordial welcome at this time. 

 

TRIBUTES TO DECEASED FORMER MEMBERS 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, it has become customary on the first day after the 

opening of the House, to pause briefly in our deliberations and pay tribute to former members of the 

Assembly who have passed away since last we met. I would now draw to the attention of the members 

the names of some of those who have passed away in recent months. We all recognize, I am sure, that 

the men and women who have served the public field in Saskatchewan should be remembered and 

honoured for the work which they did during the period of public service. 

 

The first one I want to refer to is the death just three weeks ago, of the HON. THOMAS CLAYTON 

DAVIS, a distinguished native son of Saskatchewan. Mr. and Mrs. Davis were visiting the home of 

friends in Vancouver when he succumbed to a heart attack. 

 

The news of his death came as a great shock to his many friends and admirers throughout Saskatchewan, 

who recalled his vital and colourful personality, his agile mind, his nimble wit which made him almost 

legendary in his lifetime, and who recalled, too, his 37 years of devoted and brilliant service to his 

province and country in capacities ranging from alderman to Ambassador. 

 

Born at Prince Albert, September 6, 1889, son of a pioneer prairie lawyer and M.P., the late Senator 

T.O. Davis, “Tommy” got his early schooling in his home town and at St. John‟s College, Winnipeg. He 

then studied 



 
February 12, 1960 

 

 

2 

law at Osgoode Hall, Toronto, from 1909 to 1913, graduating in law in 1914. Soon afterwards, he 

entered law practice in Prince Albert, eventually forming a partnership with a younger brother, the 

present Mr. Justice C.S. Davis of the Court of Queen‟s Bench, Regina. Two years later he made an 

unpremeditated entry into civic politics, serving four years as alderman and three as Mayor of Prince 

Albert. 

 

His fluency of speech and ability to marshal argument attracted the attention of the Hon. J.G. Gardiner, 

then a Minister in the Provincial Cabinet, and brought him into the wider field of provincial politics. He 

successfully contested Prince Albert Constituency in Liberal interests in 1925, and, when Mr. Gardiner 

became Premier in 1926, he was taken into the Cabinet as Minister of Municipal Affairs, Provincial 

Secretary and Minister in charge of the Bureau of Labour and Industries. In 1927, he became Attorney 

General, holding that office until the defeat of the Liberal Government in 1929. For the next five years 

he sat in Opposition in a House which gave him ample scope to demonstrate his prowess in polemical 

debate. 

 

When the Liberal Government was returned to power in 1934, “Tommy” Davis, who was known to 

everyone, re-entered the Cabinet as Attorney General and, in the ensuing term, piloted many major 

pieces of legislation through the House. During this period, also, he was instrumental in arranging the 

agreement with the Federal Government by which the Royal Canadian Mounted Police took over the 

work previously performed by a Provincial Police force — an example which other provinces were 

quick to emulate. 

 

Re-elected in 1938, and again Attorney General, Mr. Davis had charge of the preparation and 

presentation of Saskatchewan‟s voluminous submission to the Rowell-Sirois Commission in 1939 — a 

Commission whose creation was largely inspired by the then Premier, Hon. W.J. Patterson. 

 

Later that year, Mr. Davis accepted an appointment to Saskatchewan Court of Appeal, but the outbreak 

of the Second World War brought him a call to other, more strenuous duties. He was called from his 

judgeship to become Associate Deputy Minister of National War Services at Ottawa. His first great 

challenge and test in the new position was the gigantic task of National Registration which, in 1940, 

when the Commonwealth had its back to the wall, assembled information on the age, occupation and 

willingness to serve of every Canadian over 16 years of age. 

 

In 1942, Mr. Davis joined the External Affairs Department, and was sent to Australia as Canadian High 

Commissioner, at a time when Australia was a focal point of activity in the war in the South Pacific. 

Later, he became in turn Canadian Ambassador to China, West Germany and Japan, his last diplomatic 

post, which he held from 1954 until his retirement in 1957. In all these varied employments and 

positions, he acquitted himself with great distinction and, by his outstanding success in the diplomatic 

field, brought honour to his native province. 



 
February 12, 1960 

 

3 

Restive in retirement in Victoria, B.C., he found many occupations to engage his great industry and 

many talents in the interests of this country, and of the province of his birth, which always retained a 

warm spot in his heart. I can certainly vouch for that latter statement. Although Mr. Davis and I have 

never sat in the Legislature together I received, I suppose, on the average of two to three letters a year 

from him on some particular point of interest. As a matter of fact, a few days before his death I received 

a very fine communication from him, introducing two gentlemen who were heads of the corporation 

who were seeking to set up a manufacturing establishment in the province. I cite that because it shows 

that despite the fact that he had been away from the province for a great many years, he never lost 

interest in his native province and its welfare. 

 

Mr. Davis is survived by his wife, the former Grace Edith Elwood, daughter of the late Mr. Justice 

Elwood, whom he married in 1925. Also surviving are three brothers and a sister. 

 

Honourable members will recall the shock with which we learned of the sudden death, in the midst of 

last Session, of the then member for Kinistino, the late HENRY BEGRAND. When the news reached us, 

members on both sides paid tribute to the sterling qualities of our deceased colleague, who will always 

be remembered for his generous, warm-hearted nature and friendly spirit. Many hon. members from 

both sides demonstrated their high regard and affection for Mr. Begrand, by attending the funeral 

services. 

 

The news came so unexpectedly, that it was impossible at the time to prepare and place on the record the 

brief biographical sketch, which is customary in these circumstances, and I assured the House at that 

time that I would do it at this stage of this Session when we are paying tribute to the memories of former 

members of this Assembly who have died since last we sat. 

 

Henry Begrand died, it will be recalled, of a heart attack on March 8, 1959, while spending a mid-

session weekend at his home in Hoey, Saskatchewan. He was 63 years old, and when he left for home 

there was nothing in his appearance or his demeanour to give warning of his sudden and tragic passing. 

 

Born in Halanze, Belgium, August 22, 1895, his parents migrated to Canada the following year. He was 

one year old when he came to Saskatchewan where the family settled on land in the Hoey district. 

Educated at a convent in nearby St. Louis, he married Phyllis, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. John Papen of 

Hoey, in 1920, and, besides farming in the district, he operated a garage business in the town of Hoey 

from 1919 until 1945. 



 
February 12, 1960 

 

 

4 

Mr. Begrand early identified himself with farming organizations and the co-operative movement; he was 

secretary of the local Wheat Pool committee for many years. Active also in community and municipal 

affairs, he was reeve of his home municipality of St. Louis from 1937 to 1952. He also served as 

chairman of Hoey High School Board. 

 

A political candidate for the C.C.F. as early as 1944, Mr. Begrand was first elected to this Assembly, as 

representative for the Constituency of Kinistino, in the general election of 1952. Re-elected in 1956, he 

served his constituency and the province with characteristic vigor and distinction, until the day of his 

death. His jovial and forthright personality is sorely missed by his colleagues on this side, and, I am 

sure, by all members of this Assembly. 

 

To mourn his loss he leaves his widow, a married daughter and son, both of Miles City, Montana, and 

another son, Henry Jr., of St. Louis, Saskatchewan. 

 

JOHN HOUSTON LAIRD, who died at Victoria, B.C. on May 29, 1959, in his 85th year, represented 

Moose Jaw City in this Assembly from 1934 to 1938. 

 

Born in Prince Edward Island in 1874, and educated in the public schools of his native province and at 

Prince of Wales College, Mr. Laird came west in 1897 to become a teacher in Moose Jaw‟s first school. 

Later, he was principal of Victoria Public School before entering the employ of the Canadian Pacific 

Railway as a conductor. While with the C.P.R. he was prominent in union committee work and, after his 

retirement to Victoria, was instrumental in founding the C.P.R. Veteran‟s Association. On many 

occasions, as C.P.R. conductor, he was responsible for the care of many international dignitaries, 

including royalty. 

 

While resident in Moose Jaw, Mr. Laird was a member of the Victory Loan Committee, the Children‟s 

Aid Society and of Willowdale Golf Club. 

 

A member of the Masonic Order for 62 years, Mr. Laird was a Past Master of Moose Jaw Lodge, a 

member of Rose Croix Lodge of Perfection, Commander-in-Chief of the Consistory in Regina, and a 

member of the Scottish Rite. 

 

Mr. Laird contested Moose Jaw City in the interests of the Liberal Party in the 1934 election, and sat 

throughout the term of the Eighth Legislature. He did not seek re-election in 1938. A quiet-spoken, 

gentlemanly member, respected by all, his voice was never heard in the more polemical debates of the 

period, his chief interest throughout his term being in matters relating to labour. 

 

He is survived by his wife, whom he married in 1904, and by a brother in Prince Edward Island. 



 
February 12, 1960 

 

5 

HARVEY HAROLD McMAHON, former member for the constituency of Gull Lake, died suddenly at 

his home in Vancouver, B.C., on November 17, 1959, in his 73 

 

 year. 

 

Born at Millbrook, Ontario, September 20, 1887, he was educated at Millbrook public and high schools. 

Coming west in 1927, Mr. McMahon settled in Shaunavon, where he owned and operated a general 

store for the next twenty years. 

 

Mr. McMahon served on the Shaunavon town council from 1930 to 1936, and, in 1938, successfully 

contested Gull Lake constituency in the interests of the Liberal party. He sat through the term of the 

Ninth Session. Seeking re-election in 1944, he was defeated, and, in 1947 sold his store in Shaunavon. 

After spending a year travelling in eastern Canada and the United States, he retired with his wife, the 

former Miss Lilah Anderson of Bowbells, North Dakota, to Vancouver, where he lived until his death. 

 

An active member of the Masonic Order, he was a Past Master of Shaunavon Lodge No. 110 A.F. and 

A.M. 

 

Mr. McMahon, as a member of this Assembly, served his constituency faithfully and well, and was 

respected by all his fellow members. 

 

He is survived by Mrs. McMahon, two brothers and one sister. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that all hon. members will want to pay tribute to these various former Members of 

the Legislature who, in their day and generation, carried part of the load of democratic government in 

this province. It is always well for us to remember how much we owe to the men who have gone before 

us. I think if we, today, are able to serve the constituency we represent, it is only because of the work 

which has been done by those who have gone before us. 

 

Hon. members will notice that I am making the motion with reference to only three of the persons to 

whom I have referred. The hon. members will remember that last year I passed a motion of condolence 

in the death of Mr. Begrand, seconded by Mr. McDonald. 

 

I would, therefore like to make this motion, seconded by Mr. McDonald, and agreed to by silent 

standing vote: 



 
February 12, 1960 

 

 

6 

“Resolved, That this Assembly records, with sorrow and regret, the passing since last Session of three 

former Members of this Assembly, and expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions each 

made to their communities, their constituencies and to this Province: 

 

JOHN HOUSTON LAIRD, who died at Victoria, B.C., on May 29, 1959, in his 85 

 

 year, represented Moose Jaw city in the Eighth Legislature, from 1934 to 1938; 

 

HARVEY HAROLD McMAHON, who died at Vancouver, B.C., on November 17, 1959, in his 73 

 

 year, represented the Constituency of Gull Lake in the Ninth Legislature, from 1938 to 1944; 

 

THE HONOURABLE THOMAS CLAYTON DAVIS, a native son of Saskatchewan, whose period of 

public service extended over 37 years in civic, provincial and diplomatic fields, died suddenly in 

Vancouver, B.C., January 21, 1960, at age 70. During his membership of this Assembly, representing 

Prince Albert from 1925 to 1939, he served as Minister of Municipal Affairs, Provincial Secretary, 

Minister in charge of the Bureau of Labour and Industry, and as Attorney General. Appointed a judge 

of the Appeal Court of Saskatchewan in 1939, he obtained leave to accept appointment as Associate 

Deputy Minister of National War Services. In 1942, he was appointed to the Diplomatic Corps of 

Canada, serving successively as Canadian High Commissioner to Australia, Canadian Ambassador to 

China, West Germany and Japan, where he served until his retirement in 1957. In the varied capacities 

in which he served, he won great distinction for himself and brought honour to the City and Province 

of his birth, in which he maintained keen interest to the end. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere 

sympathies with members of the bereaved families.” 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Leader of Official Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I think there is very little that I 

could add on this occasion to the remarks of the Premier, as it was not my privilege to have ever met any 

one of the three members whose services we are recognizing in paying tribute here today. However, a 

year ago when the late Henry Begrand passed away, I said I felt that probably one of the things that 

Henry would most be remembered for would be the fact that he was a friendly man, and I am sure that 

he is missed, 



 
February 12, 1960 

 

7 

not only by the members on the other side of the House, but also by members on this side of the House. 

However, there are several people, I am sure, on both sides of this Assembly who knew especially Mr. 

T.C. Davis very well, and also Mr. Laird and Mr. McMahon, who would like to pay their respects on 

this occasion, having known these gentlemen personally. Therefore, I only want to say that it gives me 

great pleasure to second the motion of the Premier. 

 

Hon. R.A. Walker (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to say a few words in tribute 

to the Hon. T.C. Davis. As a member of the Legislature, he is remembered as a man with thorough 

insight and a quick wit. His contemporaries recall that, in spite of a heavy schedule, he was always very 

faithful in attending the sittings of this House. He advocated his causes forcefully and effectively, but he 

was always prepared to admit, if necessary, that he didn‟t know the answer to a question that was put to 

him. 

 

As Attorney General, it is quite apparent that he was a hard worker and that he inspired his subordinates 

and his co-workers. The files of the Department indicate that the labour and time which he devoted to 

coping with the many problems besetting the Government of that day was stupendous. If his staff was 

not available after hours, he forged ahead on his own, did his own typing if necessary, in order to get the 

public business ahead. Mr. Davis‟ capacity for hard work and thorough work is revealed in those 

speeches that are still available to us. For example, I would mention the speech which he gave in this 

Assembly in 1929 at the time of the transfer of the Natural Resources from the Dominion to the 

province. Or, I would bring to your attention the speech which he made in 1934 when introducing the 

new Debt Adjustment Act. Or his speech in February, 1935, on an important amendment to the litigation 

of Civil Rights Act. These speeches present in a clear and lucid fashion the technical implications of the 

legislation. They are well worth the time of any lawyer or legislator to read. They are full of carefully 

researched historical information, and will form a very valuable source of information for anyone 

studying the history of the effects of these particular pieces of legislation. 

 

Hon. T.C. Davis first served as Attorney General from 1927 to 1929, and conditions in this province 

were then very favourable, and there were very few problems. This term of office is perhaps best 

remembered for his originating of the police agreement which many provinces now have with the 

Federal Government regarding use of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. When the Liberal 

Government was returned to office in 1934, however, this province was in the depths of a depression. 

The Bennett Government at Ottawa had recently passed The Farmers‟ Creditors‟ Arrangement Act, and 

the persons in the Federal Government in this field of legislation raised considerable doubts as to the 

constitutional validity of Saskatchewan‟s Debt Adjustment Act. Mr. Davis and his law officers toiled 

with this problem, sorting out the subjects, the powers which were provincial and those which were 

federal. The result was the new Debt Adjustment Act of 1934. No matter what one might think of this 

legislation, we would 



 
February 12, 1960 

 

 

8 

all admit that it was the product of much hard work and much careful study, and did a lot of good. 

 

The infamous Regina riot was perhaps the most dramatic event during his second term as Attorney 

General. Hon. members will recall that the Bennett Government in Ottawa had taken over control of the 

R.C.M.P. and ordered them to stop the march of the unemployed at Regina. At 6:00 o‟clock p.m. on July 

1 

 

, 1935, T.C. Davis and some of his colleagues were negotiating with the leaders of the unemployed, 

arranging for their orderly departure. At 8:00 o‟clock p.m., the R.C.M.P., without the knowledge of the 

provincial authorities, and acting on the order of the Minister of Justice, were charging the crowd in 

Market Square. The result, of course, was one dead and scores injured, and thousands of dollars of 

property damage. T.C. Davis, tireless as usual, demanded that the Minister of Justice restore control of 

the police to the province and denied the validity of the action that was taken by the Federal 

Government. At the same time, he was helping to arrange for the feeding of the strikers, and for their 

orderly departure. When the marchers finally boarded the train for the west coast, T.C. Davis was to be 

seen among them to the very last, moving about through the unemployed. 

 

Other major problems dealt with by him included the enforcement of the School Laws, the new liquor 

legislation at that time, and the province‟s submission to the Rowell-Sirois Commission on Dominion-

Provincial relations. Among the other outstanding legislation introduced by T.C. Davis was the removal 

of the Personal Covenant on mortgages, abolition of the centuries-old liability of a husband for his 

wife‟s torts, extension of The Homestead Act, adoption of The Uniform Act, such as the devolution of 

The Real Property Act, and The Intestate Succession Act, and several relief laws. If T.C. Davis had 

retired from public life when he left this Legislature, he would have left a notable record of 

achievement. His memory will be long respected, Mr. Speaker, not only by the legal profession of this 

province, but also by those thousands whom he served so well as a member of the Legislative Assembly, 

and a member of the Executive Council. 

 

I wish to join with what other members have said in offering my sincere sympathy to his family and 

friends. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not personally acquainted with the other persons whose names have been mentioned 

here today, and I cannot say anything about them which would add to the store of knowledge of their 

careers, and I would join in what has been said in condolence of them, and in memory of their record. 

 

Hon. J.H. Sturdy (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, I had the very great privilege of spending half to 

three-quarters of an hour with Hon. T.C. Davis in Victoria at the Lieutenant-Governor‟s reception on 

January 1 

 

. I have known Mr. Davis from the early thirties, at which time I was Secretary of the 



 
February 12, 1960 

 

9 

Teachers‟ Federation, and may I say that in those grim days, Mr. Davis, both by word and by deed, 

showed that he was very sympathetic to the situation of education and the teachers here in the province 

at that time. This half-hour we spent together was an incident, which I shall long remember, because it 

was punctuated by the humour for which „Tommy‟ Davis is so familiar. In the space of five or ten 

minutes, we had gathered around us probably fifteen or twenty ex-patriots of this province, and with an 

audience of that kind, „Tommy‟ Davis was at his best. 

 

I wish to mention at this time, Mr. Speaker, the fact that he inquired about personalities in this 

Legislature at the present time, and he did wish to be remembered affectionately to the hon. members 

from Arm River (Mr. Danielson) and from Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson). He also asked to be remembered to 

the Premier, and I believe he wrote to the Premier shortly after that time. If it were a more fitting 

occasion, I should like to repeat some of the very humourous jokes he told on that occasion, because 

„Tommy‟ Davis was a man with a great love for life, and love for people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I wish to associate myself with the remarks of those who have already spoken, in 

extending sympathy to the widow and to the many, many friends of „Tommy‟ Davis. 

 

Mr. A. Loptson (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to endorse all that has been said in respect to 

the members who have passed on. I would say in particular, with respect to T.C. „Tommy‟ Davis and 

what has been said about him is all true. He was a man of great wit; he was a man of great heart. He had 

an ingenious understanding of the layman‟s mind. I have never met a man of his profession who could 

understand me, or anybody else that knew as little as I did about law, what I meant when I approached 

him for something, or some matter. As far as he being a genial and a jovial fellow, his wit and his glad 

hand made him friends wherever he went, irrespective of how hard he hit the Opposition sometime. 

 

If I am permitted, Mr. Speaker, I would like to inject just a little of what happened on one occasion in 

this House. I would like to refer to his action after the Government changed from Liberals to 

Conservatives. „Tommy‟ didn‟t forget the Conservative promises. There was one particular individual 

on the Conservative side that, I understand, was his equal insofar as education was concerned, and that 

was the Hon. Mr. Bryant. Mr. Bryant sat about where the Minister of Education is sitting now, and Mr. 

Davis sat alongside the Leader of the Opposition, then Mr. J.G. Gardiner. On the Orders of the Day, 

every day for about two weeks, „Tommy‟ Davis would ask the Hon. Minister of Telephones and Public 

Works why a certain individual had been fired, because their platform indicated that no one should be 

dismissed; that is, any of the former employees. Mr. Bryant would give him the usual excuse that they 

didn‟t require him, and so forth. But on one Monday morning, „Tommy‟ Davis asked why so and so had 

been fired on a 



 
February 12, 1960 

 

 

10 

Tuesday and then he had been re-hired on the Thursday. That was something new. I want to say that 

„Tommy‟ Davis probably met his equal, when Mr. Bryant got up very pompous and said he wanted to 

inform the hon. member that on Tuesday they had found out that this so and so had been a good Grit, but 

on Thursday they had found they had made a mistake, and he was a good Tory, so they rehired him. 

That was the end of that. 

 

With respect to Mr. Begrand, I don‟t have to say anything more than has been said about him. We have 

already expressed our sympathies and our respect for Mr. Begrand. I liked Mr. Begrand as I have liked 

any member who ever sat in this House, irrespective of what he called me in his debates. We were the 

best of friends outside in the lobby, and while he did not believe in his politics any more than probably I 

believe in some of mine, he followed the party, anyway. 

 

As far as Mr. Laird was concerned, I sat in the House with Mr. Laird from 1934 until 1938. Mr. Laird 

was a labour representative on the Government side at that time, and we appreciated his advice very 

much. He was very moderate and very sound in his opinions, and I venture to say had he continued, he 

would have made his mark in the Legislature as a Labour leader. I cannot hold the same opinion of some 

of his successors, but I want to pay my respects to Mr. Laird because he was really a constructive 

representative of labour. 

 

This is about all I want to say, Mr. Speaker, and again I want to repeat that those who have passed on, as 

I have known them, have made their mark in this province, and they have served the people well for the 

time they were paid by the taxpayer. I want to say again as far as Mr. Davis is concerned, he probably 

would be one of the most outstanding Attorney Generals in this province, and I want to express my 

appreciation for the kind words of the present Attorney General with respect to the work of Mr. Davis. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of sitting in this House from 

1934 to 1939 with Mr. Davis. Mr. Davis is one of the men who would be noticed in any crowd or any 

place where he had some business to perform. One of the characteristics of Mr. Davis was his immense 

capacity for work. I can always remember him coming into this House practically every day, and he 

would have his arms full of files and documents, and he would sit all afternoon and check files, and 

study files. If anything came up in this House he would hear every word, and just as quick as a flash he 

was ready to chip in with something, or to ask a question or to add something to the debate, even while 

he was working at something else. This was characteristic which, of course, indicated that he was alert, 

quick, and intelligent and familiar with the business at hand. 

 

Every member in this House had respect for him at all times. He was always willing to take a few 

minutes of his time to spend with others. During this period, Mr. Speaker, it was my duty to put through 

the House a large number of Bills which were all in relation to, and for the benefit and advancement of, 

the Co-operative movement in this province. Some of those 



 
February 12, 1960 

 

11 

Bills were very contentious. Some of them took six weeks to get through this House. The debate 

sometimes was bitter, and the division was very clearly drawn not only among the members of the 

House, but among the members of one party. At all times „Tommy‟ Davis would be there to come to my 

assistance in putting this legislation through. 

 

Mr. Davis was a very quick-witted person; a person who likes fun. He could always see the comical side 

of everything. We had a member for Gull Lake in this House during this time. He was a very fine 

gentleman by the name of Kemper. I think he was here yesterday, but I didn‟t have the opportunity of 

shaking hands with him. He was the kind of fellow who forever asked questions and was greatly 

interested in law, particularly as it related to Mr. Davis‟ department, and finally after some time Mr. 

Davis, when speaking in the House, addressed him as “my learned friend”, and every time on the floor 

of the House, for four years he addressed him as “my learned friend”, and we had some very interesting 

comments from both sides; comments which make time slide away quite quickly. 

 

The last time I saw Mr. Davis, Mr. Speaker, was at Waskesiu just after he had come back from 

Australia. He was there for a month or two on vacation before he proceeded to the next place he was 

going, and I think that was China. I had quite a chat with him there. He was in Saskatchewan last fall, or 

late summer, and he stopped in my town of Davidson for two or three hours, but I wasn‟t home at that 

time, so didn‟t have the opportunity of speaking with him. 

 

There isn‟t much more that could be said that has not already been covered, but his most important 

phase of his activity was as Attorney General of this province. It indicates, I think, that his heart and 

mind and his efforts were devoted entirely to trying to rectify things, and make things a little better for 

the people who, during these trying years, were in very bad circumstances indeed. This province, and 

this country of Canada, lost a very, very able and devoted servant when Mr. Davis passed away, and I 

think we should consider ourselves lucky to have had such men as Mr. Davis in the formative years of 

this province, when the foundation was laid for these institutions which we have at the present time; all 

the things that go to make a community and a province that we can all be proud of. 

 

I want to say a work, Mr. Speaker, in regard to Mr. Laird. Mr. Laird was a member of this House from 

1934 to 1938. He did not seek election in 1938. He was our labour representative at that time, and a very 

moderate, fine gentleman. I never heard anything from him during all these years that would indicate 

that he was bitter, or that he had any animosity or any hard feelings towards any person. He was 

constructive and quite free in what he said. If anyone asked a question of him, he was very clear and 

distinct in his ideas, and his expression of those ideas. 

 

Mr. McMahon: I had the pleasure of being the speaker at Mr. McMahon‟s nomination at Gull Lake in 

1938. It was a very big convention. That big hall was full of people. It was a peculiar thing that his 

opponent at that election, Mr. Speaker, was Mr. Kemper, and of course, he lost to Mr. McMahon. Mr. 

McMahon then served from 1938 to 1944, and the man that he defeated in 1938 was Mr. Kemper. Mr. 

McMahon was very active, and looked after his duties in this House very well. He was always in 

attendance and took part in the debates 



 
February 12, 1960 

 

 

12 

and the Committees, and carried out his duties as a member of this House very effectively. I am glad to 

have had the opportunity of having been associated with him and, as I said, I attended his Nomination 

Convention in 1938. 

 

With this, Mr. Speaker, I wish to associate myself with other members of this House who have spoken 

in expressing my sorrow and regret at the passing of these former members of this Legislature. Their 

services have been of great value to the welfare and progress of our province. 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, I feel at this time I would like to associate myself with 

the remarks of members of the House because of the close personal relationship, although it was as a 

young boy to an older man that I had with the former Attorney General of the province, in the person of 

Mr. T.C. Davis. As has been stated by other members in this House, the people of this province did 

enjoy the service and the pleasure of knowing Mr. Davis during his years of public service in this 

province, and also in the rest of Canada. 

 

In making a few remarks about Mr. Davis, and having already heard from others about the tremendous 

capacity for work that he had, I would like to just relate one or two experiences that took place either 

from having heard of them, or having experienced them myself, or been there on the occasion. I can well 

remember when the War Services Department was being set up at Ottawa, because of the fact that it 

happened to be during the summer months, the vacation months and at that time it was difficult to get 

workers in the office buildings at Ottawa. They were short of help, and I had the opportunity of going 

down and working in my father‟s office for two weeks just shortly after Mr. Davis had come to Ottawa. 

They had to put him in a small office down at the end of the department, where the Department of 

Agriculture was located at that time, and I remember on one occasion he had three stenographers in 

there, all going at the same time, and he was dictating to the three of them. At the same time, if there 

was anything he wanted from another office, instead of ringing a bell, he could quite easily shout to the 

individual that he was looking for, and he could be heard for four or five offices down the corridor. I can 

assure you in those days — the early days of the war, that the hours of work put in by Mr. Davis in his 

task as Deputy Minister, or Associate Minister of War Services, I believe, surprised many of those who 

worked in the Civil Service at Ottawa. 

 

There is one thing particularly at that time that I heard him say, and that was that it was much different 

working in the sphere of the Civil Service at Ottawa than it had been working here in the Provincial 

Government in Regina. He was a man who desired to get things done, as someone has mentioned here, 

whether it was after supper, or whether it was very early in the morning. He found it very difficult to 

see, at five o‟clock, the staff disappear. There was nobody left to help him, or to give instructions to, 



 
February 12, 1960 

 

13 

or perhaps to carry out the functions and the work to be done that was needed at that particular time. 

 

I can also remember the occasion referred to by the Attorney General at the time of the Regina 

difficulties in 1935. I can remember the visits of the then Attorney General, Mr. Davis, and the 

Commissioner, Mr. Woods, about five o‟clock the morning after the riot, to our home which was just 

across the lake at that particular time. As a small boy, of course, taking in the excitement of the 

occasion, I can remember getting out of bed, sitting behind the tree and watching the procession of 

people as they went back and forth, working at that time with a problem which was considered very 

serious by the people of this province, and the people of Canada as a whole. 

 

As a younger person in this Legislature, I would today like to associate myself with the others who have 

spoken on behalf of Mr. Davis. I considered him, as a young boy, a very close friend. He was one, 

although older, who always took a great deal of interest in younger people and in the families of close 

friends. I can also remember many of the letters I received from him during the years he was in other 

countries of the world, and the interesting highlights that were contained in them, and the many amusing 

periods that he spoke of during his sojourn in countries such as Germany, Japan, China and other places. 

I still have those letters today, and I believe I will keep them in my memories for many years to come, 

and probably go back over them in future years and read them again, and think of the times when, as a 

small boy, I had the opportunity and the privilege of knowing, on a personal basis, T.C. Davis. So I wish 

to add to the words of others in this House my respects to the family of Mr. Davis, and also my regrets 

that a fine gentleman and a great public servant has been lost to the people of Canada. 

 

Mr. D.H.R. Heming (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to add a few words in respect 

to a good friend, Mr. John Laird. He was a man of very high calibre, and was held in very high esteem 

by his fellow workers, and by the community in which he served. He was an excellent employee of the 

company he served, and I remember him more for an admonition he gave me. Forty years ago, I was a 

lot brighter and quicker man than I am today, and my occupation was switching. I was executing a move 

which I should not have been doing, and he got down out of the car and said: “Watch yourself. Do you 

want to die?” I remembered that ever since, and I am sure that the admonition has had some effect on 

my being here today, because there have been a great number of railroad men who have died 

prematurely, in the course of carrying out their duties. 

 

I am sure that those of us who survived, and used to work with him, will agree with the resolution that 

has been presented by the Premier to his survivors, and I am sure that those who did not know him will 

go along with us in expressing their sympathy. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 3:40 o‟clock p.m. 


