



















































Hansard: March 24, 1960


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

31st Day 

 

Thursday, March 24, 1960 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon City):  Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I wish to draw the 

attention of the members to the group of students sitting in the Speaker’s gallery. They are from the 

Mayfair School from Saskatoon, with their teachers, Miss Clements and Mrs. Haydon. I am sure all 

members will join with me in saying how happy we are to have them with us, and hope their trip here 

will be an enjoyable one. 

 

STATEMENT RE PARLIAMENTARY ASSOCIATION 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Before the Orders of the Day, I would like to give notice of two occasions which I am 

sure will be of interest to the members. They have no doubt been wondering when we were going to 

hold the annual meeting of The Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. I am arranging this to take 

place on Thursday next, a week from today, at 6:00 o’clock p.m., which will be as early as we can hope 

to gather in the basement. This should be a particularly interesting meeting. There was, as hon. members 

know, a meeting of the Provisional Committee of the Canadian Area Conference in Ottawa, attended by 

Mr. Cameron and myself. We will give a report on that meeting. Then there is a Canadian Area 

Conference to be held at Winnipeg, or at least in Manitoba, this coming summer, and also recently our 

secretary, Mr. Stephen, has had correspondence in connection with regional area conference, that is, 

West Indian Federation Area Conference at Trinidad. All those matters will be included in the routine 

proceedings. 

 

As in the past, there will be no written invitations, but I am sure hon. members would wish me to 

include our worthy Sergeant-at-Arms and his good lady at that dinner meeting. We cannot do our work 

without him, and I don’t think we should play without him on a festive occasion, and this will be partly a 

festive occasion. So please bear that date in mind, Thursday next, March 31. 

 

The second announcement I wish to make was at the request 



 

March 24, 1960 

 

 

2 

of some hon. members, I have got in touch with Mr. West, of West’s Photographic Studios, and he will 

be here on Wednesday next, at this time in our proceedings, that is, before the Orders of the Day, and I 

am hoping the members will consent to a recess at that time, so that he can photograph us all in our 

seats. I am giving that notice in order that members will be sure to be present, if they wish to be included 

in the photograph. 

 

MOTION RE COMPREHENSIVE PROGRAM FOR HIGHWAYS 

 

Moved by Mr. Thiessen, seconded by Mr. Woods: 

 

“That this Assembly urge the Government of Canada to proceed immediately with a comprehensive 

program that will co-ordinate on a continuing basis the financing of long-term planning and 

construction of roads of national and international importance, and that financial assistance be made 

available to any province immediately that province completes its portion of the Trans-Canada 

Highway.” 

 

Mr. John Thiessen (Shellbrook):  Mr. Speaker, in speaking to this motion as it appears on the Order 

Paper, I would like to spend a few minutes of the time of the House in going back just a little bit into 

history – some of it before my time, and some of it during my time. I would like to go back to the time 

the Federal Government of this Canada of ours was discussing and planning ways and means of creating 

a transportation system which would connect one coast to the other; which would allow people and other 

things to be transported from one coast to the other, and from one province to the other. This, at that 

time, could only be accomplished by a railway, and I would like to spend just a few minutes on the 

planning that was done in this regard. 

 

First of all, the Federal Government had already built and constructed some railways, some in Manitoba, 

some in Ontario; for a transportation system to which they would build more lines. There was a grant of 

$25 million made to the C.P.R. They were also granted 25 million acres of land near the railways which 

must, of necessity, be fairly good land. If it wasn’t good land, they could transfer to some other lands 

within that vicinity which were good. They were given all the lands for their right-of-way; they were 

given the land for their station grounds, their workshops, dock grounds, water frontage and all the land 

which was necessary for the completion of their railway. They were also given the right-of-way to cross 

Indian reservations, in which they would do away with the title to that part of land which they needed 

for right-of-way. They were given permission to take stones and any other materials which were 

necessary 



 

March 24, 1960 

 

3 

for the construction of their railway from Crown properties. This, and a lot of other things, were done to 

construct the first transportation system, which was originated in Canada. For this, the C.P.R. was 

supposed to construct a transportation system which would take care of transportation, not only for the 

beginning of Canada, or for covering the middle ways of Canada sometime, but this was supposed to be 

something which was going to be used forever, as far as Canada was concerned. It was planned that they 

would do all the transporting which was necessary. 

 

This created in our province here, small communities from eight to 10 miles apart along these railroads; 

it created small stockyards to which you could haul your cattle; it created elevators, post offices, and 

many of these other little things which we require in local communities. The local problem was not too 

great in that most of the travelling was done by wagon and team. My dad tells me that his first travelling 

was done by oxen and wagon. The municipalities which were originated at that time didn’t have too 

great a problem. 

 

As time went on these things changed a little, and upwards to about 1914, my dad purchased his first 

model-T Ford car. This was one of the old cars with the brass radiator. I don’t think there is a man today 

in this House, man or woman, who is any prouder of their 1960 cars than he was of his 1914 model. 

However, this 1914 car created some more problems. It created the problem of going to town with his 

car. the places where he could cross with a team and wagon, he couldn’t cross with a car any more, so 

they had to do a little bit of slusher work, and they did that with two horses in front of a slip and they 

filled some of these holes. That wasn’t too bad either. They got along with that, but in 1916, as many 

others did, the cars improved. 

 

My dad at that time bought a 1916 McLaughlin, with all of 45 horsepower, and that car was modern. It 

would go up to 60 miles per hour. This thing created more problems for the municipalities, not only with 

driving in the local area, but they weren’t too happy just driving to town or to Saskatoon. In 1916 my 

dad and mother went on a holiday trip all the way to Swift Current from Aberdeen. They took two or 

three days to get ready for this trip, and they made it a three-week tour. How long it took them to get 

there and come back, I don’t know. I didn’t go along with them, but I do know that a week or two ago I 

went along with a friend of mine from Regina to Saskatoon, and we pulled out of Regina about twenty 

minutes to give, and got into Saskatoon at seven o’clock. 

 

I am not too sure, Mr. Speaker, whether our clocks stopped, or whether we broke the speed limit, but I 

do know this that my dad’s clock in 1916 didn’t stop, and I do know that he didn’t break speed limits, 

either. He said in some municipalities you could travel easily, and in other municipalities you could 

hardly travel at all. 

 

All these were problems which were getting harder and harder to solve, because cars were becoming 

more modern. Farmers in the days of 



 

March 24, 1960 

 

 

4 

the buggy and horse stayed at home when it rained because they got wet if they went out. These modern 

cars had a top, and all you had to go was lift it up, screw it up on top of your windshield, and put the 

curtains on, and you could travel in any kind of weather. So when it rained in the morning, they would 

put the horses in the barn, and away they would go to town. It created a maintenance problem. This 

didn’t take too long until municipalities invested in fresnoes, which is a four-horse scraper, or should I 

say a four-hay-burner scraper. This is what we used to call them. We got $4 a day for walking behind 

them, too. But it always seemed that we were just one mile behind the traffic which was created in the 

district, for people who wanted to go through. 

 

Then in 1926-27-28-29, not only cars were on these roads, but trucks to haul grain from the threshing 

outfits to town, and those trucks used up the roads which were built by these slushers so fast that they 

just were no good. This brought municipalities to the point where they had to buy graders, and I know 

that our municipality bought its first grader, an old Stockland from Richardson Road Machinery, and 

they thought they could really build roads with this machine. They hired a man with a 110 horsepower 

steam tractor, and they paid him so many dollars an hour for operating, and they built roads, and said, 

“Now, we’ve got it beat.” but the car manufacturers brought their cars down a little lower, widened out 

the tire a little bit, and did the same thing with the trucks, with the results that those roads were only 

good for just a few years. 

 

Then we came to the position where the municipalities could not carry on insofar as their tax money was 

concerned, and it went up and up and up some more, for these roads and for maintenance and other 

things, so that the Provincial Governments finally stepped in and assisted the municipalities. The 

Provincial Governments finally established a road system of their own across which people could travel 

from one end of the province to the other, and from one province into the other. But if the railways, in 

my opinion, had kept modernizing their system, had fulfilled their obligations which they took over after 

all these grants had been made to them, that the national and international travelling which today is done 

on rubber, could have very well have been done on steel. But not having done that, it has been up to the 

municipalities, the Provincial Governments, and up to the cities and towns to see that roads are paved, 

and gravelled so that people can travel across these, and because our money from provincial and 

municipal governments is not sufficient, it is necessary for the Federal Government to come into a 

system of planning and construction and financing of roads. 

 

Quite a number of years ago the municipalities realized they would never be able to keep up with the 

increase of transportation within the municipalities, and they came to our government and asked for 

some system of doing something with the municipalities that would keep them in operation. I feel that 

the Government has proven to the Federal Government that sharing can be done. Not only have we 

proved this in Saskatchewan, but we have a number of books and write-ups from the American 



 

March 24, 1960 

 

5 

side that show that this is being done in other countries, that other countries are sharing with their lower 

levels of government to construct roads. 

 

So, therefore, Mr. Speaker, because the C.C.C. Government has proven that the sharing of the costs of 

road construction as between municipalities and Provincial Governments is workable, and because 

traffic today is not only local, but national and international on rubber, and because taxable revenue of 

municipal and Provincial Government is not sufficient, and because the Federal Government derives 

quite a large sum of money from highways, I move the above resolution, seconded by Mr. Wood. 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current):  Mr. Speaker, this matter of a national highway program is an 

important one, as outlined by the mover of this motion, and it is a motion which deserves our utmost 

support. As the mover has said, the road problem in Canada today has changed a good deal throughout 

the years, and is one of the major problems confronting us today. 

 

I am quite prepared to admit that, according to the British North America Act, the roads of the province 

are a provincial responsibility, but any Federal Government which was prepared to sit back and let the 

provinces carry their own problem in regard to roads on the strength of The British America Act, saying 

it was strictly their responsibility, would be simply hiding their heads in the sand, because the advent of 

the motor car has entirely changed the situation today. In 1867, when the B.N.A. Act was written, the 

roads in any province would be the problem of that province, and of that province only, but today where 

we have so much transcontinental travelling, both for pleasure and for commerce, the roads of another 

province where anyone wishes to go, or to a province beyond that province, are of a growing interest to 

the people throughout Canada. I think that is a question that has to be considered and recognized by 

anyone who goes to look at this problem of an overall highway program for Canada. 

 

There is this matter of our own internal traffic which must be served, and in being served properly, I 

believe it is a national rather than a provincial problem. Besides this there is the matter of the tourists 

coming into our country. I think the matter of tourist trade is a national one, rather than a provincial one. 

When tourists come into a province and buy things it is an assistance to the retail trade of that province, 

and if they are buying the products of that province, it helps also the people who are producing the 

goods. But when they are buying produce from outside that province, it is not only helping the province 

in which they travel, but the people in other parts of the nation who have made those things which they 

buy, and I think in this regard, the tourist traffic is not a problem of any responsibility of one province, 

but is a truly national one. 

 

I think this matter of trade is one of more than a passing interest to the people of Canada today. You 

have only to read what Mr. Coyne has been talking about this past week or so, in regard to how serious 

is this matter of 



 

March 24, 1960 

 

 

6 

our national spending. I notice that in 1957, which is the last year for which I have a fair comparison, we 

bought $689 million more than we sold. In 1958 we bought $264 million more than we sold, but as I 

said before, 1957 is the last year for which I have a fair comparison. In that year, tourists spent $363 

million in Canada and of that $363 million, some $325 was spent by tourists coming in from the United 

States. That makes it appear to me that the problem of bringing these tourists across on international 

roads is rather an important one, because you can plainly see that any real improvement of our tourist 

trade would have quite a strong bearing upon helping us to balance our overall imports and exports. 

 

In regard to this tourist trade, Mr. Speaker, we are not making a very good showing. I want to say that in 

1957, when we had some 16.7 million people in Canada, those 16.7 million people bought, in the United 

States, some $403 million, but the 171 million people of United States only bought some $325 million 

worth of goods in Canada. Between 1948 and 1957, the amount of money spent by the Americans 

travelling in Canada increased by some 20 per cent, but the amount of money that was spent by 

Canadians travelling in the United States, increased by some 250 per cent. We are not holding our own 

in this business of the tourist trade. I think it is something that Canada has to wake up to, nationally 

more so than provincially. I believe it is something that concerns the nation, and not just the individual 

provinces of that nation. I believe the fact that the United States has for years been spending a good deal 

of money federally, upon building roads that are of national as well as of state interest, has a good deal 

to do with this matter of the tourist trade. Americans are not going to come over to Canada if they are 

going to travel around on a bunch of poor roads, when they have a good set-up for roads at home, and I 

think it is time that we started to look into some of these things. 

 

Then there is the matter of defence, Mr. Speaker. I think we all recognize that roads and highways 

would be of importance during time of war, or any other national emergency. I sincerely trust, and I am 

sure we all here today, sincerely hope that we can evade war. I know it is something we must give all 

our interest and our support to try to evade any possibility of war. It is a must, as far as we are 

concerned, and yet it is rather apparent that we have to have some preparations along these lines, and if 

so, Mr. Speaker, I submit that we should pin more of our faith, and put a little more of our money into 

such things as roads, which we know are of use, and which would be of use in peace or war, and which 

would be of use in any kind of emergency, rather than spending so many millions of dollars in outmoded 

airplanes that are obsolete before they come off the assembly line, or in missiles which appear to be of 

very dubious value. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that roads are something we should be paying a little more 

attention to nationally, in regard to defence. 

 

Then we have the matter of our national development. It is rather peculiar, but I think nevertheless, it is 

often a fact that our 



 

March 24, 1960 

 

7 

greatest natural resources, the greatest and most important of our natural resources, are in those places 

which are thinly settled, in the hinterland, and if the development of those natural resources is going to 

be left to the resources, the money and finance of those thinly populated areas, it is not going to be good 

for the national development of Canada. Of course, in this line we have this Roads Resources program 

which has been brought forth by the Federal Government. It was possibly along the right lines, but it is 

not enough, and in this program, where a small province like Prince Edward Island is to get some 

$7,500,000 under this plan, and where a province like Saskatchewan, which has such a vast hinterland, 

and such vast unexplored resources, stands to receive what would be to all intents and purposes, only 

$6,250,000, I think that such a program is not well thought out. It is not equitable, and we have to have 

something of an entirely different nature, if we are going to satisfactorily develop the natural resources 

of our country. 

 

Again we have the Trans-Canada highway. It was very good, and something which has been very much 

appreciated, so far as it went, and has served to prove how the provinces are able to work together on a 

program such as this. We in Saskatchewan have the distinction of being the first to finish our share, as 

we all know, and I think we have thereby shown to all of Canada that we are quite prepared to co-

operate on any such program as this. But this Trans-Canada program, Mr. Speaker, did have some 

serious limitations. It just went east and west; it did nothing about the other very necessary roads which 

we need. This is a national concern, and this one thin ribbon of pavement going east and west cannot be 

considered a suitable and a complete national road program. 

 

I noticed about a year ago the Hon. Mr. Green, who was then the Minister of Public Works, speaking in 

the House, had some rather harsh words to say about the Minister of Highways in British Columbia. He 

said that Mr. Gaglardi had approached him in an effort to obtain some $15 million, asking the Federal 

Government to help them to participate and go half with them on the building of some $30 million worth 

of roads in the province of British Columbia, which had nothing to do with the Trans-Canada Highway. 

Mr. Green pointed out that, while he was doing this, there was some $35 million worth of work to be 

done yet on the Trans-Canada Highway, with which the Federal Government was prepared to help them, 

and he took a dim view of the fact that Mr. Gaglardi apparently went to the press, and said that the 

Federal Government, by refusing to help the Provincial Government in regard to these roads, was 

contributing to the unemployment of the province, and so on. Mr. Green thought that he should have 

gone ahead and finished their share of the Trans-Canada Highway. I think that Mr. Green possibly had a 

certain amount of an argument there, in regard to that, but does not the fact, Mr. Speaker, that these 

provinces had not seen their way clear to finish up these roads as quickly as they might have, tend to 

lend strength to the argument that there are other roads in those provinces which the Provincial 

Government considers to be more important provincially, than is the Trans-Canada Highway? And such 

an argument as Mr. Green put forth, has no strength whatsoever, when you are talking about such a 

province as Saskatchewan, which has completed its highways program. 



 

March 24, 1960 

 

 

8 

I feel what we need is something which is going to be on a continuing basis, and that will not be a hit-

and-miss sort of affair that grinds to a stop whenever we get our share completed, and we have to wait 

for the laggards to catch up. We must have a program which will go on continuously and uniformly, 

well thought out, and something that will produce in this Canada of ours, a decent and good set-up of 

roads. 

 

This problem of roads which faces us today and this matter I am talking about of what this resolution 

considers, a policy of road building on a federal-provincial basis throughout Canada, was considered 

very strongly in 1945 when the Dominion-Provincial Conference or Reconstruction convened in that 

year. The Federal Government’s proposals included assistance to provide new access roads to 

underdeveloped mining and forest resources, assistance for the construction of transportation facilities of 

national importance, and a Trans-Canada Highway with international connections, and approaches to 

National Parks. They have in those proposals from the Federal Government a good deal of what we are 

talking about today, along the line of a national highway program. It was apparently accepted by the 

Government of that day that these were problems which should be squarely faced. But since that time, 

Mr. Speaker, in spite of the fact that we have constructed a good deal of this Trans-Canada Highway, 

which was more or less the outcome of this conference in this regard, the situation is even worse today 

than it was then. In Canada, in 1945, there was a total of 1,497,081 motor vehicles, and 16,842 miles of 

bituminous surfaced and concrete roads. At the end of 1958, there were some 4,719,474 vehicles, and 

42,237 miles of bituminous surface and concrete roads. In other words, there were well over three times 

as many vehicles in 1958 as there were in 1945, and only two and a half times as many miles of hard-

surface road. The number of our vehicles is gaining on the number of miles of hard-surface road. 

 

If you look at what is said in the Report by the Gordon Commission, the Royal Commission on 

Canada’s Economic Prospects, you will see that of this number of vehicles, the number of heavy 

vehicles in proportion to light vehicles is on the increase, and besides that, the number of miles per 

vehicle travelled per year is also on the increase. So when you look at the whole picture, where the 

number of vehicles is increasing more than our mileage of roads, and at the same time the weight and 

the amount of travel of those vehicles is also on the increase, you can see that we are definitely on the 

down-grade since the proposals were put forth in 1945. the need was recognized at that time, Mr. 

Speaker, and I submit that it is even a greater need today than it was then. 

 

There is a little point of interest here, as I was going through these statistics I found that, while the 

number of miles of hard-surfaced roads had increased by two and a half times from 1945 to 1958 in the 

Dominion of Canada, in Saskatchewan they had increased by over 14 times. I don’t believe from that we 

can come to the conclusion that we are away ahead of the game insofar as the rest of Canada is 

concerned, but 



 

March 24, 1960 

 

9 

I think it does point out that back in 1945 hard-surfaced roads were practically unknown in this 

province, and our rate of progress is satisfactory compared with other parts of the Dominion. We are 

actually increasing this type of road in our province a good deal more than has been done elsewhere. 

 

I also noticed, Mr. Speaker, that the Conservative Government in Ottawa at the present time, when they 

were in Opposition, and out campaigning for their 1957-58 elections, were very much in favour of this 

type of thing. I am not talking about something here that I do not have support for from elsewhere. The 

Prime Minister, Mr. Diefenbaker, in 1958, speaking in Edmonton, at that time promised a second Trans-

Canada Highway, and the Hon. George Hees, now Minister of Transport, in 1957, stated that Canada 

needed a national highway program for the development of the tourist trade, natural resources, and 

defence program. He said if the Conservatives were elected, they would start a Canada-wide highway 

program similar to that in the U.S.A. I submit, Mr. Speaker, it was time we stopped talking about this 

thing and started doing something about it. We know from past experience with regard to such programs 

as this, that there is usually and inescapably a good deal of a lapse of time from the time we start talking 

about these things, and start to do our planning in regard to them, before the first bull-dozer starts to 

move in regard to working out that program. 

 

This motion before us today asks that such a program be instituted just as soon as any given province is 

through with their share of the Trans-Canada Highway. I concur with that in relation to ourselves, that 

we should start at once, but I would like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that according to the 1956 

amendments to this Trans-Canada agreement, it is due to close, to be finished on December 31, 1960, 

and here we are, just puttering around. We haven’t even got going on a plan to take the place of this 

present program, when it is finished. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that the time is long past when we should be 

beginning to work on such a program as is before us in this motion today. 

 

I also want to mention that in 1958, the Federal Government spent approximately the same amount on 

highways as what they took in on excise taxes on automobiles, tires and tubes, but this gives no 

consideration to the other taxes which were derived from the automobile industry and those who are 

working in it another way. I submit in that regard, that the Federal Government has been profiting at the 

expense of the provinces who have been building these highways, and the industry that is supported 

thereby. The taxes going to the Federal Government are not being returned in the proportion in which 

they are collected. 

 

I would also like to point out, as we all know, that the tax-sharing agreement which is in force between 

the provinces and the Dominion Government at the present time is by no means a charitable program of 

giving money to the provinces. It is simply giving back to the provinces what is coming to them, 

because of their agreeing not to collect succession duties, corporation and income taxes. We are not, by 

this motion, Mr. Speaker, asking for a handout. It is not something along that line which is under 

consideration at all, but I feel that this motion is something that should be passed, and it is very 

important that we pass this motion 



 

March 24, 1960 

 

 

10 

to signify our acceptance and our willingness to co-operate with the other provinces, and with Canada in 

something which is of national importance, and a problem which is facing us today. Mr. Speaker, I take 

great pleasure in seconding this motion. 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour):  Mr. Speaker, I am in hearty agreement with this 

resolution, but I would like to make a few remarks on transportation matters generally. Mr. Frank Hall, 

who is one of the outstanding Labour leaders in Canada today, and has done an excellent job of heading 

the 15 non-operating railway units in Canada over the years, is alleged to have made a statement 

recently to the effect that the abolishing of the Crows’ Nest Rates could provide railways with sufficient 

revenues to pay increases to employees. I would not agree with Mr. Hall in this respect. He came out to 

England as a young man, and has always lived in the east. We can overlook the fact. . .  

 

Mr. Speaker:  Will the hon. member please confine his remarks to the motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams:  Yes, I am just coming to that, Mr. Speaker. One more sentence – we can 

overlook the fact that he has always lived in the east and hasn’t got the western viewpoint. Farming in 

the prairie provinces is a depressed industry, I think we all realize that, and cannot afford to pay any 

higher transportation costs on grain than at the present time. Railways have done very well over the 

concessions granted them in early years, and the low rates on grain at the lake head must remain, I think 

we must all agree to that. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, there is no reason for railway employees to be 

kept on wages less than what is provided for other industries. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! Order! The hon. Minister has not touched this motion yet. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams:  I’ll just skip the next part then, Mr. Speaker. I thought I had something of 

interest to this House but will just get past where I was referring to the Crow’s Nest Rates. I want to 

mention the fact that the reason for railways having lost a tremendous share of their revenues, is, the loss 

of traffic to airways, trucks and buses. If we had to, we could get along without air travel or even trucks 

and buses, although they have their place and are a part of the country’s economy. I am not suggesting, 

of course, that we do away with any of them, but I do suggest, Mr. Speaker, that we could not do 

without the railways which are the arteries of this, or any other nation. Obviously, they cannot operate 

into every hamlet, and village in the country on a weekly or tri-weekly basis, and here is just where 

other services are justified. The country could not, however, exist without the railways transporting both 

products, such as fuel, grain, livestock 



 

March 24, 1960 

 

11 

and other heavy commodities, just about everything on the highways, (and we have been talking quite a 

bit about highways this afternoon) would result in transportation chaos and choke our roads to such an 

extent that travel by the general public would be almost impossible. 

 

A solution would be, in my opinion, to give the Transport Commission authority over all commercial 

transportation, whereby traffic would be divided in the best interests of our country, and in the interests 

of the transportation companies, themselves. In this way railways could get back some of the revenues 

they have lost, and be able to pay their employees proper wages. I repeat. . .  

 

Mr. Speaker:  Would the hon. Minister begin to discuss the motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams:  Yes. 

 

Opposition Members:  I think the hon. member is on the wrong motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams:  Very well, I will just say, Mr. Speaker, that I feel the answer is a subsidy from 

the Federal Government, and will just close by saying that I feel it is most important that financial 

assistance from the Federal government be provided any program immediately its portion of the Trans-

Canada Highway is completed. 

 

I will support the motion. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Leader of the Official Opposition):  Mr. Speaker, it is not my intention to 

prolong this debate at any length. I am a little confused now as to which debate I should take part in, the 

one that is on the order paper, or the one the Minister of Labour was speaking on. 

 

Premier Douglas:  You spoke on that one two weeks ago! 

 

Mr. McDonald:  I would suggest that was the time my hon. friend should have been taking part in the 

debate, and not today. However, Mr. Speaker, I feel that the mover and the seconder of this resolution 

have placed most of the material on record which I feel ought to be placed there. I cannot say that I am 

in complete agreement with all of the statements made by either of the Speakers, but I want to assure 

this House that as far as I am concerned, and I am sure I speak for my colleagues as well, I am in 

complete agreement with the body of the resolution, that is, calling on the Government of Canada to 

make further agreements with provinces such as Saskatchewan, (and Saskatchewan is the only province 

that could qualify at the moment) and to continue to plan highway improvements after the Trans-Canada 

Highway has been completed. We are in agreement with that policy. We also agree that Canada’s 

constitution places responsibilities for highway construction on the provinces, but I am one of those who 

believes that this country has progressed since Canada’s constitution was drawn up, and probably from 

time to time we should 



 

March 24, 1960 

 

 

12 

take a look at the division of responsibility, not only between the Dominion of Canada and the 

provinces, but also between the provinces and local governments. I sincerely hope that the mover and 

the seconder, and all of those people on the other side of the House, will have similar thoughts in mind 

when, from time to time, the municipalities of this province ask for similar treatment from the province 

of Saskatchewan that we are now asking from the Government of Canada. 

 

I sometimes wonder, when I listened especially to the seconder this afternoon, if he can recall the facts 

that certain provincial responsibilities, with respect to roads in this province, and with regard to 

highways, have now been handled on to the municipalities. 

 

Opposition Members:  Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald:  Certain highways, marked highways, have been taken out of the highway system 

and handed back to municipalities. Secondary highway systems have been handed back to the 

municipalities. In our opinion, this is a retrograde step, and in our opinion ought to be rectified just the 

same as we are attempting to do with the resolution that is now before us. 

 

I doubt very much the remark of the Minister of Labour just now, (and I could not agree with him) that 

we could probably do away with trucks, buses and airways. I doubt that very, very much. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams:  Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. I didn’t say anything of the kind. I said I 

wasn’t suggesting for a moment that we should do away with them. My remarks were all out of order, 

and I think perhaps his are out of order, too. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  I will withdraw the remark, Mr. Speaker, because I wouldn’t want to be out of order 

to the same degree as the Minister of Labour was out of order, and I am not going to suggest that by the 

Federal Government coming into a new agreement with the province of Saskatchewan, it would help in 

the increase in wages to railway employees. I don’t think this resolution has too much to do with that. 

But I do agree that times have changed, and I think the Government of Canada has some responsibility, 

despite the fact that our constitution states otherwise. I think for the good of this country that the 

Government of Canada must plan an active part in providing adequate transportation systems, not only 

across our country, but into the vast mineral areas and into the recreational areas, not only of 

Saskatchewan, but of all parts of Canada. I doubt very much if the revenues that are available to 

Saskatchewan or to many of the Provincial Governments are such that we can cope very much longer 

with this problem, because of the ever increasing number of vehicles on our roads, and the ever 

increasing number of trucks and heavy equipment. 

 

I want to assure you that we will be most pleased to give our support to this resolution. 



 

March 24, 1960 

 

13 

Hon. J.T. Douglas (Minister of Highways):  Mr. Speaker, I didn’t intend to take part in this debate 

because the mover and seconder did a very excellent job in placing before us the reasons why we should 

have federal aid for highways, but in view of remarks made by the Opposition Leader, I am afraid that I 

cannot allow some of his remarks to go unanswered. 

 

I notice he refers to the treatment which we have given to the municipalities, and intimated that we were 

not giving our municipalities the same treatment from provincial funds that we are asking from the 

federal people for federal funds. I want to point out that the last year for which I have the figures, we did 

spend something like 137 per cent of the entire amount of money which we have collected from the 

Road Users’ taxes on highways and roads, and of that share, something over 25 and 30 per cent of that 

money went to our municipalities. Unfortunately I find I haven’t got the figures here that represent the 

amount Ottawa collects from sales tax, excise taxes on cars, trucks and other motor vehicles, nor have I 

the amount which accrued to the federal treasury because of import duties on foreign cars entering this 

country, all of which can be considered as highway users’ taxes. I also find they are charging sales and 

excise tax against fuel oils and gasolines, which are used on the roads, so that they are collecting very 

large sums of money from this source, and they are not spending it themselves, nor are they spending on 

provincial roads an amount equal to what they are collecting from the highway users. So it is a much 

different story as between the treatment which the Federal Government is handing out to the highway 

users of this country, than that of this province where we are spending much more every year on roads 

and highways, then we are getting from the highway users’ taxes. 

 

There is another point, while I am on my feet, that I would like to bring to the attention of this 

Assembly, and that is the need for federal aid, and the immediate consideration of federal aid. I do not 

want to see a repetition of what took place here when the Minister of Northern Affairs and Natural 

Resources announced their northern roads program. We announced the northern roads program without 

first consulting with the provinces. I would gather he did not even consult with his own officials, and I 

say that after having discussed this matter with some of his officials. As you all know, it has been a 

rather haphazard method. In fact, I do not know whether or not they have signed that agreement 

themselves, but I do know this, that in spite of what the Minister of Northern Affairs and Natural 

Development said, when I signed with him an agreement for the Prince Albert bridge, there was no 

question whatsoever of the cost of that bridge being included in the northern roads development 

program, and of course, as you all know, that is now being done – they are now deducting the cost of 

that bridge from the money which they will spend in the northern development roads. 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  They haven’t come across yet. 



 

March 24, 1960 

 

 

14 

Hon. Mr. Douglas:  I would think so, but as I dealt with that a short time ago, I don’t need to deal 

with that again. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  We’re used to that, now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas:  But I want to say this, that I am hoping that the representations that we have 

been making to the present Government at Ottawa over the last several years will eventually be listened 

to, and that they will call in for consultation all the provinces of Canada, and discuss with them a 

program of federal aid for highways. As has been pointed out here this afternoon, it is long overdue. We 

are the only important country in the entire world without a national road program, and I say it is a 

disgrace to Canada that we haven’t got one. 

 

I am very glad to know that we have the support of at least one phase of the Opposition, in this 

resolution which I think is a very well considered one, and one which I would be glad to know we can 

present to Ottawa with the full recommendation of this Assembly. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to unanimously. 

 

On Motion of the Hon. Mr. Douglas (Weyburn) the Assembly then adjourned at 9:55 o’clock p.m. 


