



















































Hansard: April 04, 1960


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

38th Day 

 

Monday, April 4, 1960 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

MOTION ON SELECT STANDING COMMITTEE ON PRIVATE BILLS 

 

Moved by Mr. Gibson, seconded by Mr. Brown (Bengough): 

 

“That the Second Report of the Select Standing Committee on Private Bills be now concurred in.” 

 

The question being put on the said motion, it was agreed to on the recorded division of 31 to 16. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Hon. J. H. Sturdy (Saskatoon City):  Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I am sure the 

members of the House would wish to join with me in welcoming the group of students from the Air 

Vice-Marshall Curtis School in Saskatoon, the grade VIII students, and also welcome their principal, 

Mr. Eric Marriet. Mr. Marriet is a very old friend of mine, and a comrade-in-arms of the First World 

War. I thought he had retired from the teaching profession, but such is his dedication to it and such has 

been his invaluable services as an educationist of Saskatoon, that I think he has been persuaded to return 

to the profession. 

 

Hon. Russell Brown (Minister of Travel & Information):  Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with my 

desk-mate, Mr. Sturdy, in also welcoming a group of students to the Assembly today in the gallery to 

your left. they are a fine group of students, together with their teacher, Mr. Sides, from Fernmore 

School, Earl Grey. I am awfully glad they saw fit to come in and visit us, because I was afraid the House 

might begin to think we didn’t have any schools in the Last Mountain constituency, as this is the first 

group to come in this year. I am sure we all wish to welcome then, and hope they find their trip most 

enjoyable. 



 

April 4, 1960 

 

 

2 

SECOND READING 

 

Bill No. 876 – An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Loans Act. 
 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): Mr. Speaker, this Bill is a very short one. The first section has 

three points to it: 4a, 4b, and 4c. The first two of these are actually for clarification. We have been doing 

this, I suppose since the province was formed, now for 55 years. Securities have been sometimes above 

par; sometimes below part, and this is simply to clarify the matter to make it very clear that we can 

either buy or sell securities with a premium or discount. 

 

The last one makes provision (at the present time we have the power by Order in Council) to make for 

payment of certain amounts, the principle and the interest. This also makes provision that when it is 

required by the lending party, the province will have the power to guarantee that non-residents of 

Canada, whose securities are not situated within the province, if the Government of Canada at any time 

applies a tax on the interest of these securities, that that will be paid by the province. In other words, that 

the person who buys the debentures will be sure they get the amount which they contracted to get 

originally. 

 

The next section 9 is repealed – that section pertaining to the succession duties, which provided that the 

succession duties on the returns received from Saskatchewan debentures would apply. Of course we 

have no succession Duties Act now, so that it is no longer necessary, and we wish therefore to have it 

repealed. 

 

I would move second reading of the Bill. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

Bill No. 88 – An Act to amend The Vocational Educational Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd (Minister of Education):  Mr. Speaker, earlier in this Session we had agreed to 

amendments to provided changes in the rate of remuneration for School Trustees. Bill No. 88 does the 

same things with regard to those trustees who operate under the Vocational Education Act. I would 

move second reading of Bill No. 88. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 


