



















































Hansard: February 24, 1960


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

10th Day 

 

Wednesday, February 24, 1960 

 

The House met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 

 

THRONE SPEECH DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Thorson, seconded by Mr. 

Thibault: 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, first I may I say how much I have 

appreciated your good work as Speaker of this Legislature. Yours is not an easy job. You have to sit and 

listen while we members make bad speeches. You have been very faithful to the trust imposed in you. I 

regret that because of the passing of the years you find it necessary to retire. 

 

I have appreciated very much the honour and privilege of serving and representing the people of my 

constituency for 22 years in this Legislature. I hope to have that honour and that privilege for another 

four or five years. Whether I will get best wishes for "Many Happy Returns" on that question from my 

friends opposite is doubtful, but if they are not here I will miss them. 

 

The members opposite have said they are going to oppose — they are going to vote against the motion 

that is before the House. Some of them have tried to explain that does not mean voting against the 

program which is contained in the Speech from the Throne, but I think that is rather a weak argument. I 

don't see how you can be for a want of confidence motion, which in the negative this action is, and at the 

same time be in favour of the program of progress and development as put forward by that government. I 

know that honourable members opposite often try to ride two horses, and if you try to ride two horses 

long enough you do develop a split personality. Their split personality is not sufficiently developed so 

that they can on the one hand be in favour of a program, and on the other hand be opposed to the 

government that is putting that program forward. I don't see how the honourable members can put forth 

that argument. If they are really opposed to the program set forth in the Speech From the Throne, then it 

is their duty to vote against the motion, but if they are for those programs, and they vote against the 

motion, no amount of talking will serve to convince me or other people in the Province that they are in 

favour of those programs. I know it is a difficult spot for them to be in, but it is a problem which they 

themselves have to face. 

 

I would like to deal with my own constituency again for a few minutes. While I have represented the 

constituency, first of Tisdale 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

2 

and then of Kelsey, I have seen a good many things take place. There has been a great deal of satisfaction 

to me to see those changes come. Whilst I sat in the Opposition benches, Mr. Speaker, on many 

occasions when I wanted to go to my home in the Constituency I failed to get there because there were 

no gravelled roads or highways, and because the weather was wet. We just didn't have in that 

Constituency such a thing as gravelled highways. Now the Constituency is fairly well covered with 

gravelled highways which are well maintained. It has been a thrill to see that development take place. 

Many of the other members won't appreciate that so much, but certainly in our corner of the Province 

that was the situation in 1944, which has bean remedied. I am pleased to know that the Minister of 

Highways has agreed that he is going to look at the last remaining connection on No. 3 Highway 

between the Manitoba border and the Alberta border during the coming year to survey the need for the 

extension there. No. 3 Highway now extends from Erwood, east of Hudson Bay, to west of Pierceland 

on the Alberta boundary. The only gap is from Erwood east to the Manitoba border, and I certainly hope 

to see something done about that in the not too distant future. 

 

In that Constituency it has also been a pleasure to see the municipalities building all-weather grid roads 

and to know that they are getting very substantial grants in assistance to build those roads. The 

honourable Members opposite sometime talk about the way this government uses the local governments 

in the Province of Saskatchewan. Well, I'd like to point out to them that in one year the municipalities of 

Saskatchewan will receive more grants for road and bridge construction than they received for that 

purpose in thirty-four years of Liberal government in this Province. These are the last people in the 

world who should talk about how the municipalities are being treated. The people there appreciate those 

grid roads and other improvements that are being made. 

 

My Constituency also was one with very few power lines. Now power lines extend throughout the length 

and breadth of the Constituency. There are hundreds of farmers who have the power now on their farms 

and in their homes. That, too, has been a real thrill to see that development take place. During this period 

of time villages located in my Constituency have grown up to be towns, and hamlets have grown up to 

be villages. There is every sign of progress and development being made. 

 

We have there, thanks to the Department of Natural Resources and the Saskatchewan Timber Board, a 

thriving forest Industry which is the envy of the loggers from Manitoba. There is no trouble in getting 

people to do the harvesting in the forest — in fact you have more people wanting to do it than you have 

timber for them. I might say here that the program for the management and the conservation of resources 

has also been appreciated in that area. Our forest industry there now is on a sound foundation, on a 

sustained yield basis. What happened before would have meant that pretty soon the forest would have 

disappeared. We have no commercial fishing in that area but through the efforts of the Department of 

Natural Resources in management and fish culture some of the streams in that area are the best trout 

fishing streams in the province. Through management and conservation of game, particularly the big 

game, it is one of the areas best 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

3 

known for hunting. These attractions take many tourists into the area which means a nice bit of good 

business for the business men in that area. All of these things are certainly appreciated. 

 

Then there are the resource access roads which have been built by the Department of Natural Resources 

into the forest. These roads not only make accessible the forest — make it possible to bring out the 

produces of the forest — but they provide many excellent tourist roads, pleasant roads on which to drive 

to go fishing, or hunting in the hunting season, or just to drive to see the beautiful scenery in the country. 

 

In my Constituency there have been four new hospitals built since this government took office. Before 

that there was no hospital east of Tisdale except an outpost and a nursing home or two. One of these now 

hospitals was built with grants only from the Province. The other three were built later when the Federal 

Government came into the picture and made grants too. But it was only our policy of grants for capital 

and construction that made this development possible. In my Constituency we have built, again with 

substantial grants from the Provincial Government, a home for senior citizens at Zenon Park; and on the 

border of my Constituency at Tisdale another home for senior citizens and the municipalities in my 

Constituency share in that home. 

 

The Air Ambulance service has meant a great deal to that part of the country. Air Ambulance has made 

hundreds of trips into that area. The logging industry is not one of the safest industries — there are 

sometimes accidents; and then there is the normal sickness and emergency which takes place. In one 

particular case, Mr. Speaker, the Air Ambulance landed on the airfield just outside of Hudson Bay, 

taxied right down the highway — they couldn't have done that on a Liberal highway — to the front of 

the hospital and the patient was carried on a stretcher right from the hospital into the plane and brought 

back to the hospital in Saskatoon or Regina. 

 

When we come to the question of a duration there is probably a greater change in this field than in any 

other, because in 1944, we had many log and mud schools with poor furnishings, poor equipment, 

schools that you wouldn't like to have your children attend and sit in throughout the day, especially in the 

inclement weather. Now, in that area, due to the system of grants that has been put into effect for capital 

and construction and for operations, and due to the organization of the larger school units in that area, 

they have a very good set-up of educational facilities of which the people there are very proud indeed, 

but there is only the most remote resemblance between the facilities which are there now and those 

which existed fifteen years ago. 

 

Recently a health region has been organized which covers that area, and is operating with substantial 

help from the Province. These are all new things, Mr. Speaker. They didn't have them before. Grants 

have been paid to the municipalities in giving medical care and one of the municipalities in my 

Constituency has developed probably one of the most complete and best systems of municipal medical 

care that exists in the Province of Saskatchewan. 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

4 

There has also been, of course, a great deal of agricultural development in that area through clearing and 

breaking, much of it on Crown land and now on private land which was assisted by advances from the 

Provincial Government. On the Crown land it was actually paid for by the Provincial Government. 

Something like one and a quarter millions of dollars was spent in the area for clearing and breaking of 

good land. Nearly a million dollars was spent for drainage and flood control. We are sometimes affected 

by having too much water from rain, or the spring run-off when the snow melts, and sometimes this 

causes a great deal of trouble. Many of these problems have been taken care of. 

 

The Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Branch of the Federal Department of Agriculture does not operate in our 

area, but the Provincial Department of Agriculture has established five community pastures in that area 

with an acreage of over twenty thousand acres and last year they called nearly fifteen hundred heed of 

cattle. The carrying capacity of these pastures will probably be twice as much as that when they are fully 

developed. Those are some of the particular things which it has been my pleasure to see take place in my 

Constituency. 

 

I should not leave this without mentioning the elimination of the public revenue tax which was of 

interest not only to my Constituency but to all of the Province of Saskatchewan. The people in my 

Constituency appreciate those things which have been done, and they are not short on memory either. 

They remember how little was done and how ineffectively that little was done prior to the tine when we 

took office. My honourable friends should never forget that the great mistake which was made by their 

party was the mistake of sitting doing nothing and not doing it very well. 

 

Many of the people that I have the honour to represent, Mr. Speaker, are still pioneers. That country is 

new. Many of the original pioneers who moved in there onto new land in the bush are still there. The 

problems, the troubles, the lonesomeness of pioneering on the prairie was one thing; pioneering in the 

bush where the problems we much more difficult — where development is much slower — is another 

question, and when I think about this, when I look over this situation, it occurs to me that these pioneers 

are certainly people with stout hearts. They are pioneers who face their problems and difficulties with 

steadfast courage. They are not easily discouraged. They do not give up easily. 

 

Last fall we had a very fine crop maturing; then the bad weather came, and the large part of that crop, far 

more than half of that crop was under the snow. I don't think my area of the Province was hit any harder 

as far as loss of crop under the snow was concerned, and I know that those people who suffered that 

disaster appreciate having received the emergency acreage payments. 

 

I am sure too that they appreciate the items which are in the Speech from the Throne. I am sure that they 

will be interested in crop insurance. This is one of the areas in the Province where the system used under 

the Prairie Farm Assistance Act has been of very little benefit. Our 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

5 

expenses of farming are high for obvious reasons. Our crop yield has to be high to get by, and therefore 

the 1 percent which we pay to the Prairie Farm Assistance is much greater than in an area where the 

long-time yield may be ten, or twelve, or fourteen bushels per acre. So in that area we have paid far more 

in P.F.A.A. than our farmers have been able to get out of it in benefits. That is one of the areas where 

they will probably be interested in taking a try at the crop insurance under the plan which is being 

developed. 

 

I already mentioned that power is serving the communities there and many farmers have power. More 

will be getting power within the next year or so. Somehow those people managed in a good many cases 

to erect fairly good houses; an odd one put in sewer and water, and it will cost them money if they want 

to put in sewer and water but it will cost them less money if they get some help from the Provincial 

Government. I know that they will be interested in the farm sewer and water program which we are 

about to undertake. There will be no question like there is a question with the honourable gentlemen 

opposite; there will be no question that they are in favour of that program. Those people over there don't 

know whether to be in favour of it or against it. They try, of course, to be on both sides — against it in 

one place and in favour of it in another. People in my Constituency certainly will appreciate also the 

assistance which will be available for villages and towns for this when they get a chance, don't forget 

that. No matter how my honourable friends over there vote this afternoon, when the people in my 

Constituency have a chance to vote on this question they will know that they are going to be in favour of 

these programs. 

 

We haven't got too many rural telephones over all of my constituency but where we have the rural 

telephones organized, certainly the assistance provided in the budget will be appreciated by the people 

there. 

 

Of course, above all, the medical care program — this is a program which the honourable members 

opposite dare not be against, but they develop devices to delay it, discourage it, to stop programs as 

much as they can. The Social Credit group says Saskatchewan isn't ready for it; the Liberals say: Oh lets 

have a plebiscite — that would take time. The Conservatives, of course, go one better. They don't even 

trust the people to vote on the question. They say: Let's bury it completely in a Royal Commission. You 

see they're trying to be friends with the people who are opposed to developing health services but at the 

same time they daren't vote against these things. They get themselves in a very awkward position, 

indeed. 

 

The people in my Constituency are going to welcome also, an increase in the school grants which has 

been announced in the Speech From the Throne. I'm not going to go into the details of the school grants 

in my Constituency, but certainly they realize that had they not got the increase in the school grants 

which they have enjoyed, they would never be able to have the kind of educational service which they 

enjoy at the present time. 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

6 

They are going to vote, when they get a chance, in favour of the program of assistance for re-gravelling 

of grid roads. Mr. Speaker, these people opposite can send in all the people they want but those are the 

things the people in my Constituency want; these are the things that they are going to vote for. 

 

I would like now to deal with the question of mineral resources and their development for a short time. 

There has been a good deal of discussion on this question and I have given to this House on many 

occasions, facts and figures to show that we have had a very good development of our mineral resources, 

but in spite of that, every time the honourable Members get a chance to pick up something that looks like 

the tide is turning and is beginning to ebb, they make a great deal of it. 

 

One of the very important measures as to the development and use of our mineral resources is the 

revenue the people of this Province get from these resources through the Government. My honourable 

friends may not consider revenue to be very important. I believe it was last night some of them were 

saying: What does a million dollars amount to — the revenue from the Crown Corporation? Well, we 

think it's important that we get every bit of revenue we can from our resources so that first, we will be 

able to give the best services we can to the people of the Province, which they want, and second, the 

minimum amount will need to be collected from those people in taxation. 

 

Back in 1944-45 the revenue from mineral resources was $233,000.00; just under a quarter of a million 

dollars. The average for the three years from April 1st, 1956 to March 31st, 1959, was $23,300,000.00. 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, the revenue to the people of Saskatchewan from the development of our 

mineral resources was almost one hundred times as great as when the Liberals went out of office. Now I 

grant you we wouldn't expect at that earlier date there would be the same development, but there was jut 

nothing. They had done nothing. They had got no development. No government should take the stand 

that it is all to their credit when they get development of resources, but I think that when the Liberal 

party was in power here in Saskatchewan from 1905 to 1944 with the exception of five years and had 

done nothing more with the resources than that, it is time that we took a look at it. 

 

These people, of course, are very happy when they see signs that are unfavourable; but again, may I say, 

I don't think the people of Saskatchewan are going to be ready to trust a political party which completely 

failed in the past in regard to development of resources. 

 

First, let me say a word about potash. A little while ago one of the American potash companies decided 

to close its office in Saskatoon. The news went out over the air and in the newspaper and unless you 

listened very carefully, or read it very carefully, you got the impression that the Potash Company of 

America which has over $20,000,000.00 now invested in Saskatoon, was pulling out. Those prophets of 

doom love to low these things up. The people in the potash industry have been having very great 

problems in getting through the Blairmore formation — getting a shaft through it — a shaft that will 

stand up. At the same time, in the potash market from 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

7 

the present mines there can be a sufficient supply produced. They have decided that, for the time being, 

they would move out their office. They are keeping their land of course. Everybody read the comments 

of a Vice President of International Minerals and Chemicals Corporation in which he said Saskatchewan 

will be the world's greatest producer of potash within 20 or 25 years. 

 

Opposition members have been trying to make something of the decline in seismic surveys. Seismic 

activity reached its peak in the United States and Canada in 1952 and 1953. The Saskatchewan peak of 

activity was in 1958, while seismic activity on this Continent was going down after 1953, in 

Saskatchewan it was increasing. 

 

Taking 1956 as the base year, in 1957 seismic activity in Canada decreased by 8 per cent and in 1958 it 

was down 27 per cent. In the U.S.A. seismic activity was down 7 per cent in 1957, and 23 per cent in 

1958. On the contrary in Saskatchewan seismic activity was up 3 per cent in 1957 and up 16 per cent in 

1958. 

 

In 1959 seismic activity was down again in the U.S.A. and Canada and also down in Saskatchewan. The 

member for Gravelbourg (Mr. Coderre, Liberal) asked how many seismic crews were in operation in 

Saskatchewan on February 1,1960, and he got the answer — two crews. Most people know that seismic 

surveys are not done to a great extent in the winter unless there is a real urgency or the work is being 

done in muskeg country where travel is best in winter. 

 

As a matter of fact this southern part of Saskatchewan is pretty well covered with seismic surveys. These 

seismic surveys which are made by the oil companies are all turned in to the Department. After a certain 

length of time they become available to the public, when they are past the confidential stage. 

 

When a company, interested in an area in Saskatchewan, wants to look at this area, are they going to hire 

a seismic crew and send it out to the field to do the job? No. They're going to go to the Department and 

get the seismic maps for that area which are in the Department. Here, Mr. Speaker, are three maps, one 

showing the seismic survey coverage in the Province, and the price list of all the geophysical maps 

available. I'm going to lay them on the table in case any of the honourable Members want to find out 

anything about them. The job of seismic surveys is largely done, and we won't have much seismic survey 

activity here in Saskatchewan. In 1952 we had 47 crews licensed, and in 1959 54 were licensed to do 

seismic work in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now in the field of quartz mining and prospecting the situation is much the same. The demand for 

metals of various kinds decreased relatively in the last few years. The defence stockpiles were built up, 

the Korea scare was over, so this industry could produce far more base rotation we could possibly use 

under our present system at the present time. As to the tight money policy — you can understand how it 

is hard to get risk money to go into exploration — the people who have money now, in the main, want to 

see the end of an ore body sticking out of the ground, then have a map of it, to develop as a pretty sure 

thing before they go into it. 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

8 

Now there is still some risk money going into exploration but it isn't large and I don't think it's going to 

be large until there is some change. The change could be the scarcity of metals of any particular kind, or 

increase in price of those metals; or a discovery in a certain area of course would spur activity in that 

area. It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, and I am sure all Members will be glad to hear, that one 

uranium company operating in the Beaverlodge area has bought two contracts and has brought these 

contracts to Saskatchewan to their mine in Saskatchewan — for filling them there. That doesn't look like 

Saskatchewan is considered to be too bad a place to operate in. 

 

Anyway, in this whole question of mineral production let it be remembered that Saskatchewan moved 

into fourth place among the provinces of Canada in 1958, and is holding that position with a substantial 

increase in 1959. 

 

Now, just a minute or two on the question of royalties and rentals. I want to say that I think we should 

get from the development of our resources, the best returns we can. I don't think we would be true to the 

people of the Province unless we kept that in mind. At the same time we have to remember that royalties 

and rentals apply in British Columbia, Alberta, Manitoba, and Ontario. In no area can you get very far 

out of line without pushing more of the exploration work into these other areas. So our royalties and 

rentals are comparable. Particularly I would like to mention oil. When you take our royalty and then you 

add to it our share of the road allowance oil, which they haven't got in Alberta . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — That's the last straw. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . add to that our road allowance oil, then put that formula on a graph and 

it runs parallel, but just a little below the royalty in Alberta. So, when my honourable friends suggest that 

royalties are too high, it isn't so. Maybe they'll go out and campaign for lower royalties in the coming 

election. I'd be happy to meet them on that question if they went to do it. 

 

In hard rock our royalty is comparable with the royalty in effect in other provinces. Furthermore, our 

regulations provide that a mining company, if it makes no profit in mining, then it doesn't pay any 

royalties. What fairer arrangement could you have than that? And, in any case, they will never pay under 

our present regulations, more than 12 1/2 per cent of their profits. I think, and I am sure I can speak for 

the government on this, that there is no intention to change any of these things. On a long term of years 

there may be a change in conditions that may justify changes, but I think these things will be left where 

they are, the royalties and rentals, for some considerable time. 

 

One of the things that has been important to people in the northern work has been the roads going into 

the north. It is a lot better to have a mineral showing close to a road than to have it far away. 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

9 

It is a lot cheaper to get the exploration done and to get the development work done to prove whether it 

is any good. The Government of Saskatchewan has helped very substantially also in the construction of 

oil access roads into the oil fields. Saskatchewan carries out geological surveys and the information that 

is collected is available to the public. 

 

There in no question that Saskatchewan, first of all, is rich in minerals. That doesn't man that you can 

just get them for nothing. They're hidden. They have to be found. Many have been found and more will 

be found in the future. We have the only healthy coal industry in Canada to this year the production is 

down. In 1959 the first serious impact of competition from other fuels was experienced, but I think it 

will still continue to be a fairly healthy industry. Our oil, our gas, our sodium sulphate, our sodium 

chloride, potash and the metals, and now two new ones, helium gas and iron. Agreements are in effect 

now for exploration and development concerning helium gas. 

 

At this point, Mr. Speaker, I would like to make the very short statement in regard to natural gas. The 

policy of the Government in regard to natural gas has many points in common with policies in effect 

elsewhere. First, the recognition by the Government that only one organization with a province-wide 

franchise can effectively plan to bring the benefits of natural gas to the maximum number of 

Saskatchewan urban communities and the maximum number of consumers. Therefore, this 

responsibility was placed on the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 

 

Early in the history of exploration the Saskatchewan Power Corporation gave encouragement to 

exploring for gas by guaranteeing a market for any commercial quantities of gas discovered. The 

Department of Mineral Resources also encouraged this exploration by special agreements and by special 

clauses in our regulations. At the same time, before any export of natural gas was allowed from Alberta, 

this government announced a policy regarding export of gas from Saskatchewan. Under this policy 

certain quantities of reserves had to be established before export would be allowed. Those required 

reserves have not yet been established and no export of natural gas from the Province had been allowed. 

This policy has been in effect in many jurisdictions. 

 

It has also been common practice in many areas to see that local consumers got some price advantage 

when using gas, even though somewhat higher prices may have been available in the export market. The 

price advantage enjoyed by a number of consumers in Alberta cities is a good example of that policy. I 

understand that gas for the City of Edmonton is bought at 8 cents or less per M.C.F. at the plant at Leduc 

and gas from another field for the same consumers costs considerably less than that price. A provision in 

the contract also provided that the price, if this gas were exported, it would bring high returns. In 

Saskatchewan we believe that our consumers, the same as the consumers in many gas producing states 

or provinces, are entitled to a similar price advantage. 

 

The important point is that policies in effect here regarding 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

10 

export of natural gas and the price for local consumption have been followed in many other areas. 

Consideration is now being given to a policy designed to allow some export of Saskatchewan gas in the 

not-too-distant future, and to provide that the pipeline grid of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation shall 

be used to collect such gas; that any price advantage gained shall be equitably distributed to 

Saskatchewan producers and owners of proven reserves. 

 

The Saskatchewan Power Corporation has purchased gas in fields in Alberta and will be selling part of 

this Alberta produced gas for export to eastern Canada. This, of course, is no more than any other 

Saskatchewan corporation could do. 

 

In reviewing the whole situation, we can say that the past years have been good and certainly looking 

ahead we can say there are still more of the better years to come. I have here two clippings, one is from 

the Leader-Post, February 15, 1956, when the headline was "McDonald says power gas rates deter 

Saskatchewan industry." The other one is from the Financial Post — an editorial in the Financial Post of 

February 20, 1960 — and this is what it says: 

 

"Since 1949 industrial production in the agricultural province of Saskatchewan has zoomed up four-fold 

or more than twice as fast as the cross-Canada total. It's true that Saskatchewan started the last decade 

with such a small industrial base" (and who was responsible for that) "that each new bid represented a 

big addition to industry, but it is still a proud record of development." 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I shall support the Motion. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, we now have had some seven days (I think 

it is) of debate on the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne. When this motion was placed 

before us, those on this side of the House listened with pride to the convictions, the clarity and the 

sincerity with which the mover spoke. We listened with pride also to the seconder of the motion, our 

newest member during his very fine performance. 

 

May I also, Mr. Speaker, express my regret at the long absence through illness in the House, of the 

member for Meadow Lake (Mr. Weber), and express the hope that his health will allow him soon to 

return to the Legislature. 

 

As we listen to the comments of the members of the Opposition, it become increasingly clear to me that 

the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan has not yet forgiven the people of Saskatchewan for not re-electing 

them in 1944. Over and over again, member after member on the opposite side of the House has tried to 

re-fight the 1944 election, trying to explain or to 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

11 

excuse, or to defend, just why it was the Liberal party, in power for so long, actually accomplished so 

very little. One fact they have overlooked, however, in remembering this election is the fact that we on 

this side of the House have been re-elected in 1948, 1952 and 1956. It may be true that the people of the 

province first elected us to office in 1944 because of the Liberal Party, but they have re-elected us in 

those other three years because of the general satisfaction with the performance of the Government 

during those terms; because of the confidence they have gained, and because our platforms presented 

ensuring our election campaigns have been, and will be carried out. That, Mr. Speaker, to me, seems to 

constitute a good part of the answer to the question which the member for Humboldt (Mrs. Batten) tried 

to ask the other day — a question in regard to a philosophy of the C.C.F. We are known — our 

philosophy and principles are known — for what they have been, and for what they will mean by virtue 

of what me have done in this province since we came into office. 

 

In addition to that, may I point out this, that most of the candidates who will contest the forthcoming 

election on the part of this Party have already been nominated. They have been chosen by the people in 

their constituencies because of their adherence to, and their understanding of the programs that have 

guided the Government for the past 16 years. 

 

We have already placed before the people of this province a good part of the program which we suggest 

can be carried out during the next four years. Those proposals are based on policies developed by groups 

of people meeting regularly in convention, and discussing their problems and reviewing their hopes for 

themselves and for their neighbours. I stress regular conventions, Mr. Speaker, not conventions held as 

in the case of the Liberals who sit opposite when they had need of a new leader, which seems to occur 

fairly frequently, or when they want to whip up some election excitement. Those proposals, as in the 

past, will be voted on and for by the people of the province and will be carried out by the C.C.F. 

Government after the election. 

 

I submit that the members opposite, in their desperate attempts to stir up the fears, and indeed the 

antagonism, of some people in the province, in recent days, are reporting to an old policy of theirs, with 

regard to scaring people away from supporting this movement. The fact of the matter is that the people 

do know what to expect from the Liberal Party, and the Liberal Party is afraid of that; the people do 

know what to expect from this Party, and the Liberal Party is equally afraid of that. 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek): — What about education? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — In the remarks, the main body of my remarks this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, I intend 

to do three things. First of all I want to review the activities of the Department of Education, and some of 

the other agencies for which I have responsibility, 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

12 

and indicate plans for the future to continue the improvement of the services provided through those 

agencies. Secondly, I want to comment on the issue of freedom and liberty of individuals, which has 

been raised by some members opposite, and to place before the House some of the facts, some of the 

evidence to indicate how that freedom and that liberty has been extended by the activities of this 

Government. Thirdly, I want to discuss the issue of honesty and accuracy of statement, which has also 

been raised by some members opposite, and to show how misleading some of the statement at least some 

of the members opposite have made, have been. 

 

Turning first of all, then, to the Department of Education, to get the picture which I want to give I wish 

to review a bit. I have to review because of the erroneous statement made by the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. McDonald), when he spoke in the legislature some days ago. You may recall, Mr. 

Speaker, that at that time he made the statement in commenting on the description of the member for or 

Souris-Estevan (Mr. Thorson) of school grants, that the percentage of cost carried by school grants had 

increased very little during our term of office. This has already been corrected by the Premier, and by the 

Provincial Treasurer as recently as last night, and I want to try to put it in the simplest possible terms in 

order that the leader of the opposition may be restrained or prevented from making similar misstatements 

in the future. 

 

May I put it in these general terms. When we assumed office in this Province, school grants constituted 

about 20 per cent, just over 20 per cent of the expenditures of school boards throughout the province. 

Last year school grants will constitute over 40 per cent of the expenditures — operating expenditures of 

school boards throughout the province. It shouldn't be necessary to put it any simpler than that, Mr. 

Speaker. In general terms, from 20 per cent to 40 per cent. I hope the leader of the Opposition may 

remember that, because he has made this same kind of statement, that our percentage contribution has 

not increased, not only in the Legislature, but he is reported to have made it throughout the country as 

well. 

 

There is more to it than just 20 per cent and 40 per cent. This was 20 per cent contribution, at a time 

when the average salary of teachers throughout the province was just over $1,000 per year. The average 

salary for 1959 was just over $4,000 per year. This was 20 per cent of expenditures at a time when there 

was practically no new construction, and very little by way of repair and renovation going on in the 

province. Last year the school boards of the province spent, out of current revenue, (taxes and grants) in 

the neighbourhood of $7 1/2 million for capital construction. In addition they spent a somewhat similar 

sum of money obtained from the sale of debentures, or from capital loans obtained through the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

This also was 20 per cent of a program which included a relatively small portion of students taking high 

school, and 40 per 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

13 

cent of a program which includes a much large percentage of students taking high school. Let us 

remember, too, that there were costs in those days assumed by individuals outside of taxes, which today 

are carried by taxes. I have reference particularly to the cost of most of the people who went from rural 

districts to other districts for high school purposes. Parents paid out of their own personal funds the 

tuition costs, the costs of board and room of living away from home. Today many of the students are 

carried by school buses; the fees are assumed by the district. This, too, makes a substantial difference. 

 

Let me recall also that at that time the full responsibility for purchasing of school texts was that of the 

parents, whereas the major part of the responsibility today for texts at the elementary level is assumed by 

the Department of Education. This increasing percentage which we take of the expenditure of school 

boards, and this more comprehensive program, has meant, of course, a considerable extension in the way 

of school grants. In the year before we took office, school grants amount to $2,800,000. In 1959 they 

will amount to more than $24 million. Let me apply one or two other measurements. In that year, 

1943-44, the school grants on a per pupil basis amounted to $15. This last year they amounted to per 

pupil, if we divide the amount of money available for school grants by the number of teachers employed, 

that figure for 1943-44 was about $350, and it will have been for, last year, about $2,670. No matter how 

one looks at it, Mr. Speaker, it is not only a considerable increase in the total amount of money paid, but 

a considerable increase, at least double, in terms of the percentage of total expenditures of school boards 

paid by school grants. May I again express the hope that the Leader of the Opposition, and others across 

there will not continue to make the kind of statements that were made in this House some six or seven 

debating days ago. 

 

I am happy, as all members on both sides of the House will be, that the Speech from the Throne suggests 

there are further substantial increases in grants which will be made available this year. Perhaps I may 

point out that in each of several recent years, the increase in school grants has been more than the total 

amount paid in school grants before we came to office. Perhaps I can best illustrate it this way. The 

grants paid to the schools in the city of Saskatoon in 1959 represent an amount one-half as large as the 

total amount paid to all of the schools in the province in 1943-44. The grants paid to six school units 

alone, Meadow Lake, Shell Lake, Prince Albert, Wadena and Sturgis, amount to as much and more in 

1959 as was paid to all of the schools in the province, rural and urban, in 1943-44. 

 

One other measurement of the obligations which we assume today is worthy of note. The grant which 

will be made this year to the University of Saskatchewan, including expenditure on buildings there, will 

be more than the entire expenditure for the whole Department of Education as recorded in Public 

Accounts in 1944. Our grant for one purpose, for the University of Saskatchewan, will amount to more 

this 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

14 

year than was spent for the full Department of Education, including for a War Emergency Training 

program entirely paid by the Federal Government the University, in 1943-44. When I say that I bear in 

mind the fact that in that 1943-44 expenditure, there was an item of over $300,000 and those figures for 

the Department of Education then included all the grants paid to public libraries in the province, and 

included the cost for the Industrial School for boys which was then under the Department of Education. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition also had something to say about relative rates of taxation for educational 

purposes in various provinces of Canada. It is quite right, as he said, that in regard to property tax levied 

by municipalities, the per capita rate in Saskatchewan is higher than in many provinces. This per capita 

rate is highest in the province of Ontario; Saskatchewan, second; with Manitoba only a few cents per 

capita behind, and Manitoba coming up very quickly just behind that. It is difficult to measure the 

incidence of taxation without looking at a lot of facts, so I suggest this is something we need to look at 

with more than one kind of measurement. The annual reports of the Departments of Municipal Affairs 

for the three provinces, Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba, indicate the levy of the Rural 

Municipalities for school purposes and general municipal purposes. They also indicate the acreage 

involved in agriculture production in those municipalities. If we take those figures, then we find that for 

school purposes in Alberta, the levy was 43 cents per acre; in Manitoba it was 40 cents per acre; in 

Saskatchewan, 30 cents per acre. If we take the levy for general municipal purposes, it was in Alberta, 31 

cents per acre; Manitoba, 67 cents per acre; in Saskatchewan, 27 cents per acre. Of course, if we add 

school and municipal levies together, it works out to 74 cents per acre in Alberta; 97 cents per acre in 

Manitoba, and 57 cents per acre — the least of the three, in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

There is still one other way in which this comparative situation can be looked at, and that is by 

examining mill rates. Along the Saskatchewan-Alberta boundary there are eight Alberta school 

divisions; there are nine Saskatchewan school units. In only one instance is the Saskatchewan mill rate 

higher than in the area immediately across the boundaries, and in that instance the difference is one — 

the Saskatchewan rate, 30; the Alberta rate, 29. There is, on the other hand, a maximum difference in 

favour of Saskatchewan at one point, of 16 mills, of the rural assessment in the continuous units. The 

range of rural rates in the Alberta units is from 29 to 42 — that is the group along the Saskatchewan 

boundary. Only one of those has a mill rate of 31 mills or less. In Saskatchewan, the range is from 25 to 

35, seven of them being 31 mills or less. Each of these measurements show the mill rate, or the tax load 

for school and municipal purposes in Saskatchewan favourable, when looked at with regard to our 

neighbouring provinces. 

 

When I spoke in this Debate about one year ago, Mr. Speaker, and I was able to put before the members 

of the legislature a number of statistics to indicate the healthy growth in both quantity and quality of our 

school programs. It was possible to point out a very considerable 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

15 

increase, not only in total numbers of students attending high schools, but in the percentage of students 

going to, and completing high school. It was possible to point out not only a total increase in the number 

of students going to University, but a very considerable increase in the percentage of our Grade XII 

graduates going on to University, or to other institutions of learning. You may recall that I went back 

five or six years before to indicate that, at that time some 14 per cent of Grade XII graduates wore found 

in University the following fall, whereas in the year just previous to last year, 21 per cent of the Grade 

XII graduates were found in our University. 

 

I am not going to repeat those statistics this year, Mr. Speaker, except to say that the trend is again 

confirmed. Last year in this Legislature, too, we endorsed the proposal to provide entrance scholarships 

to students going to first year University, Teachers' College, or to one of our two-year courses at the 

Technical Institute. I want to indicate something of the results of this. One way of talking about it is in 

terms of the number of a students. There is another kind of result, however. I am told by school 

principals throughout the province that this has provided a very considerable amount of advantageous 

incentive to their students, and they expect it will be reflected in terms of scholarship level of 

achievement. 

 

Some 322 such scholarships were granted last year. The distribution was good on a geographical basis. It 

was good to note that it wasn't the large schools that monopolized the scholarships, but that here too 

there was a good distribution. Of these 322 scholarships granted, 268 of them were for $500 each; the 

remaining were for $300. The students are in attendance at 11 different education institutes, four of them 

are outside of the province, in which cases the students are attending courses not given at our own 

University. Naturally enough, the largest group is at the University of Saskatchewan — 223. The second 

largest group, I am pleased to note, is at Teachers' College — some 59. Within these groups, the largest 

number is in the College of Arts and Science, which would include pre-medical and pre-dental students. 

The second largest groups is enrolled either at the College of Education at the University and in our 

Teachers' College. Probably the most striking fact of all is this, Mr. Speaker, that one out of every six of 

the first-year students at University or Regina College, was awarded a scholarship — one out of every 

six of the first-year students received a scholarship. In addition to this kind of assistance, something over 

1,000 students in the period from April 1st to December 31st, received non-interest bearing loans 

totalling some $344,000. There is another way in which the opportunity for students to realize their 

ambitions to further their education has helped. Our assistance to the University of Saskatchewan has 

been such that the student fees at that institution amount to a lower percentage of operating costs than is 

true of any other western University, or in my other University of comparable size in the Dominion of 

Canada. 

 

We have not, however, been interested solely in assisting those who wish to go on to University, or to 

prepare for their professions. Last year we talked about the development of the Technical Institute 

Program in Moose Jaw. This year the Speech from the Throne indicates that this program is being 

steadily expanded. By way of report, the building is not 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

16 

entirely complete. It will be completed later in 1960; there are a number of classes already in progress — 

classes leading to engineering, technician work, architectural draftsmanship, and a number of trade 

classes, as well. Those will be expanded as the building in completed. 

 

The apprenticeship program, operated jointly by the Federal and Provincial Departments of Labour, 

provides an opportunity for some 900 to 1,000 people to receive training as skilled craftsmen. These 

people taking these classes pay no fees, and receive an allowance. The psychiatric nurses' training 

program operated by the Department of Health in providing training for some 400 young people for that 

occupation. Again, there are no fees, and indeed there is a salary paid. Under our C.V.T. program some 

100 young women are taking courses leading to positions as nursing assistants. There are no fees paid, 

and there is an allowance available. This is a program which we expect to increase. 

 

In addition to that, this morning in Public Accounts, the Minister of Social Welfare pointed out 

assistance which his Department gives students and persons wishing to qualify as social workers. The 

Department of Agriculture provides assistance for those who wish to become veterinarians. The 

Department of Health provides assistance for those who wish to become physiotherapists, or X-ray 

technicians. All in all, it is a very impressive total, indicating the kind of assistance and the kind of 

opportunity that is available for the young people, in particular, of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I should mention that last year and this year again, we have operated special courses available to 

unemployed persons in order to up-grade their skills. Again, there are no fees charged. Again there is an 

allowance paid to those who attend. Some 200 unemployed persons either have taken advantage of those 

courses this winter, or are taking advantage of them at the present time. It is possible then, Mr. Speaker, 

to say that never before in the history of this province have so many young people received so much 

assistance to enable this to continue with their educational opportunities. 

 

I want to spend some time in discussing our position with regard to our teacher supply — again our 

teacher supply in a quantitative and a qualitative sense. To begin with, we can make use of in the 

province, approximately 8,000 teachers. At the end of June, 1959, 1,481 persons who had been teaching 

up until that time discontinued teaching in the province, or at least they were not in our schools when 

school re-opened in September. But in September, some 673 Saskatchewan teachers returned, after an 

absence of teaching during the previous year. So in that sense we had a net loss there of 880 persons. 

The obvious question is: how do we make up a loss of this kind? Well, there were graduated from 

Teachers' College in June of last year, 779 persons with at least an interim certificate. There came to 

Saskatchewan teachers trained in other parts of the country, and in other parts of the world (including 

some 32 from the United Kingdom), 176 persons, and there were 15 other Saskatchewan teachers who 

had left the province the 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

17 

year before who decided to return to Saskatchewan in 1959. We had a gain then of 970 qualified teachers 

to take the place of the 880 which we lost. But in addition to that, graduates from the University College 

of Education with a professional certificate, a degree or degrees, and others with at least 2 years of 

training at the University, totalled some 300, so altogether we had 1270, one might say, new persons, to 

take the place of the 880 who didn't continue teaching at the and of the year. 

 

May I say a word, too, about matter of teachers leaving the province, because I think that sometimes the 

impression is left that teachers leave in very great numbers. During the past year some 316 persons, who 

had been teaching during the year, asked for transcripts to other provinces, indicating their intention to 

leave the province. Eighty-seven of those, however, are still teaching in the province. So that means that 

there were some 229 who did leave or who are not teaching in Saskatchewan this year. Against that, may 

I again point out, 191 persons came from the other provinces or the United Kingdom or returned to 

Saskatchewan after one year's absence, so that represents a net loss, taking those who left and those who 

came, of some 38 persons. 

 

The future with regard to supply of teachers is encouraging. We have enrolled at our two Teachers' 

Colleges and the College of Education, at the present time, some 1,500 persons, roughly 200 more than 

we had last year at the same time. Thus, Mr. Speaker, even though we raised last fall the entrance 

requirements as compared to what they have been, we have this 200 increase in the number of teachers 

in training at this time. It is interesting to note what the principals of the schools from which the students 

at our Teachers' Collage came, said about those students. One of the bits of information, which comes 

with the student's application, is a report of the principal. These principals rated over 70 percent of our 

Teachers' College students in the top half of their classes and they rated about 40 percent of them as 

being in the top one-quarter of their grade XII classes. It is an encouraging note that the Teachers' 

Colleges continue to attract a larger percentage of the better students into the teaching profession. 

 

It would seem, then, if one looks at all of these figures, that the supply of teachers who have certificates 

qualifying them for elementary schools in the province, is reasonably adequate and certainly more 

adequate than it has ever been. I think I had occasion to mention last year that the percentage of teachers, 

not only with minimum qualifications but with 2 or more years preparation after grade 12, continues to 

increase. We do have in Saskatchewan the highest percentage of teachers with senior matriculation and 

one or more years of preparation after grade 12, to be found in any province in Canada. Almost 95 

percent of our teachers have this amount of training. The only province that comes close has between 80 

and 90 percent. It goes down in one province as low as 8 percent, a province which until 3 or 4 years ago 

had a Liberal government. The Canadian average for persons with this amount of training is in between 

50 and 60 percent. Added to that, and perhaps related 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

18 

to it, is the significant fact that we have the highest entrance qualifications for the profession of my 

province in Canada and that we require the highest qualifications before a permanent certificate is given, 

of any province in Canada. 

 

Now there are many factors which have been attributed to this improved supply. Quite obviously the 

improvement in salaries has made a contribution. I have already commented that the average salary in 

1959 was in the neighbourhood of $4,200 per teacher, taking all teachers into consideration. Certainly 

the improvements in the superannuation opportunities for teachers has been a factor. I want to restate 

something that I have stated before in this House, Mr. Speaker, the majority of the teachers 

superannuated under our plan can do so with a better pension than they can in any other Canadian 

province. The certification policy that I have just spoken about aimed at keeping qualifications up and 

putting pressure on to raise those qualifications, has had some effect. The program of centralization of 

schools throughout the country, giving more satisfactory teaching opportunities, has undoubtedly had its 

effect. 

 

Something else which I think needs to be mentioned needs to be credited, is the atmosphere which exists 

in this province in regard to teachers. Our teachers do have a very considerable amount of opportunity 

for initiative and for participation. They have a considerable opportunity to play a part in the making of 

decisions which determine the disciplines under which they will teach; this is exceedingly important. 

This is an atmosphere which can be contributed to by the teachers themselves, certainly by the school 

boards of the province, by the Department of Education and by the attitude of the people of 

Saskatchewan in general. All of these things put together make Saskatchewan a good place in which to 

teach. It isn't always possible for us to pay as high salaries as some provinces that have greater financial 

ability, a greater percentage of larger and graded schools, and in that circumstance the creation of a 

desirable working climate does something to compensate and is increasingly important. Even though 

those statistics and conditions to which I have referred are such as to provide any of us with a 

considerable amount of satisfaction, may I say again me have no intention of being complacent. The 

Speech from the Throne advances suggestions to improve further the quality of teaching personnel. 

 

First of all there is the proposal with regard to a group insurance program for teachers. The members of 

the Legislature will know that an increasing number of organizations, government and private, are 

offering to their employees the benefits of group insurance programs benefits which can only come as 

the result of a whole group taking advantage of that insurance plan. Such a program for teachers, with 

the government acting on behalf of the school boards, sharing the cost of the premium, will be placed 

before the Legislature this Session. The payment, it is proposed, of the premium on the first $2,000, will 

not 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

19 

be deducted from grants. It will in effect be added to the grants as the school board contribution made by 

the government in this case. The remainder of the premium will be paid by the teachers themselves. This 

proposal will be subject to acceptance by the council of the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation at its 

annual meeting. The proposal is advanced in order that we may go a bit further in creating the type of 

conditions which will encourage more people, better people into the teaching profession and to keep 

them in that profession in Saskatchewan after they have completed their training. 

 

The second proposal is one which arises out of our particular concern with the need for more teachers 

with professional certificates, that is, teachers who have a university degree or university degrees. While 

our percentage of teachers who have two or more years of preparation after grade 12 is reasonably 

satisfactory, we are not nearly as happy with the percentage of some 15 to 20 who have a university 

degree. There is going to be an increasing need for persons with this kind of training, as the number of 

students moving into our high schools increases and the percentage of our students who will continue in 

high school continues to improve. As a result the government is suggesting this year the making 

available of a number of special scholarships for teachers. In order to obtain a university degree, one of 

the university requirements is that one year must be spent in attendance at the regular courses of the 

university. A number of our teachers begin by going to Teachers' College and then add a number of 

classes by way of summer school or correspondence courses. Eventually they have to take a year's leave 

of absence and spend that year in attendance at university. While it is not exclusively for this group that 

the scholarship will be proposed, it is my thought that it is largely this group who warrant most this kind 

of proposal. The amount of assistance is not fully determined yet, but it will likely be in the 

neighbourhood of $750 or $1,000 as a bursary to those who have at least a standard certificate and who 

need this one year of attendance at university in order to complete their degree. 

 

In addition to the bursary, the student, the teacher in this case who will become a student, will have of 

course access to the student loan fund if they are in need of further financial assistance. I should point 

out, Mr. Speaker, that in the course of one year's leave of absence, if the teacher really wants to do a 

good hard year's work, he or she can take one class at summer school, five more in the regular year, 

another one at intersessional before the next summer school and one more the summer school following, 

making a total of 8 classes. It wouldn't be any holiday, Mr. Speaker, but it can be done and I suspect that 

this kind of assistance will encourage a worthwhile performance. 

 

Some 2,600 districts are now served by school buses, that's roughly twice the number that was served 5 

years ago. Over 40,000 pupils are conveyed in these school buses. That's more than double the number 5 

years ago. Of these 40,000 some 11,500 are high school students; that's about 21 times the high school 

students conveyed compared with 5 years ago. 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

20 

It has been a busy year on the part of school boards, insofar as school building is concerned. In 1959 

some 600 new classrooms were constructed and in addition to these new classrooms, auditoriums, in 

many cases gymnasiums, libraries, laboratories and other facilities as well. In the last 5 years over 2,000 

new classrooms have been made available in the province and that represents about one-quarter of the 

classrooms in the province which have been built now in this last 5-year period. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, then when all of this is added up, the financial assistance to students, the 

increased attendance at high schools and universities, improvement in the supply and certification of 

teachers, the extension of the school bus service and new and improved school buildings, it is possible to 

make an adequate and accurate generalization. That generalization is that never before have as many 

educational opportunities, been made available to as many young people, and never before have so many 

of these young people taken advantage of these opportunities. Even so, as indicated in the Throne 

Speech, the reference to increased school grants, increasing scholarships, the extension of the technical 

institute programs, indicates there is no complacency on the part of the Government. I suggest that one 

of the most important freedoms which we enjoy is based on educational opportunities. This government 

is pledged by program and by a philosophy to extend that freedom. 

 

That leads me to deal with the second more or less major portion of my remarks; those dealing with the 

issue of liberty and freedoms since this has been raised as an issue by some of the members across the 

way. I realize that the word "liberty" and the word "Liberal" probably came from the same root, but I 

know, as you will know even better, Mr. Speaker, that you don't necessarily got the true plant from the 

root — frequently there is some grafting necessary before you got what you want. I am not going to 

suggest that the grafting of the Liberal party has been a bit of an abortion, or produced some abortion at 

times. I do want, however, to discuss four ways in which the activities of this Government which sits 

here has extended the liberty and the freedom of Saskatchewan people. The Bill of Rights, first of all; 

secondly, the encouragement which has been given to organizations, the opportunities which have been 

given to many organizations and individuals to participate in influencing the policies of the government; 

thirdly, the development of resources in this province, and the diversification of industry which has 

resulted; fourthly, some specific programs. 

 

To begin with, the Bill of Rights guarantees against discrimination because of personal belief. It was the 

first such Bill in Canada. No Liberal Government, either Provincial or Federal, has as yet passed such a 

bill. Indeed, if I heard him properly (sometimes it is hard for one to tell if he knows what he means) the 

member for Melville yesterday argued that there should be no need for a Bill of Rights. Yet you will 

remember, as I remember and every member of the House will remember, times in Canada when there 

was a Liberal Government in power in Ottawa, when a Bill of Rights would have been a very precious 

instrument. 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

21 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — I can think of religious persecution. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — You should know. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — I can think of the treatment meted out to Canadians who happened to be of 

Japanese origin during the war and after the war. One can go back even longer than that, a time when the 

leader and spiritual founder of this movement, Mr. Speaker, was put into gaol at a time when there was a 

Liberal party in power at Ottawa. I refer to Mr. J. S. Woodsworth. He was put into gaol for preaching a 

sermon, if you will. However, it is not just the fact of this legislation that is important; certainly it isn't 

the fact that there haven't been prosecutions. The thing that is important is this: this Bill of Rights, is a 

statement of moral conviction on the part of the Government, on the part or the Legislature and on the 

part of the people of this province. 

 

The second way in which I suggest liberty and freedom have been advanced in this province under this 

Government has been because of the encouragement and assistance given to a number of organizations 

to develop and the opportunities they have had to influence the policies of the Government. The C.C.F. 

has always recognized the necessity of extensive participation by people and organizations in making 

decisions which for Government policy. That has been a vital part of our philosophy; that will continue 

to be a vital part of our philosophy. We have always recognized and will always know that the task of 

governing is much larger than a Government can, by itself, adequately or properly perform. As a result 

we have quite consciously made possible a more extensive communication with a number of 

organizations in the province, and have extended the opportunity for non-governmental groups to add 

their influence. 

 

Now, I will give some examples. I refer first of all to the co-operative movement. I know, as well as any 

member, that this Government didn't create the co-operative movement. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Hurrah! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — I know as well as any member that there were co-operatives in the province when 

this Government was elected, but I do say this, that there has been a much greater emphasis in assistance 

and encouragement to the co-operative movement that was never given before. This is something which 

during the period of the depression and the early '40s needn't have cost the Liberal party which was in 

power any money. It might even have saved them some money, Mr. Speaker. The co-operative 

movement is an important cutting edge of democracy. It is one of the means by which people can, to a 

greater extent, control their economic destiny. One doesn't need to quote statistics any more to 

demonstrate that Saskatchewan is the banner co-operative province in Canada. I know that governments 

don't make co-ops. Governments establish the climate, however, which makes it possible for co-ops to 

grow more freely. 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

22 

I thought I would like to introduce here, Mr. Speaker, some testimony in the words of Mr. George Urwin 

who until recently was president and had been for a number of years, of the Federated Co-operatives. At 

a banquet in Saskatoon, January 20th, Mr. Urwin indicated several ways in which the present 

Administration, meaning this Government, had acted to give the co-operatives an even break with other 

business. For example, a fair share of Government purchase of goods and supplies was being channelled 

through co-operatives. The member for Qu'Appelle-Wolseley, not in his seat, asked a question the other 

day which he said he took out of the Journals of 1943 or sometime. He should read a little further in the 

Journals, Mr. Speaker. He should read there the questions asked and the answers given by the 

Government of the day with regard to business done with co-operatives and the co-operative printing 

company. The second point made by Mr. Urwin was the fact that there was a time when the sale of drugs 

couldn't be made by co-operatives until this Government took the initiative and passed legislation to 

make that possible. Thirdly, in the development of the oil resources of the province, the co-ops were 

given an opportunity to explore oil leases and develop the natural wealth of the country and thereby 

retain for the many thousands of citizens of the province, who are members of the co-operatives, the 

wealth of Saskatchewan. This, by the way, Mr. Speaker, is a move on the part of the Government that 

has been objected to on the part of some members opposite at least. 

 

Insofar as we have then, without dispute, made possible and encouraged the extension of the 

co-operative movement, liberty and freedom in this province has been extended and enhanced. 

 

Secondly, I want to refer to the trade union movement. I've got the impression during the last several 

days that some at least of the members of the opposition were possibly antagonistic to and certainly 

afraid of, the trade union movement. The member for Humboldt spoke about 'selling out'; the member 

for Wilkie spoke about trade unions having no consideration for the farmer, that all labour wants out of 

the farmer is cheap food. I submit that anybody who knows the history or trade union movements in all 

parts of the country knows that they are interested in their economic welfare, but they are interested in 

broad economic and social issues effecting the people on a whole by their support for human rights, by 

their support of improvements in education, health and social welfare services, and so on. We have taken 

the stand on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, that those persons who are employed have the right to 

organize and participate in determining the conditions under which they work. They share the 

responsibility and the consequences of that work and they should have come right, too, to share in 

determination of the conditions. 

 

The Government of the province, generally by statute and specifically by action with its own employees 

and the employees of Crown Corporations has set an example. It is not just those who are in the trade 

unions that have benefited. There is a large group outside of trade unions who have benefited from 

minimum wage regulations, compensation, holidays with pay and a number of those items which have 

already 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

23 

been mentioned by the member for Moose Jaw the other evening. The result has not been just in more or 

stronger trade unions, the result has also been in bettering industrial relations and, I suggest in greater 

productivity. The point raised in a brief submitted to the Government within recent months by the 

Canadian Manufacturers' Association and is now relevant. They had admittedly asked for some changes 

in the labour laws, and here is what they said: 

 

"As we present this brief, we refer proudly to the good labour relations which have existed in this 

province in 1959. Credit should go to Saskatchewan management and their employees. Certainly we 

have not yet experienced some of the serious labour troubles which have been in recent years the lot of 

other jurisdictions nor do we see much evidence of threat of such." 

 

I submit, a part of the climate of industrial development which makes possible industrial development is 

good employee, employer relations. I submit, insofar as we have encouraged and assisted in the growth 

of the trade unions, we have extended the liberty and the freedom of a large segment of the people of the 

province. 

 

The Royal Commission on Agriculture made it possible for all people in this province to voice 

suggestions and opinions to influence public thinking and Government thinking. The Local Government 

Continuing Committee, frequently subject to some dogma of scorn by the members sitting opposite, 

made up of representatives of local governments, gives theme people an opportunity to take part in an 

extensive and detailed study of basic Saskatchewan problems, gives then an opportunity, in fact to take 

part in Government. 

 

I want to turn to more specific examples of direct consultation. About two weeks ago the Minister of 

Agriculture and his staff met, as they do annually, with the chairmen of agricultural district boards 

throughout the province, a group of people chosen locally because of their own success in farming, who 

come in and sit down with the department to appraise Government policy and to suggest changes in 

policy. In my own department, we have teachers and trustees sitting regularly on an advisory committee 

with regard to teachers' college programs, with regard to our audio-visual program, with regard to 

certification of teachers, and with regard to administration generally. Again an opportunity for people 

and organizations to influence Government. May I suggest that this kind of attitude towards people and 

towards their organizations encourages and releases the creative energy of many of the people outside of 

Government personnel. This kind of opportunity for regular meetings and for the use of representatives 

in an advisory capacity opens the pages of Government for many to read from and for many to write on; 

pages which otherwise, and which formerly, I suggest, were closed in this province. This is all part of the 

deliberate 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

24 

working out of our philosophy which will lead to putting power in the hands of the people, the basic 

policy of our program. 

 

I do not need to say much with regard to my third point which was the development of resources and 

diversification of economy. It has been well exemplified and demonstrated by the Premier and others. I 

want to read just one additional testimony. It comes from the 'Globe and Mail' the issue of Friday, June 

8th, entitled "A New look at the Prairies'. This is what it said: 

 

"One of the most striking developments in Canada during the 1950s was the diversification of the 

prairie provinces' economy. Saskatchewan offers the best instance." 

 

The fourth way in which I suggest there has been a very considerable extension of freedom and liberty 

for Saskatchewan people has to do with specific Government programs and with some of them I want to 

deal. I want to look first of all at the Power Corporation and its work. This seems to be one of the areas 

of greatest confusion by the members of the opposition. The leader of the Liberal party outside the 

House, Mr. Speaker, says it‟s an 'octopus.' The Leader of the Liberal Opposition in the House said the 

other day it‟s a 'barnacle.' Either way, Mr. Speaker, there is something 'fishy' about the stand of the 

Liberal opposition. I don't think they have fully resolved yet the question of whether to a sell or not to 

sell. The member for Humboldt raises the question of where the C.C.F. stand. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — What did you call it? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — We started it. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Something fishy . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Where does the Liberal Party stand with regard to Crown Corporations, including 

the Power Corporation? Where does it stand with regard to the extension of the public utilities and 

where does it stand on its retention as a public utility? This organization, Mr. Speaker, the services that it 

has provided has added to the freedom of the people of this province; freedom from work which could 

be classified as drudgery, the possibility of heating homes by oil and more recently in urban parts by gas. 

In my constituency we have a number of dairy farms. I know what it has meant to them. I know what it 

has meant to the other farms. It has not only made freedom to enjoy life better, it is a freedom to be more 

efficient in their operations, it has, in fact liberated both minds and bodies for thousands of people and is 

good economics besides. The farmers of this province have endorsed it on many occasions as a good 

investment. 

 

The new water and sewerage program is now to be added to this program to bring more comfort, 

convenience and labour-saving 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

25 

opportunity to our farm and small urban homes as well as advancing the health of the people. 

 

The grid road program and those other road assistance programs by means of which the Government has 

been providing approximately 40 per cent of the expenditure of rural municipalities on roads and bridges 

has extended freedom of opportunity for the people in our rural areas. 

 

I have already dealt with the education program. 

 

In Social Welfare, one can tell the same kind of a story. Because, Mr. Speaker, of some of the remarks 

made in recent days about, particularly, the Minister of Social Welfare, I think I would like to say this, 

something which I know thousands of people throughout this province would want to be said in this 

Legislature. There are few members here today and who have been here, Mr. Speaker, who are more 

widely known or more favorably known than the Minister of Social Welfare. There are few members, if 

any, and I know of none who will leave this House enjoying a better reputation for integrity and fairness 

and intellectual honesty, than the Minister of Social Welfare. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — One needs only to ask those thousands of people whom he served in this province 

while working for the Wheat Pool, or the members of the staff of the two departments which he has 

supervised, or innumerable church groups and welfare organizations and other organizations with which 

he has come in contact as Minister of Social Welfare and Minister or Health before that time. The 

program in this department of putting into the service of the Saskatchewan people a considerable 

increase in trained social workers, to help the group of people who need trained assistance, the program 

of correction for those people who are unfortunate enough to run afoul of society to the extent of having 

to go to one of our correction institutions; the geriatric centres, the assistance given to municipalities and 

other groups to provide homes for old people, providing not just housing but providing care and 

providing homes for people who didn't have homes to go to before. Mr. Speaker, this is a tremendous 

contribution to the freedom and liberty of many people in the province. 

 

To go on to the Department of Health. Here again the member for Melville yesterday had something to 

say. Some of my friends, Mr. Speaker, and I agree with them, have given the member for Melville an 

honorary degree, the degree of M.I., which stands for Master of irresponsibility. I think he has 

demonstrated the right to this title again yesterday when he said this: 'The record of the Government is 

not very strong in regard to health services'. Well, I don't need to go into the whole program at this time, 

but I think there are few programs in this province or any province of Canada, which have done more to 

provide people with freedom from fear, freedom to retain or regain good health as has the program of the 

Provincial Government here. One needs 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

26 

only to look at the mental health program, curative, preventative and custodial; one needs only two be 

reminded that one of the first acts of this Government was to provide hospitalization and medical and 

dental care to our old age pensioners and beneficiaries of mothers' allowance, which gave these people 

the opportunity to live out their declining years free from fear which had ridden them before. One case 

which I know of very well, Mr. Speaker, was a young man in my constituency whose young son one 

morning appeared to be as healthy as could be, but who, the next night was fighting for his life in the 

University Hospital. If the service and staff of that hospital hadn't been there, the boy wouldn't have 

lived. If we hadn't had our hospitalization plan he would have paid over $5,000 to hospital and doctors. 

These various programs have added greatly to the freedom and the liberty of the people of Saskatchewan 

including, on many occasions, the freedom to live itself. 

 

To this is to be added the medical care program. Let me comment only briefly. The expanding horizons 

for a better life and hope for each individual and an increasing sense of sensitivity to the responsibility 

for all people are characteristic of maturity in a society. Maturity is indicated by the steady enlargement 

of our obligation to meet the primary needs of people. Health is one of these primary needs. The health 

program does more than just meet health needs. The patient who in also a citizen, undergoes a change in 

attitude. Better health services lead to a greater awareness of good health which itself leads to a greater 

awareness of the value of individual life. This will be an extremely important step, adding to our 

awareness of the value of individual lives in the province. 

 

I think I have said sufficient to indicate that in a variety of ways, the consumers in the province, the 

producers in the province, the babies with a better opportunity to be born in hospital, the old people who 

need the services of geriatric centres, the young people who want to go to high schools, the young people 

who want, to go on to university, all enjoy a greater freedom and liberty because of the fact that this 

Government has been in office for some 16 years. 

 

The other topic which I will have to hurry through has to do with the issue of honesty and accuracy 

which was raised by some members of the House. I begin by reference to the member for Humboldt who 

introduced, I believe, this issue here. She went on to point out that the C.C.F. copied the medical care 

program and the water and sewerage program from the Liberals. She gave as her evidence that fact that 

she ought to know, she was chairman of the resolutions committee at a Liberal convention; she was 

there, she spoke it and she said it. Well, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal leadership convention took place on 

September 24th and 25th of last year. I have in my hand statements in the Leader-Post of May 28, 1959, 

in which the Premier is reported speaking at Wakaw, and at which the hon. member from Melville, 

evidently, was present, I quote: 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

27 

“Mr. Douglas said in the next few years our big drive must be to provide running water and inside 

toilets for the people on farms and in small towns. He also discussed the Government's plan for a 

comprehensive medical care program.” 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Caught red-handed again. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — I am not suggesting that it was intellectual dishonesty on the part of the member for 

Humboldt to state that we had stolen this from them. I am not suggesting that, because to make such a 

statement requires no use of intellect, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Then she went on to say that, local government authorities, coming to the Government to sell to the 

Government debentures, had to plead and to, she used the word, get 'brainwashed' to do it. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I am not suggesting again that it was intellectual dishonesty on her part to make that kind of 

statement, but it's certainly not honest, you can call it what you like. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition made a statement with regard to school grants, which I dealt with 

previously. He also made the statement that all of the things he had been talking about could be done by 

eliminating waste and extravagance, and he said, "I'll tell you how." And he mentioned one item of 

$14,000 to provide sanitary conveniences on the Legislative Grounds. Now, I suggest here is a picture of 

the Liberal standard of service, Mr. Speaker. There are a thousand people come here on Sunday, and 

other days during the summer, but there are more bushes than there are people so why bother? At any 

rate, Mr. Speaker, why bother to put water in, the only thing you have to do is dig a little hole and put a 

little house on it. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — You're in the bushes right now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — The member for Notukeu-Willowbunch stood up in his place talking about the 

huge, so he said, increase in civil servants, and said $51 million was spent by the government on new 

buildings and left the impression, whether he intended to or not, that all this had been done to house 

additional civil servants. When somebody on this side of the House stood up and said, are the university 

buildings included? He said he didn't know, "this is so complex and so confusing." I have the same paper 

in my hand, Mr. Speaker. What does it show? The first four items have to do with buildings for mental 

hospitals, $12,295,000; the next item has to do with the university buildings, $21,630,000. Those two 

items alone, two-thirds of that total, staring the member right in the face and he couldn't say whether or 

not it was for other than office buildings. I could go on . . . 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

28 

Mr. Klein: — On a point of privilege. The return I had included the Power Corporation and all the other 

corporations together with that one. There is another half to that return. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — For sanatoriums, for health centres and health region buildings, $400,000. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Where's the other half of that return? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — The Geriatric Centre at Regina and at Melfort. Here's another one we didn't have in 

the days of the Liberals: a service laboratory, for a core storage building in Regina. Mr. Speaker. I 

submit there are three instances. I haven't time or I could go on. 

 

I am not suggesting intellectual dishonesty, but I am suggesting a very considerable readiness on their 

part to select the facts which they want to use and ignore the facts which they are not interest in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many other things I should like to mention and could comment on in regard to 

this debate. I want to close on one which I am sure will be a happy note, but I do so without much hope 

that the members of the Opposition will be persuaded to vote for the motion. 

 

This has been a very notable year with regard to the University of Saskatchewan. The hon. members will 

remember that last year we honoured Dr. W.P. Thompson the retiring president. This year we welcome 

Dr. Spinks as the new president. I know that all the members of the Legislature will join me in the 

opinion that the Board of Governors in choosing Dr. Spinks chose exceedingly well. 

 

The second important item insofar as the University is concerned is that the year just finished is the year 

it celebrated its Jubilee year. It was characterized by a number of activities at the university. The Learned 

Societies met there, off and on, over a period of many weeks, bringing to Saskatchewan the outstanding 

scholars in all of the disciplines in the Dominion of Canada. They held a summer festival in which they 

encouraged art and music and drama and made available to the people much of the best of performances 

of music and drama in Canada. They produced a film, which I think all of the hon. members have seen 

and which will be shown around the province. It will do much to explain the purpose of the University to 

the people of the province generally. 

 

Finally, there have been three publications during the year, one of them entitled 'The First Fifty', written 

by Dr. King, the head of the English Department and the Dean of the Summer School, dealing with the 

teaching, research and public service at the University from 1905 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

29 

to 1959. A second one is entitled 'Saskatchewan, The Making of a University', which Dr. King edited. It 

was written in manuscript form and not quite completed by the late Dr. Morton, the first head of the 

History Department, prior to his death. The third publication 'The University of Saskatchewan‟, a 

photographic history on the University by Dr. Lewis Thomas, who the hon. members will remember was 

the former Provincial Archivist and who is now Professor of History at Regina College. 

 

The third important item with regard to the University has been the decision that beginning next year the 

facilities at Regina College will be extended and in the near future it will be possible to take at Regina 

College, or the Regina branch of the University, the full degree in Arts and Sciences. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have discussed at some length a number of the various programs of the 

government. Simply, in conclusion, I would point out this: these are programs that have grown in 

accordance with and in response to the wishes of the people of the Province. These are programs which 

have grown out of the experience and the aspirations of the people of the province. These are programs 

which have enhanced the economic and social welfare of the people of the province. These are programs 

which have extended the freedom and the liberty of individuals in the province and of the society in 

which we live. Because this year's Speech from the Throne again makes a notable contribution to 

extending those programs, I will support the Motion. 

 

At 5:00 o'clock pm, pursuant to subsection (4) of Standing Order 30, Mr. Speaker put the question on the 

motion of Mr. Thorson (Souris-Estevan) for the Address-in-Reply, which was agreed to on the following 

recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 31 

 

 

Douglas (Weyburn) Sturdy Willis (Elrose) 

Brown (Bengough) Brown (Last Mountain) Kramer 

Bentley Douglas (Rosetown) Berezowsky 

Brockelbank Kuziak Neibrandt 

Fines Williams Davies 

Walker Erb Meakes 

Lloyd Johnson Wood 

Nollet Thurston Thorson 

Cooper (Mrs.) Thibault Harrop 

Gibson Stone Thiessen 

Willis (Melfort-Tisdale)   

 

NAYS — 16 

 

 

McDonald Loptson McFarlane 

Batten (Mrs.) Coderre Foley 

McCarthy Barrie Klein 

Horsman Korchinski Elias 

Cameron Gardiner Nicholson 

Danielson   



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

30 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 4 — An Act to provide for Annual Holidays with Pay for Employees 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, this in merely a consolidation of the 

Holidays with Pay Act. It has been amended so often over a period of years that it is difficult to figure 

out just what it now means. There are only one or two changes. One is that it an employee wants to have 

his two or three weeks' holidays together, he may notify his employer to that affect before his 

anniversary date — that is, whatever date he started to work. If this is done he must receive those 

holidays together. We feel that is desirable, and quite a reasonable amendment to put in. Of course, it 

doesn't detract from the fact that the employer has the right to give him those holidays at some time 

suitable to the employer. That is point number one. 

 

The other will provide that records need not be kept for short periods of employment, one or two days a 

week; perhaps in a chain store, where they have the same employee coming in week after week for a 

Saturday afternoon, or maybe for Friday and Saturday, whenever they have a sale. Obviously it would 

take years for that employee to over get where he or she could qualify for three weeks holidays with pay. 

So I am merely putting in an amendment whereby that store does not need to keep track of those one or 

two days per week. It has been at the request of one of the large chain stores; we have gone along with it, 

and with that explanation I move second reading of Bill No. 4. 

 

Bill No. 5 — An Act to amend The Mineral Taxation Act. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, in administration of The Mineral 

Tax, it is found in some cases that it is difficult to find the owner. So as to provide an absolutely legal 

way, and also a fair way of dealing with that kind of a situation, this Bill makes provision in those cases 

where, after effort has been made to find the location of the owner, to bring the matter to a conclusion by 

advertising in a newspaper that is circulating in the community where the land is situated. 

 

The other clauses in the Bill are changes that are necessary on account of this change. I would move 

second reading of Bill No. 5. 

 

Mrs. Batten (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, there is just one question, on the principle of the thing. 

Maybe it would be better to discuss it in Committee actually, but this right is given to the Department to 

advertise in the Gazette instead of serving notice, 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

31 

where reasonable efforts have been made to ascertain the address of the owner, or where the owner is 

dead. Surely there must be cases the owner is dead, but his heirs are very much alive and in evidence. I 

would thick it would be much better that they be served, unless for some reason his heirs cannot be 

located. I should think a change of that type would still be in keeping with the principle, and assists the 

technical administration of the Act, and yet not take away the rights of the heirs. It may well be that 

somebody should die, and although his heirs were available, they wouldn't have any notice of this 

because although advertising it in 'The Saskatchewan Gazette' is a favourite way of advertising, of 

course the Minister realizes that there are thousands of who never have access to that document and 

would not know about it; whereas the Department could quite easily ascertain whether the estate of this 

man is going to be probated, or whether steps have been taken in that direction. Perhaps further 

discussion could he had on that matter in Committee. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, I think we night further discuss this Bill in Committee of the Whole, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 6 — An Act to amend The Seed Dealers Act, 1956. 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, there are four proposed amendments to 

The Seed Dealers Act. One would change the definition of the Act to include "offering or advertising to 

buy or sell seed." At the present time the Act refers only to a person who buys or sells seed. The purpose 

of this is to make it necessary for a person who offers an advertiser to buy or sell seed to obtain a license; 

at the present time a person can go out, as everyone knows, not to buy and sell seed, but to offer to do so 

and not actually buy or sell but make a contract or agreement to do so. This, then, would permit us to 

require anyone to obtain a license who offers to either purchase or sell seed. 

 

The second requirement is that agents of the licensed dealers also be required to have a license. We have 

found that in some instances these agents can go about and make many misstatements, which are later 

denied by the principal dealer. The third provision is to provide an agreement or contract between the 

grower and the seed, or I should say, the dealer who makes these transactions should have to submit to 

us their contract for scrutiny, in order that we may approve or disapprove the contract form. 

 

The fourth amendment is deleting exemptions for grain dealers who are licensed under The Canada 

Grain Act. The Wheat Board advises that since they are only dealing in commercial grains, that legally 

we can include such dealers under our Licensing Act. Previously we felt that we couldn't license them, 

an as long as they were licensed under The Canada Grain Act. 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

32 

With those four amendments to strengthen the Act, Mr. Speaker, I would move second reading. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to ask of the Minister. He said the third point was to 

provide a formal agreement or contract, or to have the dealer submit a contract to the Department for 

approval. Now, I understand that that is restricted to those contracts which involve an option to purchase 

part of the seed grown on part of the crop. That is the only place where you would require it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Yes, that is right. 

 

Mr. L.N. Nicholson (Nipawin): — Have these charges been brought to the attention of The Canadian 

Seed Growers' Association, and if so, are they in agreement with them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — The co-operatives are excluded entirely from the Act. Any co-operative is 

excluded. It is to take care of the fly-by-night people that have been coming into the province, 

misrepresenting seed, for instance, these people that were handling Ramsay-Durum and that sort of 

thing. There are a few about yet, and we want to be in a position where we can handle this sort of thing. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — This should have been brought before the House four years ago to stop 

the swindling that has been going on here in regard to this particular transaction. It surely is time that we 

had some way whereby you could shut them fellows out. There is more swindling going on in 

Saskatchewan than in any other province, and there has been more expensive seed. Some farmers have 

been gypped by hundreds and hundreds of dollars, and I should think you have been neglecting your duty 

by not bringing it in before, because you had ample warning to do so. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I believe this was the first information we had of any activity . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I brought it to my hon. friend's attention four years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It in my duty to inform you that the hon. Minister in about to close the debate. Anyone 

wishing to speak should do so now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — It is true that neither Saskatchewan nor Alberta nor, I'm sure, Manitoba, has any 

legislation to control that kind of activity, and when these people first moved into the province, as hon. 

members know, we gave very wide publicity to the activities, and we certainly checked their activities at 

once. But there had been some transactions already entered into. We then brought in the legislation at the 

Session following, and ever since we have been strengthening the 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

33 

Act, and we hope that this will now give us the strength in the Act to deal with this type of dealings. This 

not only occurred insofar as seed is concerned, but some of these people who were associated with 

peddling these varieties that weren‟t suitable for the province, also began activities in the sale and 

subsequent repurchase of a new breed of hogs that were developed at Lacombe. So we do feel now that, 

with these additional amendments, we can deal with the situation. 

 

The motion for second reading was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the 

next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 7 — An Act to amend The Brand and Brand Inspection Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, we have been requested over the years by the Stock Growers' 

Association, to require that butchers or those who deal in hides also keep a record of the hides and the 

brand thereon. 

 

With that explanation, I se reading of Bill No. 7. 

 

The motion for second reading was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at 

next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 8 — An Act to amend The Noxious Weeds Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, this is permissive legislation that would allow a municipality, or 

authorize a municipality to require that farmers keep their trucks properly covered when transporting 

grain, to prevent the spread of noxious weeds. 

 

With this explanation, I move second reading of Bill No. 8. The S.A.R.M. has requested this legislation. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Did you say to have the truck properly covered? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Yes. 

 

The motion for second reading was agreed to and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the 

next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend The Industrial Standards Act. 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, at the present time there is no statutory 

limit for prosecutions under this Act, and we have had to depend 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

34 

On section 26 of the Interpretations Act, which sets the limit of six months. We feel that is not long 

enough, and we want to bring in a limit of one year. 

 

With that explanation, Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 9 be read the second time. 

 

The motion for second reading was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the 

next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 10 — An Act to amend The Hours of Work Act 1959. 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams: — Mr. Speaker, we wish to extend another year, (we have been doing this year 

after year ever since the Act came in in 1947), the provision for the same take-home pay as was in effect 

that year. We merely changed the figure „1959‟ to „1960‟. 

 

We had a number of instances where employers have offered their employees either a choice of 

overtime, at time and a half, or some larger sum which might or might not exceed the time and a half, 

and not long ago we had a court case on this very matter, which we lost. We have been very strict on the 

time and a half provision, after eight hours' work, or after 48 hours' employment out in the smaller 

places, and this one case has set a precedent which might be referred to in future court cases. We want to 

maintain that hour and a half overtime after eight hours‟ work, or 44 in a week, or 48 in a week, in the 

smaller points, as the case may be. With this amendment it will prevent the time and a half provision 

being disturbed. 

 

With that explanation I would move second reading of Bill No. 10. 

 

The motion for second reading was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the 

next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 11 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Government Telephones Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — Mr. Speaker, we merely wish to increase the amount of money we will be able 

to borrow. At the present time the Act reads: “up to $65 million", and we have now borrowed up to, I 

think, approximately $58 million, so with a fairly ambitious program in sight over the next two or three 

years, we will need that $65 million, and the Bill calls for the limit to be $100 million. 

 

With that explanation I move second reading of Bill No. 11. 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

35 

The motion for second reading was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the 

next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 12 — An Act to amend The One Day's Rest in Seven Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — Mr. Speaker, at the present time the Act applies only to the cities, but there is 

provision whereby the Lieutenant-Governor in Council can extend it to other parts of the Province. This 

was done in 1957. At the present time this Act is extended to all towns, cities, villages, hamlets, and so 

forth, in the province. It is a bit confusing to anyone reading the Act for the first time, they might think it 

only applies to cities, so we want to change it to read that it does apply over the entire province, and 

there is provision in the Act whereby the Lieutenant Governor in Council can exempt any particular 

occupation, or any particular part of the province from the application of this Act. It is sort of just in 

reverse to what it is now. It is merely a matter of clarification. 

 

I move second reading of Bill No. 12. 

 

The motion for second reading was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the 

next sitting. 

 

Mr. Nicholson (Nipawin): — Does that apply to the agricultural industry as well — farm employees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — No, it doesn‟t apply to farm employees. 

 

Bill No. 13 — An Act to amend The Vital Statistics Act. 

 

Hon. J. Walter Erb (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, this Bill would provide two short 

amendments which would redefine the definition of birth and still-birth. For some time there has been 

work going on between various bodies in order to get uniformity between the provinces and the 

countries of the world, as to the definition of still-birth and birth, in order for them to have more 

meaningful statistical information in the field of infant mortality. The World Health Organization had a 

Committee in 1951 working on this, and they made a recommendation which has been accepted by the 

Advisory Committee and the Conference of Commissioners on the uniformity of laws in Canada, and on 

the basis of this recommendation we have drafted these amendments. 

 

With that explanation, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 13. 



 

February 24, 1960 
 

 

36 

The motion for second reading was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the 

next sitting. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o‟clock p.m., without question put. 


