



















































Hansard: March 21, 1960


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

28th Day 

 

Monday, March 21, 1960 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon City):  Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I 

would like to welcome a group of school children from the Air Marshall Curtis School located in the 

Airport at Saskatoon, with their teacher, Mr. Wickstrom. I am sure all hon. members will join with me in 

saying how happy we are to have them with us today, and hope their trip will be an enjoyable one. 

 

Mr. D.T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley):  Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are 

proceeded with, I wish to draw your attention to the lively and good-looking group of students from one 

of the most beautiful spots in Saskatchewan, the town of Indian Head. they represent the students of 

Grades VII and VIII and they are under the guidance of their principals, Mr. Shane and Mr. Spencer, 

along with the President of the Home and School Club, Mr. Jack Hall. On behalf of all members I 

sincerely welcome them to the Legislature this afternoon. 

 

QUESTION RE RETURN 

 

Mr. Franklin E. Foley (Turtleford):  Mr. Speaker, before the Order of the Day are proceeded with, I 

would like to ask the Government when I may expect an answer to Return No. 72. At the same time, I 

would like to state that on Tuesday last, this was converted from Question 239 to an Order for Return, 

even though the Minister had the answer to the question on his desk, and was ready to submit it. I cannot 

understand the delay in obtaining this return, and I would like to ask the Government for an explanation. 

This was the question: “What parcels of land have been purchased on Jackfish Lake by the Government 

to date, and what amounts have been paid out, and to whom?” 

 

Premier Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, I was the one who asked that that be converted to a Return. The hon. 

member wanted the information which the Minister had on his desk, so he should have asked what 

parcels of land had been purchased by the Department of Natural Resources. When he said “the 

Government”, I had 



 

March 21, 1960 

 

 

2 

assume responsibility for seeing that answers are correct, and, therefore, each of the other Departments 

had to be asked to look at their records and see if they had bought any land. The Minister’s answer could 

answer only for his Department; he could not answer for the other Departments. I have no way of 

knowing if any other Department has bought land at Jackfish Lake, so, therefore, each Department will 

have to be asked to go through their records and see, in order that the answer may be accurate. If my 

friend wants it from just one Department, he should ask just one Department. 

 

CONDOLENCE: MR. ELIAS 

 

Mr. L.N. Nicholson (Nipawin):  Mr. Speaker, you will note that the hon. member for Rosthern (Mr. 

Elias) is not in his chair this afternoon. The reason is that we were notified this morning by telephone 

that his father passed away suddenly, last night, and I would ask that a message of condolence be sent 

from the members of the Legislature. 

 

Premier Douglas:  I am sure all members in all parts of the House will want to join with you, Mr. 

Speaker, in conveying to the member for Rosthern our deepest sympathy at the loss of his father. I am 

sure without a formal motion, I would be expressing the feelings of all members if you were to convey 

to Mr. Elias our deepest sympathy in his time of bereavement. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  I will see that that is done. 

 

SECOND READING 

 

Bill No. 68 – An Act to provide for the Payment of Grants in Support of Elementary Education 

 

Hon. S. Lloyd (Minister of Education):  This is a Bill to provide for the payment of school grants. 

The Bill which is found on the desks is, as will be noted, a consolidation. That accounts for the size of it. 

The basic changes, however, are relatively minor, and are ones which I have already explained to the 

House in connection with other Bills which provide also, in part, for the payment of school grants. That 

is, for those school districts or communities in which there are more than 20 rooms in operation, it 

increases the assigned cost figure by $500. For the other rooms in the province, it changes the basis on 

which equalization grants are paid. It does this in two ways. It extends the group to whom equalization 

grants are paid, from $140,000 average assessment per classroom to $145,000 per classroom, and it 

increases the mill rate which is used in calculating those equalization grants from 16 mills to 17 mills. 

 

I would move that the Bill be now read a second time. 



 

March 21, 1960 

 

3 

The question being put, it was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

The Assembly in Committee of Supply: Progress was reported. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 


