



















































Hansard: March 22, 1960


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

29th Day 

 

Tuesday, March 22, 1960 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas (Minister of Highways):  Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded 

with, I think it would be of interest to this Assembly to know that we just received word that the steel 

bridge over the Churchill River at Otto Rapids has been completed. This was no small feat, because it 

meant the construction of a 250-foot span of steel across open water. I think you will all be glad to know 

that that work has now been completed successfully. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. Cliff H. Thurston (Lumsden):  Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with I 

would like to draw the members’ attention to a group of fine young students in the Speaker’s gallery. 

They are from Westlake Rural School, in the Moose Jaw Unit. They are here with their teacher, Mrs. 

Wells, and I am sure that we all welcome them here this afternoon, and hope that their trip has been an 

enjoyable one. 

 

While I am on my feet, I might also say that Mrs. Wells, along with her husband last summer, had the 

honour of playing host to Her Majesty and Prince Philip when they were here on their royal tour. I had 

the privilege of being at their farm that day, and can say they carried themselves with distinction. 

 

Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon City):  Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I 

would like to draw your attention to the group of school children from St. Phillips’ School in Saskatoon, 

with their teacher, Mr. Hett. I am sure all members will join with me in saying how happy we are to 

have them with us today, and hope their trip will be an enjoyable one. 



 

March 22, 1960 

 

 

2 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 79 – An Act to amend The Mineral Contracts Re-Negotiation Act, 1959 
 

Hon. R.A. Walker (Attorney General):  Mr. Speaker, this Bill is an amendment that has been found 

necessary as the result of experience in the year during which the Mineral Contracts Re-Negotiation 

Board has been functioning. First of all, there are no basic or important principles involved in the 

legislation except one, and that is contained in Section 3. This provides in substance that where a 

contract has been re-negotiated between an owner and an oil company, pursuant to the good offices of 

the Mineral Contracts Re-Negotiation Board, that such re-negotiated contracts shall be deemed to be 

final, and will not be subject to attack on the grounds of fraudulent or innocent misrepresentation. In 

other words, so far as the causes of action are concerned which would give this Board jurisdiction, those 

causes of action are extinguished when the contract has been re-negotiated. The other changes are 

merely of a technical nature, and with this explanation, I would move that Bill No. 79 be now read a 

second time. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

Bill No. 80 – An Act to amend The Limitation of Actions Act 

 

Hon. R.A. Walker (Attorney General):  Mr. Speaker, in previous years we have extended the time 

under The Limitation of Actions Act during which a land owner, or mineral owner could bring action to 

have his contract set aside on the grounds of fraud or misrepresentation. that six-year period was 

extended in 1957 for one year, and in 1958 it was extended for another year. In 1959 it was extended 

again for another year. this time it is proposed to extend it to January 1, 1961. This means that anyone 

who has taken no action on a cause which originated, and which was not barred at the time of the first 

amendment in 1957, will have to the end of the current calendar year to bring his action. If his complaint 

has resulted in filing an application to the Mineral Contracts Re-Negotiation Board, then his time will 

expire six months after the Board has disposed of his application, so that it is December 31, or six 

months from the time the Board finished the application, whichever is the later. When that date is 

passed, the period will revert to the normal period of six years. Those are the only principles involved in 

the Bill, Mr. Speaker, and with that explanation I move the said Bill be now read a second time. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o’clock p.m. without question put. 


