



















































Hansard: March 29, 1960


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

34th Day 

 

Tuesday, March 29, 1960 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon City):  Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are proceeded with, I 

would like to welcome a group of school children from the Holliston School in Saskatoon, with their 

teachers, Mr. Taylor and Mrs. Survis. I am sure the members will join with me in saying how delighted 

we are to have them with us today, and hope their trip will be an enjoyable one. 

 

TRIBUTE TO RICHARDSON CURLING RINK 

 

By leave of the Assembly, on motion of the Hon. Mr. Douglas (Weyburn), seconded by the Hon. Mr. 

fines: 

 

“Ordered, That proceedings of the Assembly be now suspended and remain suspended while members 

welcome to the floor of the Chamber, and pay tribute on behalf of the Province, to the renowned 

Richardson Rink, of Regina Civil Service Curling Club, the members of which, by repeating their 

great victories of 1959 in the Dominion Curling championship and Scottish Cup Series of 1960, not 

only enhanced their reputations as outstanding exponents of the game and as fine sportsmen, but also 

brought credit and honour to the Province they represented so capably and successfully.” 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Members of the Legislative Assembly, and assembled guests, may I begin by 

extending a very warm welcome to those who have accompanied our honoured guests to this Chamber, 

in order that we may do honour to them by the members of the Assembly, and by those they represent 

throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

It is no mean achievement to be able to be on two successive years the champions of Canadian Curling, 

and also to win the Scottish Cup, and our friends, the Richardsons, are in that honoured position. First of 

all, they had to win the Southern Saskatchewan trophy. We had those trophies 



 

March 29, 1960 

 

 

2 

on the table here last year, and there was some ‘crack’ made about the Scottish trophy not being here, 

that they were not likely to allow it to get out of Scotland. I am sure, if there was any truth in that 

statement, that our honoured guests would not have gone back to Scotland the second time. 

 

Then there was the Saskatchewan Provincial Championship Trophy again, that had to be worked for; 

then the McDonald Brier Tankard, emblematic of the Dominion Curling Championship and then the 

Scottish Cup. It is a long road, and it has required a tremendous lot of effort and a tremendous lot of skill 

in order to achieve those successive victories. 

 

It seems to me that if our friends to the south of us, in the United States, are justified in referring to their 

baseball classic as the World Series, that we are equally justified in recognizing our Saskatchewan 

Champions as World Champions. 

 

I don’t propose to take up any length of time as Chairman. I know that we have several speakers on this 

program and, judging from my experience of those speakers, it is going to be a considerable time before 

we are in the position to adjourn. I hope they won’t live up to the reputation they usually earn in their 

seats in this Chamber. 

 

I am going to introduce our honoured guests individually. It is not necessary, we know. We have seen 

their photographs in the press, and we have followed their progress through the various competitions 

which have brought them to their present position as champions. However, I am going to introduce them 

individually. On my extreme right, Mr. Ernie Richardson, skip. You will remember that Ernie was not 

with us last year; that some accident in connection with Mrs. Richardson’s health kept him in the east, 

and this is the first time he has been with us in this Chamber; Mr. Arnold Richardson, third; Mr. Garnet 

Richardson, second; and Mr. Wes Richardson. One can well imagine the meticulous practice that must 

have been required to develop the natural aptitude of these gentlemen to the point they could defeat all 

competitors both in Canada and in Scotland. 

 

I am not going to say too much about Scotland, because I don’t know whether they found it more 

difficult to win in Canada or in Scotland. Perhaps the less said about that, the better. 

 

The first name on my program here is the Hon. T.C. Douglas, Premier and member for Weyburn. Mr. 

Douglas. 

 

Premier Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all members of the Legislative Assembly would want 

to join with me and with you, sir, in extending a very warm welcome to the Richardson rink on their 

return to Saskatchewan. This is a very happy occasion for a person of Scottish 



 

March 29, 1960 

 

3 

birth, to have a function like this opened with the bagpipes. Some person with no musical appreciation, 

sitting close to me, said a few moments ago, ‘somebody out there is getting hurt’. But I was 

compensated for that rude remark by seeing ‘Charlie’ Williams, a Welshman, having to walk in behind 

the bagpipes, and I was particularly glad to see the gleam in the eye of Mr. Loptson, member for 

Saltcoats, because a Scotsman is just a shipwrecked Scandinavian that has never been able to get back 

home. So these Icelanders really enjoy the bagpipes, but they just won’t admit it. 

 

I would like to say to the Richardsons how happy we are that they have, once again, brought great credit 

to their native province of Saskatchewan. To win the Champion here in the province, to go a second 

time to the McDonald Brier contest and bring the Tankard back, then to go to Scotland and win the 

Scottish Cup two years in succession, is a notable achievement. I believe, as a matter of fact, that the 

Scottish Cup has only been offered twice – offered first, last year, and this is the second year. For the 

Richardsons to have won it, and have brought it back to Saskatchewan in the only two years that it has 

been offered, it is a great accomplishment. We would like them to know how proud we are of the 

marvellous way in which they have conducted themselves and the sportsman-like manner in which they 

have played the ‘roaring game’. 

 

I suppose that people with names like Cameron and Douglas and McDonald – although the Leader of 

the Opposition isn’t here – I understand he is out of the country throwing a ‘take-out’; but the people 

with Scottish names, I suppose, ought to feel sad about the Richardsons beating the Scottish rinks, but 

we are not sad at all. We are delighted. I was told, in talking to the Richardson boys before they came in, 

that, when they were in Glasgow, two great disasters befell Scotland. One was that the Richardsons took 

the cup away from them, and the second was that a distillery with 19,000 barrels of whiskey burned, 

while they were there. This double catastrophe put Scotland in mourning for a whole week! 

 

All I need to say to the boys – and I am sure the applause of the members, as they came in, indicates to 

them how pleased we are, how proud we are, and above all, how delighted we are to have you back. We 

feel that in honouring you, we are honouring a fine example of Saskatchewan sportsmanship and four 

very fine representatives of Saskatchewan youth. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Thank you very much, Premier Douglas. You know, I don’t know who burned down 

the distillery, but I remember, last year, one of the Richardson boys who spoke, said they had been 

shown around Scotland and that it did not take very long, that it isn’t very big; but I am sure they saw 

the rest of it on this trip. 

 

The next name on my list is Mr. A.H. McDonald, Leader of the Opposition, but in his absence I am 

going to take the liberty of substituting that of Mr. Alex Cameron, Deputy Leader of the Opposition. Mr. 

Cameron. 



 

March 29, 1960 

 

 

4 

Mr. Alex Cameron (Maple Creek):  Mr. Speaker, first permit me to say that Mr. McDonald sent 

word that he regretted he was unavoidably delayed and unable to be here for this happy occasion. I am 

going to pinch-hit, in a small way, on his behalf. I was interested in the remarks of the Premier that 

someone said, when they heard the pipes, that some one may be getting hurt outdoors. I don’t know 

whether anyone did or not, but I know some of us were revived inside. 

 

I want to take this occasion to express our pleasure in welcoming you, today, on behalf of the Official 

Opposition. I think the Speaker spoke about brevity, and I think brevity is sometimes like a gift. It isn’t 

how long you speak or how much you say; it is the intent behind it. And the intent behind my few 

remarks is to express to you our great pride and happiness at the ‘repeat’ performance in bringing back 

these championships to Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. A.P. Weber (Meadow Lake):  Mr. Speaker, and honoured guests. I am very pleased at this time 

to associate myself with the Premier and the hon. member for Maple Creek in congratulating the 

Richardson Rink, on their winning of practically all the honours that are available to keen curlers. 

 

I might mention that, sometime during the winter here, while we have been in Session and the 

Richardsons were in Scotland, that someone would mention something about curling, and everybody in 

sort of a vague way would say, “Oh, what were you talking about?” “I was wondering what the 

Richardsons were doing in Scotland.” 

 

I have seen the Richardsons curl, and being a keen curler myself, or having been a keen curler, I have 

taken a real interest in their ability and in watching them, I was amazed at their accuracy and their 

control of the game. At the time I watched them, I predicted they would go a long way. I wasn’t too 

surprised that they won the Southern Saskatchewan Championship, and neither was I surprised when 

they won the Provincial Championship. I was very pleasantly surprised, but not too, when they won the 

McDonald Brier Tankard for the second time. However, when they went over to Scotland, I was very 

surprised when they won the Scottish Cup, because I was always under the impression that this curling 

game was invented, or discovered in Scotland, and I thought that they had control of the game in their 

hands, and that no upstart country like Canada (much less a little known province like Saskatchewan) 

would ever dare to come out and beat the Scots at their own game. But nevertheless, as shown, 

eventually the student surpassed the master! The Richardsons have shown that out of a little province 

like Saskatchewan, we can produce World Champions in curling. 

 

I must say this for the Richardson, that throughout all their tours across Canada, they were goodwill 

ambassadors. When they went to Scotland they were goodwill ambassadors, representing both Canada 

and the province of Saskatchewan. In their conduct on and off the ice, they certainly exemplified 



 

March 29, 1960 

 

5 

everything we could expect from any of our young people who go across the ocean to represent us in 

either business or sport. I again want to congratulate the Richardsons, and wish them a lot of luck in the 

future. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Mr. Weber expressed some surprise that our friends, the Richardsons, were able to 

triumph again in Scotland, the hone of curling. I wouldn’t be at all surprised if they repeated the 

performance for a good many years to come, because as long as they continue to curl together, there 

seems to be no combination, either in Canada or Scotland, that can compete with them. I think if they 

are, on successive years, entertained in the Legislative Assembly, that no speaker of this Assembly 

would rule that type of repetition out of order in this House! 

 

I will call on more members among us to perform a little chore – Mr. P.A. Howe (Kelvington); Mr. 

Thurston (Lumsden); Mr. Horsman (Wilkie) and Mr. Elias (Rosthern) – to come forward and make a 

presentation to the Richardson curlers. (Each of the members of the Richardson Curling Rink was then 

presented with a camera). 

 

Now, there is a very proud lady in this Chamber, a lady who is grandmother to all the boys here, Mrs. 

Richardson, and I am going to ask Mrs. Cooper to perform another pleasing task. 

 

Mrs. Marjorie Cooper (Regina City):  Mr. Speaker, first I would like to associate myself with all 

those who have spoken previously, in congratulating the Richardson boys on the wonderful 

accomplishment, and the honour they have brought to the city of Regina, and the province of 

Saskatchewan, and the Dominion of Canada. I would also like to say a work of congratulation to the 

Richardson wives who, I am sure, by their encouragement and enthusiasm, have helped the boys to win 

this honour. 

 

I remember I said last year, there is one person sitting here today that I am sure is the proudest person in 

the Dominion of Canada — the grandmother of these boys. I am sure she was not only proud last year, 

but she must be especially proud this year, to think the boys not only did it once, but they did it again. I 

am so very happy to be able to present this bouquet of flowers to the grandmother of four very fine 

grandsons. I am sure she is proud of her grandsons, and also proud of the great honour they bring to all 

of us, including herself, today. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  I now call on Mr. Ernie Richardson, skip of the Richardson Rink, for a few words. 



 

March 29, 1960 

 

 

6 

Mr. Ernie Richardson:  Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen. On behalf of the fellows, I would like 

to say this is a great honour for us to be here today. I would also like to thank you all, very much, for the 

wonderful reception. While we were away, we did have a wonderful time, but it is certainly nice to be 

back home, and we are very proud to represent Regina and the province of Saskatchewan in this event. 

Thank you, very much. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  It is my understanding that our honoured guests have just been conducted from the 

airport, where they disembarked from the plane, to this building. I don’t know how it feels to be in a 

plane at their age. I know that nowadays, the shorter time between the time I get off the plane and the 

time I get into a place where I can relax, the more comfortable I am. Consequently, this program has 

been kept very short, and I am going to ask Mr. Williams to conduct our guests to seats behind the rail, 

so that we can recess the House. 

 

(Recessed at 5:30 o’clock p.m., until 7:30 o’clock p.m.) 

 

At 7:30 o’clock p.m., the Assembly in Committee of Supply: progress was reported. 

 

By leave of the Assembly, on motion of Mr. Brown (Bengough), the Assembly adjourned at 10:00 

o’clock p.m., without question put. 


