



















































Hansard: March 31, 1960


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

36th Day 

 

Thursday, March 31, 1960 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Hon. C.G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale):  Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I 

wish to call the attention of the House to the Grade 12 pupils here from Daleville High School in the 

community of Pleasantdale, in the constituency of Melfort-Tisdale. They are accompanied by their 

teacher, Miss Henderson. They are enjoying themselves immensely, and I am sure they will carry home 

with them a lot of memories of a day well spent. 

 

Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon City):  I, too, Mr. Speaker, would like to welcome a group of students 

from Saskatoon. I am sure all members will join with me in saying how pleased we are to have them 

with us, and hope they have an enjoyable trip. 

 

QUESTION RE MEDICAL CARE PROGRAM 

 

Mr. G. Herman Danielson (Arm River):  Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask a question of the 

Government. I don’t know whether I am in order, or not, but the reason is purely personal. What I would 

like to ask the Minister is this, and I do this because I have the Speech from the Throne before me in 

regard to the health legislation and medical scheme: “Legislation established in the framework of this 

program will be introduced for your consideration.” Will that be done? 

 

Premier Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, it is unlikely that legislation will be introduced now regarding the 

health program. The legislation would have been purely enabling legislation, setting out the framework 

within which the Committee on Medical Care would have operated. It was our hope that this Committee 

would be set up in February or March, and that it would be possible to submit to them the draft of this 

Bill. The Committee hasn’t been set up. It will be set up, we think, in the course of the next few days. I 

think it has already been announced by the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan, that 

they are now ready to make their appointments to the committee. However, that Committee wouldn’t 

have time to review this legislation before submitting it to the House. We feel it would 



 

March 31, 1960 

 

 

2 

be discourteous to them to introduce legislation which they haven’t seen. This does not in any way 

interfere with the timetable which the Government has in mind. It is hoped that this legislation can be 

submitted in 1961, which would still provide ample opportunity for setting up a medical care program 

sometime in that year. 

 

NEWSPAPER CORRECTION 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas (Minister of Highways):  Mr. Speaker, yesterday I drew to the attention of the 

House an error that appeared in the ‘Leader-Post’ of March 30. I note in today’s issue that correction has 

not been made. It is a very serious omission and one I can understand could easily happen, but I am 

going to ask that the press be informed that this mistake be rectified. I do not want to have it said that I 

had admitted in this House that the fees for truckers had been raised very materially. I did not make that 

statement. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 10:00 o’clock p.m. 


