



















































Hansard: March 10, 1960


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

21st Day 

 

Thursday, March 10, 1960 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

NEWSPAPER CORRECTION 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas (Minister of Highways):  Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded 

with, I would like to draw the attention of the House to an article which appeared on the third page of 

March 9th issue of ‘The Leader-Post’, stating that three bus routes had been discontinued during the 

year under review. I can well understand why the press may have made this statement. Trying to think 

back on the question that was asked, I believe it was something like this: ‘How many bus routes have 

been discontinued by the S.T.C.’. Of course, we have discontinued three over the years, but there were 

none discontinued in the year under review. I wanted to make that plain. 

 

Also while on my feet, I wish to draw your attention to an article on the editorial page this morning, 

which states ‘Strange Discrepancy’, and goes on to state that the price paid for the present bus depot 

property was only $51,000. That has been answered in this Legislature a number of times, and I find that 

in Return No. 40 of last year’s Session, it was pointed out that the property which we bought from the 

St. Mary’s School cost a total of $51,000. The property we bought from the McAra property cost us 

$37,000, which makes a total of $88,000 and for reconversion and renovation, it cost $32,235 which 

makes a total of $120,635 – the answer which I gave in Crown Corporations the other day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon City):  Before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I would like to 

draw your attention to a group of public school children from the Westmount School in Saskatoon, with 

their teachers, Miss Lang and Miss Irwin. I am sure all members will join with me in saying how happy 

we are to have them here, and hope their trip will be a worthwhile one, and also an enjoyable one. 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

 

2 

MOTION RE CROW’S NEST PASS FREIGHT RATES AGREEMENT 

 

Moved by Mr. Thurston (Lumsden), seconded by Mr. Dewhurst (Wadena): 

 

“That this Assembly is unalterably opposed to any change in the Crow’s Nest Pass Freight Rates 

Agreement, and urges the Saskatchewan Government to continue its efforts to obtain a complete 

revision of the freight rate structure with a view to removing the existing discrimination which 

adversely affects the prairie provinces.” 

 

Mr. Cliff Thurston (Lumsden): Mr. Speaker, the resolution which I propose to introduce today can 

be considered equal in importance to any resolution that has been moved in this House. Many 

resolutions have dealt in the past, with particular phases of our society, but I feel the matter of freight 

rates, the subject matter of this resolution, deals with the whole economy. Any increase in freight rates 

affects all our people, farmers, business men, rich and poor, people on fixed incomes. In other words, 

anyone who purchases goods from cars to tractors, to a can of beans or a spool of thread is affected by 

transportation costs. The resolution recognizes that freight rates have had an impact on our economy, not 

only in the province, but in Canada as a whole. 

 

I would like at this time to commend our Provincial Government for its efforts to limit the rise that has 

taken place in freight rates, every time the railways have asked for an increase. It is true, freight rates 

have increased since 1946 by some 157.4 per cent, but I feel that the increase would have been greater 

had it not been for the efforts of our Provincial Government, along with other western governments, and 

the Maritimes governments in their efforts to keep these down. Proof of this was the last increase 

granted by the Board on December 1, 1958 of 17 per cent, by the presentation by these provincial 

governments just mentioned to the Board, and while the increase was in effect, Board Order No. 98424, 

dated July 10, 1959, substituted a 10 per cent increase for the 17 per cent, bringing the accumulative 

increase down from 157.4 per cent which I just mentioned, to 142 per cent. This reduction was made 

effective on August 1, 1959, for a period of one year, and was made possible by the payment to the 

railways by the Government of Canada of a subsidy of $20 million as was provided for, in Bill C-38. 

 

You will see, Mr. Speaker, that the resolution deals with two main points, firstly, the Crow’s Nest Pass 

Rate Agreement, and secondly, it urges the Provincial Government to continue its efforts to obtain a 

complete revision of the freight rate structure, with a view to removing discriminatory factors which 

affect the prairie region. I feel that all members, and I know the western farmers, view with alarm that 

the Crow’s Nest Pass Grain Rates have been raised by the Royal Commission on Transportation, which 

is presently sitting. It is viewed with alarm, in particular, after the statement of the Prime Minister. 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

3 

The Prime Minister, speaking in the House of commons, when announcing the personnel of the Royal 

Commission, had this to say on Wednesday, May 13, 1959, page 3607 of Hansard: 

 

“When the Minister of Public works, as Acting Prime Minister, announced the Government’s intention 

to arrange for this review, he assured the western farmers that such review would not mean they would 

pay more for shipment of grain for export. I wish to take this occasion to confirm this, in regard 

particularly to the action that may be taken as a result of the work of the royal Commission, to make it 

clear beyond question that the Crow’s Nest Pass Rates are part of a bargain that was made between the 

railways and the Government on the one hand, and the settlers who went west, on the other hand. 

 

“We intend, insofar as this Government is concerned, to see to it that the contract shall not be broken.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the statement of the Prime Minister was taken by the farmers to mean that the issue of the 

Crow’s Nest Pass Freight Rates would not be raised by the hearings, but the terms of reference on the 

setting up of this commission, in spite of what the Prime Minister said, were large enough to scope to 

allow the railways to bring this forward. I would like to say under what section, and it was clause B of 

the Terms of Reference, which had this to say: 

 

“The obligations and limitations imposed upon the railways by law by reasons of public policy, and 

what can and should be done to ensure a more equitable distribution of any burden which may be 

found to result therefrom.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this is a term under which the Commission has no alternative but to hear the Crow’s 

Nest Pass Rates discussed, and I want to state clearly that if the Crow’s Nest Pass Rates are tampered 

with to any degree, the blame will not be on the Royal Commission, but squarely on the shoulders of the 

Federal Government. 

 

Government Members:  Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Thurston:  I want to state clearly that if the Crow’s Nest Pass Rates are tampered with in any 

degree, the blame will not be on the Commission, and I am not going to take the time of the House now, 

Mr. Speaker, to go into the history of the Crow’s Nest Pass Rates agreement. I feel all members pretty 

well know the history of it, only to say that this was a mutual agreement by the C.P.R. on the one hand, 

and the Federal Government 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

 

4 

on the other, on the direct assistance of the Federal Government of some $11,000 grant per mile in the 

building of the Crow’s Nest Pass Road, and by the C.P.R.’s own statement, this constituted about 50 per 

cent of the cost of construction of this road. In return for this, the C.P.R. agreed to statutory rates for 

moving of grain from west to east, and for certain stable goods from east to west. I think this was a 

sound national policy. It aided the C.P.R. who found they could not compete with other means of 

transportation, particularly the American railroads, in the hauling of the rich minerals from the interior 

of B.C. It benefited the eastern manufacturer, to get his product out to the western market, and it aided 

the western settlers both in the purchase of needed supplies and in the shipment of their grain to export 

markets. 

 

The Crow’s Nest Pass Grain Rates became fully effective by September 1, 1899, and has remained 

stationery with the exception of an increase in the years 1920-22. Following World War I, the railways 

were able to convince the Parliament of Canada that an increase was necessary, but after July, 1922, the 

grain rates were placed back on the original rate. The major change in this Agreement came about in 

1925 when the Federal Government removed the rate reduction of goods from east to west, but the rate 

of the movement of grain has remained at a statutory rate and can only be changed by the Parliament of 

Canada. I suggest if this was a sound policy 60 years ago, and I believe it was, it is every bit as sound a 

policy today. 

 

The western farmer has cherished this Agreement down through the years, and our Premier, in his 

statement to the Royal Commission recently in this city, put it so ably, when he said the Crow’s Nest 

Pass Rates have been described as the ‘Magna Carta’ of the western farmer – his Bill of Rights. So it is 

no wonder that the farmer views with alarm any suggestion of tampering of this Agreement. In normal 

years, Saskatchewan farmers have about 200 million bushels of wheat for export market. This wheat 

must be shipped some 950 miles by rail to the lakeheads, and then transported by water to the markets of 

the world, and it takes about 50 cents per bushel to get our wheat from a country elevator to the port at 

Liverpool. If the Crow’s Nest Pass rate is broken or tampered with, it could cost the farmers of 

Saskatchewan millions of dollars, and this could be the death blow to the sagging agricultural economy 

which is on the brink of bankruptcy. As I said a moment ago, the blame will be placed where it should 

be, squarely on the shoulders of the Federal Government, for first allowing the terms of reference to be 

large enough to include the hearings on the Crow’s Nest Pass Rates, and secondly, if any action is taken 

from the Commission. 

 

The farmers are opposed, as I have said, to any tampering of this grain rate structure. They agree with 

the principle that these rates shall continue to be under the control of the Parliament of Canada. I feel 

that all members of the House hope that the Commission will make a report which will, once and for all, 

put a stop to the controversy on the Crow’s Nest Pass Rate, and will give the farmer the assurance that 

this Bill of Rights will not be raised as an issue every time the railways feel they need more money. 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

5 

The second part of the Resolution deals the freight rates in general, and I would like to take a few 

minutes to deal with the freight rate increases, and to show that they add to the farmers’ cost-price 

squeeze that he is caught in. the 142 per cent increase in rates which I mentioned at the start, has been 

one of the main factors in pushing farm costs upwards. Machinery and repairs are just one example. It 

costs over $100 to move a medium-sized farm tractor from Brantford to Regina, and over $200 for 

moving combines. It is true, farmers are not buying tractors and combines every year, but we are buying 

repairs, and I think it is noticeable. I know on various occasions I have gone in for repairs and the freight 

rates have increased so many times that it is not listed in their list books; they take the price of the 

repairs first, and then add up afterwards the amount of freight. I can say it is a considerable burden 

which is placed on the backs of the farmers, the freight rates on repairs and machinery, and other 

commodities which the farmer must have. 

 

Another thing that puzzles me in the freight rate structure is the inconsistency in their billings. I was told 

recently by a local dealer, that a billing from Brantford to Regina cost more than if it was first billed to 

Winnipeg, and from Winnipeg to Regina. To me it is inconsistent and ridiculous, and shows up another 

place where I think something should be done to straighten out our whole freight-rate structure. 

 

Not only is the farmer of Saskatchewan affected by the increase in freight rates on things he purchases, 

but also on the products which he markets. I have dealt with wheat under the Crow’s Nest Rate 

Agreement, but what about his other products? Over 80 per cent of cattle marketed, 60 per cent of the 

hogs, and 50 per cent of turkey meat is shipped by rail to the major cities of Toronto and Montreal, a 

distance of some 2,000 miles. The increase in the rate of hogs from Saskatoon to Toronto has risen from 

$1.36 per hundred in 1948, to $2.27 at the present time. The spread in prices between Saskatoon and 

Toronto has widened from an average of $2.17 in 1948, to $4.24 in 1958. When hogs were worth $25 

per 100 in Toronto, the Saskatchewan producer gets $20.50, but if they drop to $20 on the Toronto 

market, it means the Saskatchewan farmer gets about $15.50. This holds true for all our meat products, 

and for that matter, any of the farmers’ produce that is shipped any distance. To me, the whole freight 

structure needs overhauling, Mr. Speaker, if we are to keep the national economy sound. For example, if 

a Saskatchewan rancher suffers a freight rate increase of $1 and the farmer near Toronto, only a few 

cents, it will not be too long until the Saskatchewan farmer is squeezed out of the Toronto market. the 

same thing holds true, on the other hand, if the Saskatchewan consumer has to pay a few dollars more 

for his consumer goods than the eastern consumer. I fear the standard of living of the western people 

will decline. Fewer goods will be purchased; then eastern manufacturers will lose some of their markets, 

and when they lose their markets, goods pile up; there is lay-off and unemployment, and we are back 

into the old vicious circle again. They cannot buy our goods; we cannot buy theirs, and the railway is 

caught between them, by not having the goods to haul either way. 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

 

6 

I want to say at this point that farmers, particularly, resent the claims of the railways that we are their 

‘poor relations’, and I want to state that statistics show that on an individual basis, the farmers contribute 

more to the income of the railways freight-wise than any other individual group. We are caught both 

ways. A carload of wheat from Regina, using a 20-cent freight rate costs the farmer about $240 to ship 

to the head of the lakes, and as I said, to bring a combine back, costs in the neighbourhood of some 

$220. This goes for every product that the farmer has to ship; we have to pay the freight; we have to pay 

the freight back on the goods we use, and I think it is a very unfair statement of the railways to keep 

saying that the farmers are not paying their share, and that something should be done about the freight 

rates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are other aspects of our economy that I could deal with which are vitally affected by 

the increase in our freight rates. The development of our natural mineral resources are certainly affected 

by increased freight rates. Manufacturing and industry which we all want so much in this province, are 

certainly adversely affected by freight rates, but I feel there are other speakers, and I will leave that for 

them to deal with. 

 

In closing, I hope this resolution receives the unanimous support, which it deserves from the members of 

this House, and for the reasons I have given, along with the reasons that other speakers will give, I am 

pleased to move the above resolution, seconded by Mr. Dewhurst. 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena):  Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to be able to have 

the privilege and opportunity of seconding this resolution. This is a resolution which is of very vital 

importance to every man, woman and child of this province; not only of the province of Saskatchewan, 

but of the whole of the three prairie provinces. We are vitally involved in the freight rate structure of 

Canada. It is true the Provincial Legislature, as such, has no jurisdiction over freight rates; therefore we 

cannot do anything about the freight rates. All we can do in this Legislature is to make recommendations 

to our senior government at Ottawa, and have them try to bring into their freight rate structure, the things 

which we in this House believe should be taken into consideration when arriving at a freight structure 

for Canada. 

 

Many years ago, when Canada was being settled, it was felt the transportation of our nation was in the 

interest of all the people of Canada. When B.C. became a province, and became part of Canada, it joined 

Canada on the understanding that a railroad would be built from eastern Canada to British Columbia, 

and in order to make it possible for a railroad company in those days to build a road across the expanse 

of these broad plains, which were in those days unsettled areas, huge financial cash grants, and also 

large grants of land were given the railroad companies, so that they could put a railroad across this 

country, so that B.C. could be kept a part of the Dominion of Canada. 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

7 

Those things were done. Across the expanse of prairie land here, it wasn’t as costly to build a line as it 

was from western Alberta through to British Columbia, but nevertheless, this was the portion of Canada 

where they got all their land, and the farmers of this province since, in either leasing this land from the 

railroad companies, or buying it, have paid considerable sums of money which should be taken into 

consideration, when arriving at the revenues which the railroads have received. 

 

When settlement came to the prairie provinces, and the Crow’s Nest Pass Freight Rate Agreement came 

into being, as has been mentioned by the mover, it was agreed that due to the distance we are here from 

the seaboard, that there should be some recognition given of agriculture in the western part of Canada, 

and that it was in the interests of Canada, as a whole, that agriculture on the prairie provinces should be 

protected, and that certain commodities coming into the prairie provinces which would assist 

agriculture, should be protected. Since that time, the products which were coming in have been removed 

from the protected list, and all that we have at the present time which remains protected is the movement 

of our grain under the Crow’s Nest Agreement. At the present time, there is some considerable battle 

going on to try and get rapeseed to be considered as a grain. I note in yesterday evening’s edition of 

‘The Leader-Post’ there was a headline saying, “Rapeseed Was Now Considered a Grain”. One, in just 

reading the headline, would assume that, if it were now considered a grain, would come under the 

Crow’s Nest Agreement, but when you read all the small print as reported in ‘the Leader-Post’, it points 

out that the decision as to whether rape will be considered a grain or not is not finalized yet, and there is 

no assurance at the present time that rape will come under the same classification as our other grains. I 

hope everything possible will be done to force on to the authorities the necessity of recognizing rapeseed 

as a grain, and to get the same protection as other grains of western Canada. Because, after all, we have 

many hundreds of thousands of acres seeded to grain in this province, and when land is seeded to rape, it 

takes that land out of production from other grains; therefore relieving the glut on the market of our 

coarse grains or wheat, which in turn should give the farmer the same protection because he is growing 

rape and not have to pay two or three times the freight he does on grain. 

 

As I have said, every settler of this province has been affected; not only the farmers. Our urban people, 

whether they be just workers, or whether they be merchants, or what have you, are still affected, because 

all the commodities they have to sell are much higher than comparable goods in Ontario or Quebec, 

which is closer to the factories where they are produced. If Canada is going to be a nation, and continue 

as a nation, when we only have the one seaport on the prairie provinces, which is the Hudson’s Bay, and 

it is only operated part of the year, then we must have other means of getting our produce to market or 

for getting the manufacturers’ produce to the consumers here. Every freight rate increase which has been 

applied for, every province in Canada, with the exception of Ontario and Quebec, has presented briefs to 

the Board of Transport Commissioners, opposing the increase in freight rates. 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

 

8 

Ontario and Quebec did not deem it necessary to oppose the increase, because they realized that, 

regardless of what the Board’s decision was, they had had other means of transportation which the 

competition itself would compel the freight rates to stay down. They had some large river waterways as 

a competitor to the railroads; also truck routes, which had become competition with the railroads, and of 

later years we have the St. Lawrence Seaways, where now ocean-going vessels can come right to the 

head of the lake to Port Arthur or Fort William, so the two central provinces, Quebec and Ontario, are 

not caught in the squeeze of the increased freight rate as we are in Saskatchewan here. 

 

When this province was settled, our agricultural land in the southern part was predominantly grain-

producing land, but in the park belt of this province, farmers couldn’t improve their farms as cheaply or 

as quickly as could be done on the plains. Consequently, it was necessary for the farmers of the northern 

part of this province to work on the farm in the summertime, produce cordwood, pulpwood and lumber 

products in the wintertime. So when the freight rates on these commodities go up, it brings a hardship to 

the settlers of the northern part of this province. We have many hundreds of homesteaders who kept 

their families living through cutting cordwood and pulpwood in the winter time. But now at the present 

time with the freight rates being as they are, it is costing more for the freight on these products than what 

the producer gets for going into the bush, cutting all these products, cordwood or pulpwood, hauling to 

the railroad siding, and loading it on the freight car. All the costs on the work that he has to do is less 

than the freight rate. 

 

There is an example, right in my hometown of Archerwill. Archerwill has been a town which throughout 

its history has been a very large shipper of wood products. In 1947, to send a cord of green, rough 

spruce pulpwood from Archerwill to Dryden, Ontario – a distance of some 599.7 miles, it was $5.85, but 

today, due to the increase in freight rate, the same cord of wood would cost $13.05. So that is, roughly, 

almost two and a half times the freight that it was some 12 or 13 years ago, and the $13.05 is more than 

the producer of pulpwood at Archerwill is getting. 

 

The same holds true with livestock producers. The stock they are shipping today is costing them two and 

one half times as much as it did 12 or 14 years ago. 

 

I have here in my hand a copy of the brief which was submitted to the Royal Commission on 

Transportation, which was headed by Mr. M.A. MacPherson, Q.C., and was submitted to them recently 

by Mr. M. Kalmakoff, who is in charge of the Timber Board. In this brief he has given the Royal 

Commission considerable statistics on the cost of moving wood products from Saskatchewan to the 

markets of Canada, and to the markets of the eastern States. I won’t take up the time of the House to go 

into them all, but I would like to give one or two examples to show what it is costing now to get these 

products to market. 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

9 

As an example, from Nipawin to ship a cord of wood to the Wisconsin Rapids area, rough, green wood, 

it costs $24.75; from Prince Albert, a little bit more, $25.25, and if you go as far as Big river it is then 

almost $28 a cord to ship a cord of green cord wood, unpeeled, to Wisconsin. on the other hand, you can 

ship it a further distance into the States from Lander, Wyoming, which is 1,345 miles; 150 miles more to 

Wisconsin, it is only $15.50. As you can see, Mr. Speaker, it is $12 less to ship a cord 150 miles further 

in the States than it is from Canada. I cannot see how those circumstances are justified, to charge the 

Saskatchewan producer, and the same would apply to Manitoba and Alberta in perhaps lesser 

proportion. The freight rates here are definitely curtailing our industrial activity, and the progress and 

prosperity of our northern settlers. If it wasn’t for some of these freight rate set-ups on our products, it 

might have been possible that before now we could have had greater industry in this province. 

 

On different occasions, companies that are interested in the manufacture of pulp have been investigating 

the possibilities of setting up a pulp mill in this province. All necessary arrangements with the Provincial 

Government have been made, but they cannot as yet get the arrangements with the railroad companies, 

whereby they can put the finished product on the market to compete with other pulp mills of Canada and 

the United States. 

 

So I say, Mr. Speaker, that this resolution affects every one of us, and it is a resolution which I hope 

every member of this House will see fit to support because in supporting a resolution like this, it is 

giving aid and assistance to those who are presenting briefs to the Royal Commission and is of benefit to 

all the people. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, like the mover of this resolution, there are many more things I could say on it; there 

have been many books written on the freight rate structures of Canada, but I am sure that the speakers 

who follow will touch on some of the aspects which the Mover or myself haven’t touched on, and I 

assure you that it gives me a great deal of pleasure in having the privilege of seconding this Motion. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland):  Mr. Speaker, I desire to associate myself with the members 

preceding me in this debate in supporting the motion. I recognize, as I think we all do, that the difference 

between areas which are progressive and which develop, and those which are backward and do not 

develop, is a matter of probably two or three things. One of them is natural resources and the other, of 

course, is transportation which can bring these resources to the respective markets. 

 

In the case of our prairie provinces, I consider, as I think do many of the people who live in the west, 

that we have an unjust freight rate structure as compared to other regions of Canada, particularly to the 

central provinces of Ontario and Quebec. As a result of this freight discrimination, 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

 

10 

the vast resources that are contained in this province of ours cannot be developed in competition with 

the resources of the central provinces I have mentioned, and of British Columbia. 

 

In addition to this, the industries of western Canada, as has been pointed out by the Mover, suffer, and as 

a result, we do not have the industrial development in the province of Saskatchewan that we would like 

to have. I could say, I think quite fairly, that the farmers suffer because of the increased cost of 

implements that they need on the farm and the machinery they need to develop their particular industry. 

 

I would like to indicate here at this time just what I mean. Take the case of a farmer who is interested in 

buying a combine, say a 438 Cockshutt combine, which is a combine of 7,637 pounds. Let’s take a look 

and see what has happened over the last 10 to 12 years as to the freight costs to the farmer, because in 

the final analysis, the farmer has to pay the freight cost of the implements that are brought to this 

province from Ontario. On April 8, 1948, I find that such a combine weighing 7,640 pounds was 

assessed at the rate of $1.28 a hundred. in other words, to bring it to Regina, not to Prince Albert but to 

Regina only, the cost would be $97.79. Later on we find that the rate was increased to $1.55, making the 

freight cost $118.42. In June, 1950 the freight rate was increased to $1.86, and the cost to the farmer was 

$142.10. You go along through the years, practically every year, 1950 to 1953, 1955 to 1957 the freight 

rates were on the upward trend, up and up and up until March 1, 1958, we find the rate is increased to 

$2.72 and instead of the farmer paying $97.79 as in 1948, he is now required to pay, to Regina, $243.72 

or $208.81 net at December 1, 1958 because of subsidy. I repeat, the rate is now $3.19 a hundred, and 

the freight the farmer has to pay is $243.72. It’s true that it has been mentioned by the Mover of this 

Motion that there has been a subsidy of some $20 million to the companies, and most of this, of course, 

was applicable to the western provinces. In any event, if there had been no subsidy that is what the rate 

would be. We hope the subsidy will remain. but with the subsidy, it still is costing us $220.80 on this 

combine, and in addition, another $100 or so from Regina to Meath Park. There one can see how much 

it is costing the farmer today, and this is one of the reasons why the farmers are unable to carry on. 

 

Because of the nature of this land of ours in the west where we produce a lot of bulk commodities, I 

think it has always been recognized that this movement at reasonable rates is important to our economy. 

I cannot help but think of the days when I taught school when I explained that during the time the first 

railway was built in this country, that over 55 million acres of land were given free to the railway 

companies, and to other companies. The C.P.R., for example, obtained 25 million acres of land as a gift 

to encourage them to build a railway. Twenty million dollars in cash was paid to the C.P.R. by the 

Government of Canada, and another $37 million’s worth of railway that was already constructed. In 

other words, a total of $82 million which, I would say at a rough guess at present day values, would be 

half a billion dollars of assets turned over in one way or another to the one railway company. 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

11 

We ask ourselves why did the Government of the day do that? I don’t think anyone would say that the 

Government of the day did wrong. I think the Government at that time had a good and necessary 

national policy. It had vision. It wanted to see the west developed; it wanted to see immigrants come out 

and settle this country, and make out of the wilderness a good land. this is a good land, but what do we 

find? We find that although we are protected under the Crow’s Nest Agreement, in some other respects 

we are not, and I think the companies who are carrying our freight today should be obliged to carry 

much products as rape and other goods to the east on comparable terms with that of grain, but we find 

they are not doing that. I should have said they should do so morally, but legally they are not doing it. 

They can get away with it by saying that rape is not a grain, and so if you want to ship a carload of say 

rape out of my community of Meath Park, it would probably cost about $1,600 to ship from there to 

Vancouver. That is what we are complaining about. We are fighting for our rights, particularly those 

farmers mentioned by the last speaker who have small holdings in sub-marginal areas, and who have in 

the past, depended on such products as pulpwood and lumber. 

 

I can recall, as the last speaker recalls, when only a few years ago in my community we saw trains 

passing by, east and west, just a bout every day and some of the members who live in the north have had 

the same experience. Today the railways can scarcely carry a passenger service. In fact, today there is no 

passenger service and there is very little freight carried, and I think that the whole blame can be put on 

the freight rate structure. I think what has happened is that the railway companies have tried to make a 

lot of fast money and have sacrificed the future of the railway companies and the future of the people of 

Canada by doing just that. 

 

As I say, I think the present difficulties of the railways can be blamed on themselves because I often 

think how strange it is that trucks, for example, can haul bulk freight in competition with the railways 

though trucks are not in the same position as the railways. As we know, our rolling stock and 

maintenance-of-way lines are pretty well depreciated and certainly the tonnage cost that railways haul 

should be competitive with that by trucks, yet trucks have come into the picture and have been able to 

take over quite a bit of the business. It seems to me that when you look at the record as to what has 

happened in Canada today, and because there are no controls by the Government to counteract what is 

happening, you will find that a ton of freight (where the differential on the shorter haul in eastern 

Canada used to be, say, five or six dollars as compared to the west) has gone up to seven or eight dollars 

on that particular ton over the years, but to us in the west it increased by $30 or $40, and as a result we 

are suffering. It seems to me that if the railway companies wanted to improve their position, what they 

could do is carry a lower freight structure. then with the development which I believe would come to 

this province, I think we could ship more pulpwood and develop some of our other resources. I am 

thinking particularly of the iron resources in my area in the constituency of Nipawin; if we had a freight 

rate which would allow us to compete with the freight in the east, certainly we could have mining and 

other developments in the natural resources field. 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

 

12 

As I said on a former occasion, I can’t possibly see how we can expand our pulp production because 

high freight rates are one of the things that hurt us. for example, I have the Saskatchewan Forest 

Products Annual Report, 1958-59, just to show this House what has happened in connection with the 

forest products which we ship out of this province of Saskatchewan. Here is what I find in a matter of 

two years, and I think the reason for it is the freight rate structure: in 1957-58, for example, we shipped 

out 46,544 cords of pulp which dropped to 16,000 in 1958-59, and I wouldn’t be surprised if it drops 

further. We just can’t compete in pulpwood any more. 

 

As has been pointed out, the difference in the freight rate on pulpwood to eastern Canada, or to the 

United States, I think is double to that in Canada. The result: in 1957-58 we produced 105,615 railway 

ties, and in 1958-59 we produced 66,859 ties. There again is a product from the forest that is in the main, 

shipped out of this province, and what has happened? It is going down. Our friends opposite sometimes 

like to blame the C.C.F. and say that we don’t encourage industry, but industry isn’t that stupid. It goes 

where money can be made. I remember a few years ago when the Anglo-Canadian Pulp Company was 

interested here. I remember quite well that our Government, the C.C.F. Government at that time, was 

willing and made an agreement to let the company have pulp at 50 cents a cord, yet later the same 

company went down to Ontario, and is paying over $3 a cord in Ontario, and when you analyze the 

situation, you find out why the development was there and not here – the trust is that the company could 

still, after paying much more for the wood in Ontario, make a handsome profit over and above what they 

could have made here, because of freight differential. 

 

All these things are very, very important to us, and I think that unless something is done, our economy 

will not only suffer but be completely strangled. We can talk about what provincial governments can do, 

and what they can’t do, but until you get a national policy in Canada that is going to bring about some 

equalization in this freight rate structure, I think that the west is going to be completely strangled. I am 

sure neither the Dominion Government nor the people of Canada want this. I know, as a farmer, if there 

is a reasonable freight rate, I can save hundreds of dollars a year, not just on machinery, but on all the 

things I have to buy. I think this may be the major factor with the farmers in my area deciding if they 

will be able to remain on their farms, or go bankrupt. Of course, there are other factors which might be 

discussed at a different time, and which have plenty to do with the farmer’s price-cost squeeze, but 

freight rates are immediate, and we must take them into consideration. 

 

I think today, as in 1875, we need a national policy, as I have said. It is the prerogative of the Federal 

authorities to take steps which will relieve the present distress and injustice and to adopt a policy which 

will safeguard the future of western Canada as well as that of the developed regions, such as Ontario, 

Quebec and British Columbia. Therefore, I feel, as others do, on the subject. I am quite sure that every 

member of this House will support this Motion. I think it is a step in the right direction, Mr. Speaker. 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

13 

Mr. Eiling Kramer (The Battlefords):  Mr. Speaker, I shall say very little about this, as I notice that 

the air time is going on. The previous three speakers in support of this motion have stated their case very 

well. I would like to add just a few words to what the previous speaker, the hon. member for 

Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) has said about a national policy. You can go back to the early days of the 

Crow’s Nest Agreement, and we know that the Federal Government at that time made a direct donation 

of some $25 million as a direct gift to the C.P.R. to build their line and they also donated some 25 

million acres as an extra gift in order to encourage this company to come in. The other companies that 

came in and built lines, certainly knew what type of competition they were facing when they built these 

lines, and I say today that they made a business error. There is no reason why the people of western 

Canada should subsidize their business errors. One of the most glaring mistakes, as the hon. member for 

Wilkie (Mr. Horsman) pointed out, no doubt knows is the line between Saskatoon and Unity, with the 

C.P.R. and C.N.R. running side by side, sometimes only a mile apart and at no place more than six miles 

apart. This is a duplication of service that was totally unnecessary and certainly from a business point of 

view totally unwise. 

 

Of course, if that had been done by one of the Saskatchewan Crown Corporations today, we would 

certainly hear a great deal about it. We hear very little of some of the mistakes of the Federal Crown 

Corporations. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, in order to do something about it, I suggest that rather than trying to mullet more 

money out of an already depressed industry, that the Board of Transport Commissioners for Canada 

should go abroad, make studies in other countries where railroad lines are either completely integrated 

or completely under national supervision, and see what economies they have wrought so that we, too, in 

Canada, may have a railway service that is efficient and in the best interests of the economy. Therefore, 

Mr. Speaker, without anything further, although there is a great deal more to be said, I want to say that I 

am wholly in support of this Motion and I hope that the whole House will be in accord. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition):  Mr. Speaker, at the outset I want to make it 

abundantly clear that as far as I am concerned, and I am sure the members on this side of the House, are 

in sympathy with the resolution. We are certainly in sympathy with all of those people in Canada who 

feel that the Crow’s Nest Pass Agreements must be maintained if we, as a western people, are going to 

survive. I think it is true to say that all members on this side of the House are also concerned with the 

problem that confronts Canada’s transportation system as a whole throughout our national today, and 

we, too, believe that we should have, as the resolution states, a revision of the freight rate structure, with 

a view to removing existing discrimination which adversely affects the prairie provincials. 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

 

14 

I can agree with, I think, most of the statements, if not all of them, that have been made by those 

speakers who have so far taken part in this debate. but I believe that the problem is a little greater than 

those people who have already spoken in the debate have indicated, and with your permission, Mr. 

Speaker, I will enlarge somewhat on this particular problem. 

 

When the railroads were first contemplated and built in the Dominion of Canada, they were a monopoly 

as far as the transportation system was concerned. In eastern Canada we know that there was some 

competition from waterways, but in western Canada there was no competition at all. It is quite true that 

the Canada Pacific Railroad were given a sum of money, I think the member for Cumberland (Mr. 

Berezowsky) mentioned $25 million, together with 25 million acres of land between Winnipeg and 

some point in British Columbia, and they were given the choice of land that existed between those two 

points. In addition, they were given some railroads that had already been constructed and they had a 

monopoly in the transportation system. 

 

However, that is no longer the case, Mr. Speaker. This country has grown, and with the growth of our 

country, our transportation system has grown and today we have more competition from water in parts 

of Canada; we have competition throughout the whole of Canada from the trucking industry, from 

airlines and from pipelines. So the situation has changed considerably from the beginning of the century 

to the present day. Some people claim that in order to get a better service, and a more equitable freight 

rate, that perhaps we should have more control with respect to our transportation industry as a whole. 

Other people have said we need less control. Well, I don’t want to hold myself out as an expert on 

transportation problems. I’m not. I’m only a layman as most people, I think, would consider themselves 

to be, in this House, when it comes to transportation problems, but I am convinced that even as laymen, 

we can see some things that have been happening that are detrimental to Canada as a whole and to 

western Canada. 

 

For instance, it seems strange to me that in some instances when the railroads have lost considerable 

amounts of traffic to other forms of transportation, they have done little or nothing about trying to 

reduce their rates or to hold that traffic. I have been one of those people who has been most vociferous 

in condemning the railroads for not using more modern methods and techniques in order to compete 

with other forms of transportation. I have learned of late that the railroads would be quite prepared to 

make a greater effort to retain part of the traffic they have lost over the years to other forms of 

transportation, but they inform me that they are prohibited from doing so by the Board of Transport 

Commissioners. I am informed, for instance, that when – we’ll use the trucking industry as an example – 

the trucking industry is drawing automobiles or cattle or some other type of freight, that the railroads are 

not in a position to bargain with the company that wants this product moved in competition with the 

trucking industry. They have to work through the Board of Transport Commissioners, and in many 

instances it takes months to set a new freight rate, whereas in the trucking industry they can pick up the 

‘phone and give a new rate to the customer over the telephone. So I am not in a position at the moment 

to take a stand either for more control or for less control. I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, what the 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

15 

answer is, but I do know this: unless this country is prepared not only to retain the Crow’s Nest 

agreements, but also to overhaul our whole freight structure, then we are in for trouble. 

 

One of the great problems confronting this nation as a whole today is the fact that we are pricing 

ourselves out of world markets. We are one of the greatest trading nations in the world, and unless we 

make every move that is within our power and within our ability to decrease the cost of goods and 

services in this country, then we can be in serious financial difficulty in the not too distant future. I am 

one of those who sincerely hopes that a national policy for transportation can be devised so that those 

people who are best qualified to carry certain commodities are the people who carry them. Those 

companies which are better qualified to carry other products should be the ones to carry those other 

products. 

 

I am also informed that the average cost of moving goods by the railroad is about 1 1/2 cents per ton 

mile. The average cost for moving commodities by truck is about five cents per ton mile. Well, with this 

information in hand, and then taking a look at some of the rates that exist, one becomes even more 

confused. I can use the rate from my home town of Fleming for shipping cattle to one of the larger 

markets in western Canada, to Winnipeg; the freight rate on cattle from Fleming to Winnipeg by rail is 

$1.20 a hundred. Keep in mind that their costs are 1 1/2 cents per ton mile, but you can ship cattle from 

Fleming to Winnipeg by cattle liner in small lots for 62 cents a hundred. If you ship a complete load of 

cattle, you can ship them for 50 cents a hundred, but the cost by truck, on the average, is 5 cents per ton 

mile. Well, I for the life of me, cannot figure out why, if railroad costs are 1 1/2 cents per ton mile, truck 

costs are 5 cents per ton mile, how on earth can the truckers carry for 50 cents a hundred and the 

railroads have to have $1.20. There is something drastically wrong. 

 

The railroads tell us that the reason they are in trouble is that they have to apply to the Board of 

Transport Commissioners and it takes months to have these arguments heard, and a new rate established. 

Their only ‘out’ as I understand it, has been through the agreed charges which they have been able to 

bring into effect for some product in western Canada that has been most beneficial to both producer and 

to the consumer. 

 

I was rather taken aback a while ago by the attitude of one of our railroad unions, Mr. Frank Hall, when 

he was endeavouring to get an increase in pay for some of his union members employed by the railroad. 

He stated at that time that if the railroads didn’t have the money that was necessary to meet this increase 

in pay, then they could do away with such rates as the Crow’s Nest Pass rates. 

 

Now, on the other side of the House we have a political party and a Government who is going to have 

this ‘shotgun wedding’ with labour 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

 

16 

and are attempting to tell us daily that labour and farmers’ interests are identical. Well, here’s an 

example, Mr. Speaker, where labour is prepared to do away, apparently, with the Crow’s Nest Pass rate 

in order to increase the salaries of railroad employees. 

 

I am one of those who believes that railroads employees are entitled to as high a wage as the employees 

of any other industry, but I am not one of those who believes that you can further depress a depressed 

economy, namely the agricultural economy, in order to pay higher wages to any labour union or the 

employees of a labour union. I believe that we must not only look at this problem of transportation that 

confronts us, but we must look at our whole cost, because it seems to me that the only wealth we have 

are the goods and services that we produce, and if we cannot produce those goods and services at 

competitive price not only to people down across the line in that country to the south of us, but to people 

who produce in other nations, then we are in serious trouble and I suggest to you that we, as a nation, are 

in serious trouble today. 

 

One need only look back to the period when the Crow’s Nest Pass agreement was set aside during the 

First World War, I think it was 1919. What happened to the price of wheat in western Canada when that 

happened? The day the agreements were set aside the price of wheat went down five cents a bushel. 

That meant, at that time, about $100 per carload of wheat. That is the effect it had on the price of wheat. 

The day the agreements came back into effect, the price of wheat went up five cents a bushel. At that 

time this meant an increase of $100 per carload of grain. Today if that were to happen, it would mean at 

least $200 per carload of grain. 

 

Now, we are all familiar with the fact that our railroads, over the past several years, especially since the 

war, have made great strides in improving the equipment and the facilities that they use to move freight 

and passengers throughout the length and breadth of Canada. First there is the new diesel locomotive 

which has been of tremendous benefit, not only to the railroads but to the people who use those 

railroads, but it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that in many instances the railroad has failed to keep pace. As 

I indicated a moment ago, when some other form of transportation comes in and takes a portion of their 

traffic, it seems that the next move they make is to ask for an increase on the freight that they continue to 

haul. I don’t think that’s good enough. 

 

To me it seems utterly absurd to have trucks running from Regina to Calgary, Edmonton and every place 

else in western Canada, down to eastern Canada to pick up a load of automobiles. The truck goes, we’ll 

say, from Regina down to Toronto empty, picks up five automobiles, delivers them out to Regina or 

elsewhere in western Canada, and makes a profit out of it or else they wouldn’t be in the business. At the 

same time the railroads claim they cannot draw them for that same rate. 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

17 

Nobody can convince me that it is more economical to move a passenger car, an automobile, by road 

transport from eastern to western Canada than it is by railroad. Nobody can convince me of that, but it 

seems to me, Mr. Speaker, and again I want to repeat I am speaking as a layman, that the methods 

adopted by our railroads for moving automobiles as cattle, are almost identical to what they were using 

20 years ago. Surely to goodness the railroads ought to be prepared to devise some sort of a carrier that 

could operate on rails, that could move not five automobiles at a time, but probably 15 automobiles. Is 

there any reason that an automobile should be placed in a boxcar? Why couldn’t we have three tiers of 

them on an aluminum constructed automobile carrier, that would move probably 15 automobiles at a 

time. I think it can be done, and I think it must be done. 

 

I also believe that if you are going to move automobiles, and we’ll continue using them as an example, 

as cheaply as possible into our western markets, that perhaps there should be a pool arrangement, 

someplace here in western Canada where automobiles could be brought in here from the manufacturer 

by the trainload, dropped off at the pool and then they can be distributed to the local consumer by truck 

from there. Those are the things that I think we must do, Mr. Speaker, if we are not going to hold freight 

rates where they are today, but bring them down in order to bring down the cost of production to our 

farmers and bring down the general cost of living to all of our people. 

 

I want to return for just a moment to the period 1919 to 1924, when the Crow’s Nest Pass rates were 

done away with. You will recall some of the arguments that were put forward by the railroads in 1924, 

before the Government of the day brought back into effect the Crow’s Nest agreements. The railroads at 

that time said it was going to cost them $50 million, but you will recall, Mr. Speaker, that the first year, 

1924, when the rates came back into effect, the railroads had an increase in their profits. We had a good 

crop in western Canada; we had markets for it and the railroads were kept busy moving it, but despite 

the fact they claimed they were going to lose $50 million, they had an increase in their profits. Railroads 

were built in this country to serve Canada from one end to the other, and I do not believe that Canada 

would ever have existed as a nation, would ever have come into being as a nation, without the railroads. 

I do not believe we could continue to exist today without our railroads, but I do believe that the railroads 

must be used to carry those products that they are best fit to carry, especially over long-distances and 

other products that are better carried by water or air or pipeline should be carried by those facilities. At 

the moment we have a hodgepodge of arrangements. One good example was referred to, I believe, by 

the member for Cumberland when he was talking about rates over different lengths of our railroad and 

comparing those rates with what goes on in the United States. 

 

I have an article here that appeared in ‘Macleans’ Magazine of which I want to read a small portion, and 

it is headed, ‘Go Farther, Pay Less’, and this seems to be about what happens. The further you move 

freight, the less it costs you to move it and I want to read if I may, Mr. Speaker, from this article; 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

 

18 

“In the case of pioneer Canadian railroads there was another reason for approving of low freight rates 

on basic commodities. the Canadian Government had needed railways to promote settlement and to 

stick together the scattered provincials of the new dominion. The only way they could get them was to 

offer grants of land and cash to railroad builders, because to begin with the railroad builders, because 

to begin with the railroads couldn’t pay for them themselves.” 

 

I think we agree with that, and I am sure I can agree with the member for Cumberland when he said that 

this was a good national policy at that time, and so do I. It was necessary to give the railroad companies 

this help in order for them to develop the great western prairies. 

 

The article goes on to say: 

 

“. . . so several Canadian railways, notably the C.P.R. began life as owners of vast tracts of land. The 

C.P.R. received 25 million acres. These lands grants were virtually valueless until the region around 

them became settled, so the railways willingly offered low freight rates on primary products as a 

means of making their land holdings valuable. 

 

“Out of the policy of using freight rates as an instrument for nation building there was evolved a 

freight rate structure in which the rate charge had little relationship to the cost of services provided. 

Thus, the railroads charged about $12.50 to haul a ton of wheat from Saskatchewan to Halifax 

although it cost them $37.50 to do so. It cost them approximately the same $37.50 to haul a ton of silk 

from Halifax back to Saskatchewan, but for that job they are charged not $37.50, but $500.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as citizens of Saskatchewan, we must remember that we have been getting fair 

treatment and the benefit of the deal when we are only having to pay $37.50 to have a ton of wheat 

moved from Saskatchewan to Halifax, but we are the people who have to pay the exorbitant sum of 

$500 when you bring a ton of silk from Halifax back into Saskatchewan. 

 

The article goes on, Mr. Speaker: 

 

“To meet competition with ships using the Panama Canal, the railways are permitted to charge a 

comparatively lower rate on through freights moving from eastern Canada to the Pacific Coast. As a 

result, certain shipments going from Montreal to Edmonton with a freight charge of say $200, would 

go 800 miles further to Vancouver, for $50 less money.” 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

19 

That’s what has happened to the whole freight structure, Mr. Speaker. It costs $50 less money to move a 

certain commodity from Montreal to Vancouver than from Montreal to Edmonton, and Vancouver is 

800 miles further than Edmonton, and over the mountains. But because of the competition through 

shipment by water through the Panama Canal, this is the policy that has been adopted by our railroads. 

 

I want to read one other article, or paragraph, from this same particular article, to substantiate the 

statement I made a moment ago, that in my private opinion I do not believe that the railroads have kept 

pace with modern technology in order to retain that portion of the total transportation, or movement of 

freight, in the Dominion of Canada. The gentleman who makes this statement is an authority on 

transportation, Mr. J.L. McDougall, Queen’s University professor, and he holds himself out, and I 

presume he is, an expert on transportation. This is what he has to say, Mr. Speaker: 

 

“We are trying to maintain a government-regulated system of paying for railway services that have 

become obsolete.” 

 

I am one of those who agree with him. I think the system is obsolete, I think the whole freight rate 

structure in Canada is obsolete, and I believe that the attitudes of some people with regard to costs are 

obsolete. I don’t want to be accused of only condemning railroads; I condemn some of the people who 

work for those railroads. You will recall, a few short years ago when there was a move by the railroads 

to dispense with some firemen on freights and yard engines, the unions put up a tremendous battle to 

retain the services of these people. However, the railroads had a commission which felt that the railroads 

could be operated without the use of firemen on freight and yard engines. I believe, Mr. Speaker, if it 

can be proven, and apparently it was, it is no longer necessary to have firemen on freight and yard 

engines, then they should be dispensed with, because we’ve got to cut our costs down at all costs, 

providing good service and safety can be maintained. I think it has proven that we have been able to 

maintain a safety record and still give good service. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to take any more time of the House, but I do feel that this particular 

resolution is worthy of the support of all the members of this Legislature and worthy of the support of all 

the people, especially the prairie provincials, and it seems to me that our provincial and our Provincial 

Government have, on several occasions, made representations in eastern Canada and elsewhere on our 

behalf. I sincerely hope that they will continue to do so, and I sincerely hope that they will be successful 

in bringing about a change in our transportation system, not only for our railroads to change, but for all 

types of transportation to change, so that we may be able to move our goods and services from one area 

to another at the lowest possible rate, so that we can decrease, I hope, the cost of living in this country, 

and so that we can decrease the price of our products which must be sold on the export markets of the 

world. In that way, and in that way only, are we going to be able to maintain ourselves, not only as a 

great province, Mr. Speaker, but as a great trading nation and maintain our position 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

 

20 

in the trading channels of the world. 

 

I have great pleasure in supporting the Resolution. 

 

Mr. Franklin E. Foley (Turtleford):  Mr. Speaker, I just want to add a few words to what has already 

been said in support of this very timely motion. I think the matter of freight rates, and the problem which 

it has created here in Saskatchewan, was brought home to us very forcibly the other morning during our 

Public Accounts inquiry into the operation of some of our public institutions when we found that the 

Saskatchewan Hospital at Weyburn shipped in some $30,000 worth of coal during the year under 

review, which was the year 1958-59, and for which freight charges for coal, according to the 

information given to me by the hon. Minister of Health (Mr. Erb) were some $17,592. That is $17,592 in 

freight to bring in $30,000 worth of coal from the field at Estevan to Weyburn, a distance of some 40 

miles. In other words, then, we were paying at the Saskatchewan Hospital at Weyburn something more 

than a dollar in freight for every $2 worth of coal that was obtained. 

 

So certainly the matter of freight rates, not only the Crow’s Nest Pass freight rates, but the freight rates 

here in the province, are a matter of considerable concern. 

 

In listening to the other hon. members speak, it reminded me that the city of Saskatoon presented a brief 

to the freight rate hearings during the February hearings here in Regina. I just wanted to say a word on 

behalf of the northern cities, Saskatoon, Prince Albert and North Battleford, where I feel that the 

unequal freight rate structure in the northern part of our province has been a major factor in hampering 

what otherwise might have been considerable industrial development. It seems to me, now, with the 

development taking place at Squaw Rapids and the necessity for the movement of a great deal of heavy 

machinery, that this matter of freight rate structure and its equalization here in our own province, has 

become one of increasing concern and importance. 

 

I just want to quote briefly from the brief which the city presented at that time, when they stated that 

while mileage was the basis for lower freight rates in Winnipeg, than for any other of the western cities 

of Regina, Saskatoon, Calgary and Edmonton, nevertheless they felt that mileage was only one of 

several factors which, up until the present time have been taken into consideration in the freight rate 

structure throughout western Canada. 

 

They go on to make this statement in their brief, and I feel it is an important one: 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

21 

“The hopes for the future of the cities of Regina and Saskatoon, with the difficulties facing the wheat 

industry are largely dependent on the diversification of the economy with an equalization in the freight 

rates structure.” 

 

It is apparent then that the feeling of Saskatoon and other northern cities has been that they have not 

shared in the economic expansion and in the industrial development which they might have done had 

freight rate structures been equalized in the province. 

 

I have had occasion in the past to say words in support of an all-out effort to try and place our northern 

cities in a more favourable position to be able to compete with the southern parts of the province in the 

matter of industrial expansion, and for this reason, Mr. Speaker, I am very, very happy to support the 

motion with regard to opposing any change in the Crow’s Nest Pass agreement. From the point of view 

of Saskatchewan, and particularly northern Saskatchewan, I would urge an all-out effort by all members 

of this Legislature to exert influence to remove the discrimination which adversely affects the industrial 

development of the northern part of our province. 

 

I will support the motion. 

 

Mr. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg):  I didn’t intend to take part in this debate, Mr. Speaker, but now I 

would like to take the opportunity to say a few words in this respect. I noticed that the discussions are 

going in a direction that I feel I should bring up what is actually taking place on the railroad lines in my 

particular community. 

 

I notice that according to the Resolution we are urging the Government of Saskatchewan to continue its 

efforts to obtain a complete revision of freight rates. I believe that the Government of Saskatchewan, in 

so doing, should also make in itself a complete inquiry amongst the various communities to bring to 

light the failure of administration, insofar as the railroad is concerned. You know, these giant 

monopolies – whether owned by Crown or others, certainly end up costing the users and the consumers 

a greater amount of money than it normally would. 

 

As I was mentioning, I would like to bring to light some of the things that are happening, which I 

believe cause the increase of the freight rates, and are also probably one of the reasons why the railroads 

are making an effort to try to increase, or do away with the Crow’s Nest rates. In a neighbouring town of 

mine, every fall, in July and August, 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

 

22 

the railroads bring in what is termed a substitute agent. This fall, particularly, I had the occasion to talk 

to this young fellow and he was very perturbed because he figured his services in that particular hamlet 

as a substitute agent were a waste of good money and a waste of good money and a waste of effort. This 

young lad I mention is 28 years old, and moved into this neighbouring town to handle wheat. He is 

brought in usually the latter part of July or the first week in August, and is usually relieved of his duties 

sometime before Christmas. The only purpose for which he is brought in there is to handle the grain that 

goes out of this said community. As you know, under the quota system that we have, there is not a great 

amount of outgoing grain from the communities at that time of the year. The four months that he was 

there this fall, this young lad actually billed out of that community only eight carloads of grain, and the 

billing of the freight was all handled by the agent in my home community. This lad felt, and I am sure, 

he was an ambitious young fellow, that it was an actual waste of money for him to be put in a 

community to bill out only eight carloads of wheat. He felt that he was not doing the satisfactory type of 

work that he would like to do. He felt guilty in some respects of actually drawing his pay-cheque; to stay 

there for five months, earning approximately $280 a month and only billing eight carloads of grain. 

These young fellows are very, very concerned, and this lad told me that there are several cases 

throughout the province, in fact throughout the prairie west, that this is going on. 

 

Now, I believe that before we ever allow any change in these freight rates, we should have the railroads 

take a darned good look at their own operations and once they have proven to us that there is no waste 

such as this, then we could look at it differently. 

 

Another thing that has taken place of which many of us are quite aware in this House, is the changing of 

the railroad schedules throughout the province. Where they had a fairly good amount of freight before, 

they have changed their schedule and the changes do not coincide with the activities of the larger 

centres. Consequently, they are losing the traffic they had to individuals who are doing their own 

freighting at an additional cost to themselves, and the railroads are losing the service and revenues. I 

feel, Mr. Speaker, that this motion is certainly opportune and we should press with the greatest urgency 

that this Crow’s Nest freight rate remain. It was established years ago for a purpose, to assist the 

budding agricultural economy, and it should remain there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I certainly support this resolution. 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

23 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw City):  Mr. Speaker, I am only going to add a few words to what has 

already been said. I want to say that I certainly do support the proposition that there should be no change 

in the Crow’s Nest Pass Freight Rates Agreement, at a time particularly when the agricultural industry is 

in such a depressed state, and Mr. Speaker, at a time when there are so many obvious inequities within 

the general freight rate structure in Canada. I think that the removal of the Crow’s Nest Pass Freight 

Rates Agreement would simply add to an already inequitable situation for everyone in the province of 

Saskatchewan, let alone the farming community. 

 

I would like to say one or two words, however, with reference to some of the statements of the hon. 

Leader of the Opposition about the railway worker. First of all, it should be pointed out that while the 

railways are, of course, primarily responsible for correcting the conditions that have arisen, partly as a 

result, I think, of their own ineptitude, that many changes have taken place of direct disadvantage to the 

railway worker. 

 

I come from a community where there are men today with 18, 20 years, yes, Mr. Speaker, up to 35 

years’ seniority, who are confronted with layoffs. The situation the railroads find themselves in is being 

passed on to the shoulders of the railway worker. I would like to point out that from 1956 to the year 

1958, there has been a drop of some 23,000 workmen on the railways in Canada. People are losing jobs 

as a result of the technological changes on the railroad, and will probably continue to do so. 

 

If I were to go into all the reasons I would take much longer than any of us would care to devote to the 

subject today. But I give one simple example of what has happened in the field of transportation in the 

last few years. Not so long ago, we had six local trains between the cities of Moose Jaw and Regina – 

six locals a day. There is not one of those locals now operating. As a matter of fact, it is said that there 

will be further changes and further reductions. 

 

I want to point out, too, that as far as the railroad firemen are concerned, when they had their dispute a 

couple of years ago, the number of firemen on the Canadian railroads had dwindled from some 4,800 in 

1946 if my recollection is true, to some 2,800. As time goes by this number of 2,800 odd workmen will 

be reduced still more. 

 

I want to say, too, that considering the wage levels of the Canadian railroad worker, they are not nearly 

as high as sometimes pictured. In 1958 it was agreed that the standard for the railroad industry in respect 

of wage levels should be the average of the durable goods industry. This was stated by the Federal 

Conciliation Board as well as by two prominent judges who were associated with a wages dispute in the 

railroad at that time. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, this standard had originally been suggested by the 

railroad managements themselves as a counter proposal to the unions at that time that the United States 

railroad wages should be the base. They later retreated from this position so that this was no longer, so 

far as they were 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

 

24 

concerned, used as a legitimate comparison. 

 

But in any event, in 1958 the average of weekly wages and salaries in the Canadian railway industry was 

$75.66 while in the same year the average of weekly wages and salaries in the durable goods industry 

was $77.95. So you see that the railway workman has been attempting to come up to this average that 

was suggested by the management themselves to be a fair average only a few years before they rejected 

the position. 

 

Now, I’m not going to presume to try and advise on what specifically needs to be done in regard to an 

equitable system of freight rates in Canada. Certainly it would require a great deal of study. But if the 

principle of equity was recognized, I think that it could be, like everything else, worked out on a fair 

basis. I think this is generally speaking what the railway workers themselves have been saying. I don’t 

know if Mr. Frank Hall, whose statement is quoted by the hon. Leader of the Opposition, made any 

qualifying remarks to the paragraph he quoted or not, but I do know that many other railroad union 

leaders have certainly expressed concern about the plight that the farmers find themselves in respecting 

freight rates and respecting, also, generally, the inequity of freight rates applying in this and other parts 

of Canada. 

 

I would like, briefly, Mr. Speaker, to quote from the April, 1959, issue of “Canadian Transport” which is 

the magazine of the Canadian Brotherhood of Railway and Transport Workers. This paragraph said: 

 

“That it would be a backward step to attempt to hinder automation. What is needed are retraining 

programs responsible joint planning for reallocation of workmen.” 

 

The real difficulty that the railway workers are complaining about is that they have had a situation thrust 

upon them very quickly, and have been asked to pay for a situation that is not really one of their making. 

What they would like to see is a retraining program with all the resources of the industry and of 

government placed behind it, a program that would be accompanied by assistance that would, if 

necessary, have workmen from one part of the Dominion to another, and all other kinds of measures that 

would be feasible to cope with a state of unemployment after many years of service to an industry. I 

would like to quote again from the same issue of Canadian Transport where the editor says: 

 

“ No trade union enjoys negotiating an agreement to compensate redundant workers, but they regard it 

as essential that they should receive the best terms possible for workers becoming jobless through no 

fault of their own. 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

25 

Industrial change brings with it schemes for modernization and nationalization to increase the returns 

of the companies whose money is invested. Out of these benefits which accrue to the industry from the 

changes should be set aside provision for men whose lives are invested in the industry.” 

 

Finally, a paragraph from the same organ on this question of feather-bedding: 

 

“Feather-bedding is the term misused by employers to cover up their refusal to take a fair share of the 

responsibility for the results of mechanization, to suggest that men want to be paid for work they are 

not doing is to dodge the real issue which is that management must take responsibility for those 

changes designed to increase return on financial investment which eliminates skilled men whose lives 

are invested. Some of the advantages to the industry should be used to facilitate the transition to new 

employment for the displaced workmen.” 

 

Now, I wanted to add those few remarks, Mr. Speaker, and also to say this with respect to the shop-worn 

phrase of “pricing ourselves out of the world market” and to repeat what I have said elsewhere and in 

this House, that all the evidence shows that far from pricing ourselves out of world markets in this 

country, we are in a pretty fair position if we’re talking about the wage and salary earners of this 

country. 

 

We have an average income scale in Canada of 30 per cent less than that of the United States. 

Competitively spending also, in Canada, the labour cost per unit of production is lower than it is in 

Japan, Germany, the United Kingdom or the United States. I don’t think that any justification can be 

advanced for the phrase that workmen are contributing to the condition of “pricing ourselves out of 

world markets”. 

 

I think my attitude on freight rates, apropos of this resolution in particular, is contained in the quotation 

of Mr. M.J. Coldwell, who wrote in the ‘Canadian Transport’ of March, 1958, when asked to give the 

attitude of the C.C.F. party on freight rates, said in part, that: 

 

“Neither the railway worker nor the user of railway services should be subjected to discriminatory 

treatment because of Canada’s national transportation costs. The railroads initially were built to make 

Canada one nation, and the burden of the disadvantages as well as the advantages of that policy should 

be a national responsibility.” 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

 

26 

Hon. L.F. McIntosh (Minister of Municipal Affairs):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You will notice that I 

kept to my seat until after we got off the radio. 

 

Just a few remarks largely relative to the history. I think if we go back prior to the turn of the present 

century there were two major problems that were facing the Dominion of Canada: one was the unity of 

Canada from the Atlantic to the Pacific, and the other was the settling of the prairies of what is now 

known as western Canada. Those responsible for the policies of Canada of that day evidently came to 

the conclusion, and I believe rightly so, that a ribbon of steel from the Atlantic to the Pacific would be a 

uniting factor in keeping Canada together. They also came to the conclusion that some assistance would 

be necessary for those who settled the prairies of western Canada and went into the agriculture industry. 

So the steel was laid from coast to coast with a considerable amount of public assistance. In turn, the 

railways entered into an agreement with the Government of Canada whereby they agreed that they 

would give consideration to assisting the settlement of the prairies of western Canada, but having due 

regard, in time they would reap the benefit of the assistance that was granted, commonly known as the 

Crow’s Nest Pass Freight Agreement. 

 

I think if we go back prior to the turn of the present century we will appreciate that there was practically 

only one means of transportation and that was by rail. Today, however, we’re facing an entirely different 

situation. Not only have we the rail transportation, but we have water; we have the air and we have the 

pipeline, and a tremendous amount of traffic over the years has moved off the rails onto the road. An 

increasing quantity of traffic is now moved by water and there is some evidence as the result of the St. 

Lawrence Seaway there will be an increasing quantity of traffic moving by water from the Atlantic to 

the head of the Great Lakes. So, in looking at the problem with which we are faced today, we find it to 

be not a problem of rail transportation alone, but it seems to me it is a national problem associated with 

the various means that we now have of transportation. 

 

The railway companies are taking an increasing number of passenger trains off their liens, but the 

railway companies are also extremely interested in making substantial investments in air transportation. 

Both the Canadian National and the Canadian Pacific Railways are increasing at a very rapid rate their 

air service. Both of these companies are also increasing at a substantial rate their transportation service 

on road, and then we have other groups that are interested in transporting by pipelines. Over the years, 

since the first application following World War II was made for a freight rate increase, and the eleven 

applications that followed the first one that was granted in march of 1958, there seemed to be an effort 

made to deal with the transportation system within the framework of policy laid down by the railways 

many, many years ago. We have had very substantial increases in freight rates granted by the Board of 

Transport Commissioners to the railways, but notwithstanding by the Board of Transport 

Commissioners to the railways, but notwithstanding the past 12 years of hearings, notwithstanding two 

Royal Commissions, I am 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

27 

firmly of the opinion as expressed by the Leader of the Opposition that we have not come to grips with 

the transportation problem. We are hopeful that the Royal Commission that is now sitting with the terms 

of reference as broad as they are, will be prepared to give consideration to some ways and means of 

bringing together, co-ordinating the various means of transportation in the national interest of Canada. If 

we can get that far, Mr. Speaker, then I am satisfied that, insofar as the western provinces are concerned, 

and the Maritime provinces, we will be able to enjoy the movement of goods and services at a lesser cost 

than what we are moving these goods and services at the present time. If we could reach that position, 

then the prairies of western Canada would be in a much better position to develop the various resources 

that we have here at our disposal. 

 

The province of Saskatchewan says that the Crow’s Nest Pass Freight is a national policy designed and 

developed for the purpose of assisting in the uniting of the Dominion of Canada, and also in the 

development of the prairies of western Canada. Insofar as the economy of agriculture is concerned, Mr. 

Speaker, lying as we do approximately a thousand miles further from water transportation than our 

competitors in the field of agricultural commodities, we are suffering under a severe handicap in the 

movement of agricultural commodities into inter-provincial and into export trade channels, consequently 

our argument before the Royal Commission is that the Crow’s Nest Pass Freight must of necessity 

remain as it is, arguing from the point of view of a national policy, remaining as it is, and we are also 

extremely interested in the unification of all of the means of transportation thinking, and hoping that as a 

result of that, we in the provinces of western Canada and in the Maritimes will be able to reap a 

considerable amount of benefit. I think it is a rather timely resolution and there is substantial evidence 

what the resolution itself will be supported unanimously by the Members of the Legislature. I am 

awfully happy that this resolution has been presented for the consideration of this Assembly at this time. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to unanimously. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 45 – An Act to assist Organization and Operation of Non-Profit Committee-operative 

Associations to meet the Economic and Social Needs of their Members on a Self-Help Basis. 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Weyburn):  Mr. Speaker, this Act, using the short title ‘The Co-operative 

Association Act’, is a very large Act and over the years it has been amended frequently with the result 

that you have to carry around a small brief case of amendments when you are following the Act. The 

Department has been hoping for some time to get it consolidated all into one volume for the 

convenience of boards of directors of Co-operative Associations and Co-operative Managers, etc. 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

 

28 

This Act is a consolidation of all the amendments that have accumulated over the years. There are no 

changes in principle. There may be some changes in wording and minor matters regarding standard 

bylaws, etc., but since there is no change in principle whatsoever, I would think the other changes could 

best be discussed in Committee of the Whole. I would therefore like to move that Bill No. 45 be now 

read a second time. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

Bill No. 46 – An Act to amend The Trade Services Act 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Weyburn):  Mr. Speaker, this is simply an amendment in line with the statement 

I made sometime ago to the effect that it was intended that the Trade Services Branchy, which is now in 

the Department of Co-operation and Co-operative Development, be transferred into the proposed new 

Department of Industry and Information. This simply makes that transfer. 

 

With that explanation, I would like to move that Bill No. 46 – an Act to amend The Trade Services Act, 

be now read a second time. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

Bill No. 47 – An Act to further the Economic Development of Cities and Towns by Facilitating the 

Providing of Accommodation and Financial Assistance to Industries. 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Weyburn):  Mr. Speaker, this is a new piece of legislation. I will not take the 

time of the House in going over the details, I will merely annunciate the general principle which is 

usually discussed on Second Reading. 

 

As hon. members know, we have had for some years an Industrial Development Office in the province, 

whose primary function has been to assist in the attraction and the promotion of industrial development 

in Saskatchewan. A good deal of work has been done by the Industrial Development Office in working 

with Chambers of Commerce in the various urban centres, and also with Industrial Development 

Committees which have been set up by some of the City Councils, and even some of the Town Councils. 

I think a good deal of useful work has been done if in nothing else but arousing the interest of local 

communities in seeing what they can do in promoting industrial development in their own area. For 

instance, some of them have become interested in purchasing land and in setting aside industrial sites. 

This would enable 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

29 

them to go to prospective companies and say: “Here, we have a good site set aside beside a railroad. It is 

very convenient and is a site that you can get for a reasonable price, because it won’t be held up by some 

land speculator.” This often has been very useful. But the difficulty is that in many cases, the Chamber 

of Commerce has no funds to procure land, or to make a building site available. 

 

Industrial Development Committees of City Councils are very limited in what they can do, and 

particularly if the industrial site happens to be located outside the city. After a great many discussions 

with Industrial Development committees in the various cities and towns, and with the Chambers of 

Commerce in urban centres who are interested in promoting industrial development, they have come up 

with the idea of setting up municipal industrial development corporations. This would allow a group of 

private citizens with the approval of the municipal council or jointly with the municipal council, or the 

municipal council itself (anyone of those three alternatives) to set up and establish an industrial 

development corporation. These industrial development corporations would then be able to receive sums 

of money from individuals who wanted to lend or invest their money in this corporation, which in turn 

would buy industrial sites, or give assistance to an industry coming into the province. They could also 

get assistance from the Industrial Development Office of Saskatchewan, because they would be a legal 

entity with which we could deal. 

 

We think that this proposal will be used by quite a number of urban communities. Some of them have 

already indicated their interest in such a technique, and we feel that these industrial development 

corporations set up on a municipal basis will be of considerable help to some of the municipalities in 

promoting industrial development. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move that Bill No. 47 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin):  Mr. Speaker, we feel that this is certainly a step in the right 

direction. I think most larger communities such as the cities of Regina and Saskatoon, and some of the 

other smaller cities have facilities now for endeavouring to attract industry and to make provision for 

industry to move into their communities. It seems to me that there is a great lack of facilities in many of 

our larger towns, and I would hope, and I am sure the Government hopes as well, that industry will not 

only locate in our larger centres, but will diversify and settle in some of our smaller communities. 

 

It seems that if a lot of our smaller communities are going to survive as thriving communities, then it is 

going to be necessary for some small industries to locate in the smaller communities, and it seems to me 

that this is a step in the right direction in helping those communities to help themselves in attracting 

some of the smaller industries to the smaller towns, so I am sure we can give full support to this 

particular Bill. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

 

30 

Bill No. 48 – An Act to amend The Forest Act, 1959 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak (Minister of Natural Resources):  Mr. Speaker, this is only a small amendment 

which is concerned with the scheduled portion of The Forest Act, which is in connection with the 

change of boundaries, and therefore, this could be taken up in detail in Third Reading. I would therefore 

move, Mr. Speaker, that the Bill be read a second time. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

Bill No. 49 – An Act to Amend The Deserted Wives’ and Children’s Maintenance Act 

 

Hon. T.J. Bentley (Minister of Social Welfare):  Mr. Speaker, there are several changes, but no great 

change in the principle, but some improvements in this Act. For instance, the secretary of The Law 

Society reported that he felt it may not be as clear as it should be in the schedules ‘A’ and ‘D’, and that 

the court can declare children as well as the wife deserted, and also include them in a Court Order. 

Provision will be made to correct that. Also, provision is made to arrange that where the court orders 

maintenance payments on behalf of children to be paid to a friend of the court, and that the friend of the 

court that is going to be named, must have given consent. Also provision is made to vary any court 

orders which have been made under this or past Acts of this kind, where there is a necessity to have the 

change in the person who is to receive the payment on behalf of the applicant, and also to provide that a 

counsel fee be paid when a wife is taking enforcement action, as well as in the first instance. 

 

With that explanation, I would move second reading. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

Bill No. 50 – An Act to amend The Social Aid Act, 1959 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley:  The principal changes in this Mr. Speaker, are: provision will be made that one 

municipality which has perhaps a social aid case which is cumbersome, may not be permitted to 

encourage or transport that case to another municipality without the consent of the of the municipality; 

provision is made for the Department and the Director of Public Assistance to bring in from another 

province people whom it is socially desirable to have in this province; to make clear in the case of an 

appeal in a social aid case, that a member of a municipal council may sit on the Appeal Committee. The 

municipal council has felt there was some doubt about their authority to do this, and will make it 

abundantly clear that they can. 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

31 

Another principle will be to provide that permissive legislation be brought in, where a council wishes to 

make payment on a per diem basis to a counsellor for this purpose, that it may do so. With than 

explanation, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

Bill No. 51 – An Act to amend The Housing Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley:  The amendment to the Housing Act, Mr. Speaker, is simply to add The Farm 

Security Act to those other Acts that are exempted, or rather make it possible for N.H.A. to make 

Housing loans. There has been a feeling that farmers were unable to obtain Housing loans because of the 

Federal Government’s order to its lending institutions in the province, and in order to meet that desire of 

the farmers to avail themselves of the opportunity to borrow under the National Housing Act, this Bill 

will provide the Farm Security Act as exempt. I move second reading, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. McDonald:  Mr. Speaker, this is another Bill that I am sure the members on this side of the 

House are most pleased to see in this amendment. I only wish the Government had seen fit to bring in 

the amendment at a time when loans under N.H.A. could have been obtained by our farmers at 4 1/2 per 

cent, rather than 6 3/4 per cent, as the case may be now. I am wondering if it isn’t another instance when 

we in Saskatchewan have missed the boat, because of the tardiness of the Government that sits opposite. 

However, I think the action now is better than if it had never happened at all, but I only wish it had taken 

place at a time when farmers could have taken advantage of low interest money, rather than now when 

the rates are so terribly high that I doubt if any farmer would see fit to take advantage of National 

Housing when they have to face 6 3/4 per cent interest on their money. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Mr. Speaker, I think this Bill should be called the ‘death repentance’ of the C.C.F. 

Government. On several occasions in this House, Mr. Speaker, it has been drawn to the Government;/’s 

attention that the rural people of Saskatchewan have been denied the privileges of operating and getting 

credit for housing in the rural parts of Saskatchewan. Not until 1944 was the prohibition removed from 

the urban sections of the province of Saskatchewan. It was held there by this Government for reasons I 

don’t know – some people say it was because of socialistic ideology, or something, but at the same time, 

that is what happened. My friend over here spoke about the Metis the other day in this connection, and I 

appreciate that he did, but this Government has made or classified the whole rural population of this 

province as Metis – that’s what they have done, and of course they have denied it. 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

 

32 

Yesterday I think the Minister of Municipal Affairs spoke on the budget. He told us that the millions and 

millions of dollars in the urban centres of this province were for new construction. It is a very nice thing 

to be able to say, Mr. Speaker. I venture to say that 85 per cent of all that new construction was done 

under the National Housing Act, or you can call it The National Housing Mortgage Corporation, or 

whatever you would like to call it. It was done by the Federal Government loaning agencies, but why in 

the name of common sense did not the rural people of this province, under the socialist benevolent 

Government, have that opportunity for the last 10 or 15 years? They have been denied this, and just a 

year ago, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Social Services, (Hon. Mr. Bentley) said he had discussed (this 

was on the budget debate last year in February) by letter with the Federal Government, the possibility of 

housing loans to help Saskatchewan farmers build. He said he had learned that the Canadian Housing 

and Mortgage Corporation will not make loans for rural housing in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it is 

extremely hard for me, knowing the intelligence and the informative mind of the Minister of Social 

Service, to see why he didn’t know better than that. He admits that he didn’t know that there was a 

prohibition by this Government in this province of Saskatchewan, under The Farm Security Act, Bill 

No. 51. I think it is. It is there. On page 67 of ‘The Country Guide’, March 19, 1995, there is a long 

article dealing with this very topic in the different provinces in the Dominion of Canada, and the 

operation of The Housing Act. I am not going to read you all of it, but I want to read you the statement 

which pertains to us here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

First of all, I want to mention some of the conditions and some of the benefits which this Federal 

legislation brings about: 

 

“Under The National Housing Act, farmers may get a loan up to $10,000 for a new farm home 

construction, and take up to 30 years to repay the loan, with interest at 6 per cent per annum, 

calculated semi-annually and not in advance, raising this loan in annual, quarterly and monthly 

instalments, of principal and interest. Apply to any of the lending agencies authorized to make a 

National Housing loan, or apply direct to The Central Mortgage & Housing Corporation for this loan, 

where it is not available from authorized lenders. Receivers alone of building will receive the loan if 

building proceeds, or in a lump sum when construction is completed.” 

 

This comes from Mr. Hunt, Chief Information Officer for Central Mortgage & Housing Corporation in 

Ottawa. 

 

“Provision of the Saskatchewan Farm Security Act precludes the making a farm house loan in that 

province. This is an Act for the protection of 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

33 

certain mortgagors or purchasers and farm leases or farm loans – farm lands. This situation does not 

arise in Saskatchewan in the urban areas, since loans in these areas are protected from the provision of 

The Farm Security Act by the Housing Act. 

 

“Chapter 246, Revised Statutes of Saskatchewan, is amended by the Statutes of Saskatchewan, 

Chapter 63, Section 12, Session 1954.” 

 

Didn’t this Government know, Mr. Speaker, when they amended the Act to admit the urban areas to the 

provisions of this Act that they were excluding the farmers from this Act? It’s a crime against the rural 

people of this province, that now in the dying days of this last Session, they come along and bring this 

thing forward. It is something like when they took the expropriation clause out of the Crown 

Corporations Act, only this is far, far more important to the people of the province of Saskatchewan – 

the poor people for whom they plead and cry and pray. They pretend to be their friends, but there has 

never been such a dastardly thing put over the people of this province by any Government, and I say so, 

absolutely knowing the injustice done to the rural people of Saskatchewan. 

 

No, the Government talk about sewer and water, Mr. Speaker. The people of this province have to have 

the amended law to take advantage of Dominion legislation – now what are these fellows here going to 

spend their money on? They didn’t need to. All they had to do was to exempt the Housing Act from the 

provision of The Farm Security Act in this province, and the people in this province for the last 12 years 

could have had access to sewer and water for the farmer. You would have seen many farmers today, 

probably living on their farms instead of some rented apartment in some apartment building in the city 

of Regina. But that is being prevented; that is being held back; that is being denied to the people of this 

province. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  For 16 years. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  For nearly 16 years. I haven’t got the details, but I can imagine it would be about 16 

years. Now, what is the condition? This Government is going to assist to put in sewer and water 

systems. That is all very well. But not until now in the dying hours of this Legislature. After 16 years in 

office, and after having obstructed the operation of the Housing Act in Saskatchewan, the rural areas, 

they are at last amending The Farm Security Act to permit the rural people to take advantage of this 

beneficial Federal legislation. 

 

I would say to them to come out and tell the truth to the rural people of the province now, and don’t try 

to hide under any distortion or make-believe or fairy-tales. You have denied the people that right, and it 

is a crime against the people of the province of Saskatchewan who live in the rural areas. Then they 

pretend they don’t know,. The Minister of Social Services last year said he understood that this Act 

wasn’t operating in the rural part of the province of Saskatchewan. In 1954 – only six years ago 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

 

34 

they amended the Act to admit the urban areas of the province of Saskatchewan, to be covered, and then 

he understood that it wasn’t operating in the rural areas! This is the second or third time that I have 

brought this condition up on the floor of this House to the attention of the Government, but they just 

laughed at me. Now they are coming along and want to capitalize on it, so that they will have something 

to tell the people at the next election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if there was ever a despicable action taken by any Government, that’s it. 

 

Mr. Alex Cameron (Maple Creek):  Mr. Speaker, I want to add my voice to this, too, and say that at 

long last we have legislation brought in that we have been advocating in this House, and I have been for 

at least the past 12 years, and it is an amazing thing. When it comes to an election and the closer they are 

to the wire, how much closer they come to the Liberal way of thinking when they go to the people. For 

so many years, we have been pointing out to them that under this vicious legislation, and that is what it 

was, that the farm people of Saskatchewan have had no opportunity to qualify for assistance under the 

national Housing Act, and that farmers in Alberta and farmers in Manitoba and every other province of 

Canada, have had equal rights with every other citizen in applying for assistance to build farm homes. 

Here in the province of Saskatchewan is the lonely place in which that curtain was put up, and you said 

to the National Housing people, “You can operate in any other province, but you cannot operate in 

Saskatchewan”, and you have denied for 16 years the rights of the Saskatchewan farmers who were able 

to come in during those years, when labour was cheaper, when materials were cheaper, when they could 

have put these homes on to the farms, and today they would have been paid for. 

 

The member for Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) the other day said in his particular area was what they 

needed most was houses, instead of sewer and water, because they first had to have the houses to put the 

sewer and water in. There are many instances all across Saskatchewan, where they have to build a house 

first before they can put in sewer and water, and if it had not been for that restricted legislation, those 

houses would have been there. 

 

Another think that has been one of the greatest detriments to the young people being able to establish 

themselves in farming in this province, because everybody who went to sell out the farm was unable to 

take his young neighbour and permit him to buy this land under the instalment plan, because he said, 

“Under this particular Act, I want to cash”, and those young people did not have the cash to buy. You 

put the farmer into a position where he either has to sell for cash, or he can’t sell at all, and you put the 

other farmer – the young man who had his quarter-section or his half-section, or was trying to get some 

assistance to build his home, he couldn’t apply for it. He was able to go under the Act to get 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

35 

machinery, to operate his farm under the Federal Loan Act; he was able to buy a truck on which the 

banks were guaranteed against a loss, but when it came to establishing a home for his family, the farmer 

in Saskatchewan is the only one in all of Canada who couldn’t take advantage of this legislation which 

was placed on the Statute Books – millions of dollars, in order to assist him to do so. Then today, after 

all those years, they came in timidly with this amendment. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Coming through the back door. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  Coming through the back door, and saying to the people, “Now you can do it”, when 

prices are the highest in history; when materials have never been so high, not only that; during the years 

when we have had bumper crops, during the years when the prices of grain was higher than it is today, 

during the years when the farmer had money in his pocket, with which he could have established 

himself, the legislation wasn’t there. Today, when the farmer has no money in his pocket, and the bins 

are almost empty, then you come along and say, “We’re very generous to you. Now we’re going to give 

you that rights to have access to something which you should have had 16 years ago. It is just 

unfortunate that you are not in a position to take advantage of it.” 

 

I say that has been one of the blots on the record of this Government, that for 16 years they have denied 

the farm population the right to qualify under National Housing Act; there has been discrimination in 

favour of the urban dweller and against the farm population. We have pointed out discrimination in that, 

together with discrimination in many other things, and it’s funny when you come under the wires at an 

election, then, in order to induce the farmers to take a look at what you are doing, and to put him in a 

more favourable frame of mind until the election is over, you say, “Well boys, we’re sorry if we have 

inconvenienced you for 16 years; but we’re about to correct it now, if you are in a position to help 

yourself to do so.” It’s a grand time to bring it in. We welcome it, but at the same time while we 

welcome the Bill, we cannot but express our feelings on the actions of this Government all during those 

years, towards the farm population of this province, in denying them the right under The Housing Act. 

 

That’s not going down easy with the farm population, and I am sure they won’t forget all of that ill-will 

within the next few months. There will be very few houses built before the next election, when they turn 

around and see the costs today, and the costs of interest, and the amount of money in the pocket, 

compared to what they could have done 12 or 15 years ago. They will know at whom to point their 

finger, and where the cause was, and who was the cause of the discrimination against the rural areas 

while, at the same time, favouring the rural areas. 

 

Mr. A.L.S. Brown (Bengough):  Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask if, in the provinces of Alberta and 

Manitoba 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

 

36 

where there is no protection for the farmers in this respect, were there any loans made to the farmers in 

those provinces? 

 

Mr. Cameron:  Can you clarify your question? 

 

Mr. A.L.S. Brown:  Under the National Housing Act, in the province of Alberta and Manitoba, 

where there is no protection for the farmers, were any loans made? 

 

Mr. Cameron:  Were there loans made? Certainly there were loans made to Alberta and Manitoba 

farmers, and the farmers have the freedom of choice to go to the National Housing Act and arrange for 

their loans. I don’t see what question there is there. They at least had the freedom of choice; they were 

not restricted by that discriminatory legislation. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  This article, Mr. Speaker, surely exposes somewhat… 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! Order! It is my duty to inform you that the hon. Minister is about to close the 

debate, and those wishing to speak may do so now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bentley (Closing):  Mr. Speaker, when I moved second reading of this Bill after 

introducing it, and outlining the principles, I didn’t expect to raise a political row about it. I thought it 

would be something that might be reasonably well know in the House, and welcomed. However, now 

that a political storm has been raised, it will have to be answered, and it will be answered very definitely 

and effectively, when I move the adjournment of the debate. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  Mr. Speaker, he can’t move the adjournment of the debate. It’s completely out of 

order. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  Just on a point of order, Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member, if this were 

Wednesday, for example, and the hon. member spoke to 5:30 o’clock and had not finished his speech, 

he would then adjourn the debate. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  No, he wouldn’t. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  Oh yes. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  One person at a time, please! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  I’m only trying to help. I don’t think there is any question that he can 

adjourn the debate, if the Speaker so rules, and if the House votes that he cannot adjourn the debate. . .  



 

March 10, 1960 

 

37 

Mr. Cameron:  On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, I had pointed out that you had announced that the 

Speaker is about to close the debate, and therefore whoever wishes to speak should do so now. He is up 

closing the debate, and if he is going to adjourn the debate, going to bring in further subject matter into 

what he has already said, then of course it must open the debate up wide-open again. He can’t use those 

tactics both ways – you can’t have it both ways, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  The hon. member does not have the privilege of introducing new material in closing 

the debate. Is leave granted that the hon. Minister adjourn the debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: No! 

 

The question being put on the proposed adjournment of the Debate, it was agreed to on the recorded 

division 31 to 15. 

 

Bill No. 53 – An Act to amend The Town Act 

 

Hon. L.F. McIntosh (Minister of Municipal Affairs):  Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments to The 

Town Act do not consist of many new principles, but I think I would just like to mention one or two: in 

the first place, the S.U.M.A. felt that the remuneration for councillors in towns, villages and cities was 

too low. Provisions are made for a slight increase there. Provisions are also made in the way of 

amendments to The Town Act to have the mayors’ term of office expire – in the same year. An 

amendment was necessary in cases where a mayor might resign in between the election seasons and 

these provisions are made that he may carry on for the balance of the term of the former mayor and his 

term of office would expire at the same time as the mayors’ offices expire throughout the province. 

Then, there is a temporary piece of legislation to make possible for the mayors’ term of office of the 

towns of Kyle and Langenburg, to expire at the end of a two-year period. That is when the other mayors’ 

term of office also expires. 

 

These are provisions made in The town Act, for the town council to enter into an agreement with the 

developer of a piece of land whereby the developer can, if the agreement is entered into, take over the 

laying of the sewer and water, and of course charge it against the land. Provisions are also made in The 

Town Act, as well as the City Act, for the town council to enter into an agreement with the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation in connection with the inside gas incinerators, and the council would 

enter into an agreement with the Power corporation, and be in a position to charge back against the 

person or persons who installed gas incinerators the cost of operating those incinerators. I think the 

principal amendments are (1) the borrowing powers are raised from 15 to 20 per cent of the taxable 

assessment, and (2) debentures issued for such things as sewer and water are excluded from the general 

borrowing 



 

March 10, 1960 

 

 

38 

 

powers. Debentures can be issued under this amendment based on the security of the returns from the 

use of sewer and water without interfering with the general borrowing powers of the town. 

 

There has been brought to our attention one or two examples where some abuses have crept in where a 

town might have within its boundaries a certain amount of agricultural land that is used exclusively for 

agricultural purposes, and the owners entered into an agreement with the Town Council whereby they 

fix a tax rate over the period of four or five years, depending upon the term of the agreement. There have 

been some instances where the owner of the property. . .  

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! Order! Does the hon. Minister care to go on? It is now past 5:30 o’clock. 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I will just finish this and that will be it, if you don’t mind. 

There have been instances where the owner of the property has put up an additional building and has 

rented that building, and has gathered taxes on it. Those abuses have crept in and this amendment is for 

the purpose of trying to eliminate abuses. The other amendments can be dealt with in Committee, Mr. 

Speaker. I move second reading of an Act to amend The Town Act. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

Premier Douglas:  It is the general agreement on both sides of the House that the Members wanted to 

have this evening free because so many of them have councillors and reeves from their own 

constituencies in the city and, therefore, if it is generally agreeable to all parts of the House, I would like 

to move that the House do now adjourn. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 5:35 o’clock p.m. 


