




















































Hansard: March 11, 1960


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

22nd Day 

 

Friday, March 11, 1960 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): Before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I would like to draw 

the attention of the Assembly to some very fine looking people in the upper Gallery. These young 

people are from the Rush lake area, 4-H Club and are here under the leadership of Mr. Bill Wallace. 

Some of the others in the group are from the Rush Lake Homecraft 4-H Club under the leadership of 

Mrs. George. We are very glad to have them with us today, and I think they have enjoyed the tour of the 

building, and hope their stay with us this afternoon will be both pleasant and profitable. 

 

Mrs. Cooper (Regina City):  I would also like to call the attention of the members of the Legislature 

to a fine group of students from the Athabasca School up here in the Speaker’s gallery, with their 

teacher, Mr. MacDonald, and I notice in the Public gallery, also, we have another group of Regina 

students, with their teacher, Mr. Anderson. I am sure we all welcome them very much here today, and 

hope they will enjoy their stay and that they will feel it was very much worthwhile. 

 

STATEMENT RE TRANSCRIPT 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River):  Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I would 

like to draw to your attention the fact that on Monday evening when I was speaking in this House for 

about an hour and thirty minutes, the last 25 minutes of my address was not recorded on the tape, or on 

the journals of this House, and I understand that the machine worked first-class the next day. Now, I 

would like to have some explanation, if there is an explanation to be given. That there should be a blank 

on the record of my speech; up to that particular minute, it is very good – excellent, but there is just a 

blank – it went off for 25 minutes. 



 

March 11, 1960 

 

 

2 

Premier Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, this is no doubt something that Your Honour will want to look into, 

since the equipment is under your direction. I think it is understood, of course, that there is a limit to 

what even a machine can stand! But I would like to say that exactly the same thing happened in my own 

case, in a speech, and also with the Minister of Mineral Resources, and also to the Provincial Treasurer. 

This has happened several times, and I am sure it is a matter of checking to see whether or not there is 

some defect in the equipment. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  Mr. Speaker, might I point out, in reference to myself. In one speech that I made, in 

particular, there was nothing on the record – I had to go the next morning and dictate everything I said 

the day before. 

 

Mr. Loptson: Coming back to the defect in the recording system, I might also add to what has 

already been said; there were a couple of paragraphs of what I said which were missed out from my 

speech. I sometimes thought that maybe I was the only one, but I see I have lots of company. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  I will certainly check into this matter. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Might I be permitted to ask you a question, Mr. Speaker? Is not the conduct of this 

House, and everything here under your care? 

 

Mr. Speaker:  That is true. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  I didn’t understand what the Premier said, but I know it was a slur of some kind, and 

I just wanted to tell him that I. . .  

 

Premier Douglas:  It was no slur, Mr. Speaker. I pointed out that this equipment is under your 

jurisdiction, and I was quite sure you would have the matter checked, to see if there was a defect, 

because a number of members have had the same experience. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  You said there was a limit. . .  

 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington):  You said there was a limit to what any machine could stand! 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Oh, can’t you take a little joke. 

 

Premier Douglas:  You’ve got a sense of humour like a suet pudding! 

 

Mr. McCarthy:  Same to you! 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! Order! 



 

March 11, 1960 

 

3 

CONGRATULATIONS TO RICHARDSON RINK 

 

Premier Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all hon. members will be delighted at the news that the 

Richardson Rink from Regina has again, for two years in a row, won the MacDonald Brier Curling 

Championship. I have wired the Richardson Rink, and I felt sure I was safe in expressing an opinion of 

the members on both sides of the House, in saying how proud the people of Saskatchewan are, of the 

fine performance which they have given at Fort William, and how delighted they are that once more 

their efforts had resulted in victory. When they go now to Scotland, to take part in the further contests, 

while you and I, Mr. Speaker, may agree that the Scottish people, we hope that the Saskatchewan rink 

will prove to be even better curlers than the people of Scotland. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas (Minister of Highways):  Mr. Speaker, I would like to call the attention of this 

Assembly to the fine group of young people who are in the gallery to your left. They are from the 

Milden High School, with their principal, Mr. McDonald. Milden, as you know, is in the very heart of 

the wheat belt of the province, and is one of the very fine progressive communities in that area. I know 

you will join with me in welcoming this fine group of young people. I have just been asked whether they 

came in on the Greyhound Bus. Certainly not, they came in on a Saskatchewan Transportation Bus. 

 

CRITICISM OF NEWSPAPER ARTICLE 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas:  I have another matter which may not be so agreeable, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 

you may recall I raised on the Orders of the Day a question of the editorial which appeared in the March 

10 issue of the ‘Leader-Post’. I didn’t think too much about it yesterday, because I gave the answer to 

this question and expected that it would receive the same prominence that was given the editorial. 

However, this morning I find there is a very small article buried in one of the back pages of the paper, 

and in view of the vicious and malicious character of this editorial, I find that I have no recourse but 

again to raise the matter today. I must insist that the ‘Leader-Post’ give the answer which I gave them 

yesterday the same prominence as was given to this very malicious article. 

 

I want to point out that ordinarily I would pass this up, but there is an inclination on the part of some 

people who I would call irresponsible, while in the country, of accusing this Government of being 

corrupt. I am sure that I want to assure you, Mr. Speaker, that I am not going to take any chance of 

anyone throwing up to me that I was accused of corruption, and did not take the opportunity of denying 

it in this House. 



 

March 11, 1960 

 

 

4 

I am asking that the ‘Leader-Post’ give the same prominence to the information which I gave them 

yesterday, and which I shall repeat for your benefit. Yesterday I pointed out that the St. Mary’s School 

was purchased by the Department of Public Works for a total of $51,000; the McAra property was 

bought for $37,000, and the re-conversion and renovation to those properties cost $32,075, making a 

total of $120,625.91, which was the information I gave the Crown Corporations the other day, and that 

is the answer to it. 

 

Again, I want to assure you there was no reason for this malicious article appearing, because this 

information has been given in this House on a number of occasions before. I should ask for an apology 

from the ‘Leader-Post’ for this malicious article. 

 

Mr. D.T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would 

like to draw your attention to the ‘Saskatchewan News’ which was placed on our desks, and the headline 

states, ‘Red Ink Erased’, and goes on to give extracts from the budget address of the Provincial 

Treasurer. I wonder if, in view of the fact that this is put out by the Government of Saskatchewan, will 

the financial critic for the Opposition have the same privilege of putting part of his reply into this 

publication? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines (Provincial Treasurer):  The Provincial Treasurer had no part in giving this statement 

to the Bureau at all. The Department of Travel and Information did this on their own, and I believe it has 

been customary in the past, in the next issue, to take extracts from the address of the financial critic. 

That has been the custom in the past. 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek):  Mr. Speaker, I would like to verify that point. Extracts from the 

financial critic’s speech delivered was carried one year. It didn’t appear after that. I’m not concerned 

about whether or not it carried the financial critic’s remarks, but this is a pamphlet that is published by 

the taxpayers’ money to keep the people informed. There is nothing that appears in there on any 

speeches that have ever been made in the House or any activities pertaining to the public, or anything of 

the affairs of the Government. It is only the affairs of the C.C.F., and when you are talking about press 

periodicals, as you were today, with the ‘Leader-Post’ and others, I would say that you have hundreds of 

thousands of dollars that have been put out, mailed out free of charge to everyone in the province, and 

all over the continent; it is nothing but a C.C.F. propaganda bureau that gives a distorted figure, even of 

the budget and what was said in the budget. 

 

Opposition Members:  Hear! Hear! 



 

March 11, 1960 

 

5 

Mr. Cameron:  There are statements made in here attributed to the Provincial Treasurer, that do not 

appear in the Provincial Treasurer’s speech as recorded here in the House, and you talk about 

responsible press reports. That is put out to the people of Saskatchewan in every household, and paid for 

by the taxpayers. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Don’t forget the taxpayers have to pay for it. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 44 – An Act respecting the Improvement of Family Farms 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture):  Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of satisfaction that I 

move second reading of Bill No. 44. There is some precedent for legislation providing a specific service 

within the Department of Agriculture. The principal previous legislation giving authority for specific 

agricultural services within the Department was the Agricultural Representatives Act, passed in 1945. I 

should say in that connection, Mr. Speaker, this was the first legislation placed on the Statute Books of 

this province, officially setting up an Agricultural Representative Service. Previous to 1945, the Ag. 

Rep. service was, as a consequence, very limited, when we had some 21 agricultural representatives at 

that time. The provision of specific legislation proves the interest of the Government in providing 

services which it hopes will continue to expand. The services of the agricultural representatives branch 

is an example, and has expanded tremendously over the years since the Act was passed. 

 

The general purpose of the legislation I have under discussion is to provide not only assistance for the 

installation of water and sewerage facilities on farmsteads, although this work will be the immediate 

general purpose of this Act is to advance the rural economy and raise rural living standards by providing 

technical construction installation services, and financial assistance for the development, improvement 

and modernization of farmsteads and rural building sites, and for the relocation of farm buildings. I 

should mention, in connection with this legislation, it is intended to go on from improving the farmstead 

itself, in terms of water and sewerage facilities, to plan the best possible lay-out of buildings for the 

purpose of labour efficiency, and the beautification of the farmstead. In other words, to provide a 

complete complementary set of services within the department which will devote its exclusive energies 

towards improving rural living, generally, and making farm living and farm surroundings more 

attractive. 



 

March 11, 1960 

 

 

6 

We hope this program will expand, as did the program under the Agricultural Representatives 

legislation, from a small beginning of some 21 ag. reps. to 41 agricultural representative districts, with 

four supervisors, a farm management division of five men and provision is also made for district board 

representation from each municipality. A committee is formed in each municipality, and remunerations 

are being made available to them, so as a result of specific legislation for a specific service, we have 

seen tremendous expansion. 

 

Another good example of legislation to set up a specific service within the Department would be the 

Agricultural Machinery Act, under which the Farm Machinery Board operates in the. . .  

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek):  Mr. Speaker, may I ask what Bill is the hon. Minister discussing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  Mr. Speaker, I am merely citing some precedents for a specific piece of legislation 

being introduced in this House, to provide a special service and a new branch within the Department of 

Agriculture. 

 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington): You’re making a political speech! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  The reason that this legislation is brought in at this time is not because there is an 

election in the offing. the usual practice of political-minded Governments is to make promises before an 

election… 

 

Mr. Cameron:  Did you have that written, too? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  …that something will be done after such party is elected. However, we have 

chosen to bring in this legislation in the fiscal year 1960-61 for the purpose of taking another forward 

step for improved rural living conditions, and for no other reason, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know my friends opposite find it hard to understand this, and I propose, in the course of giving second 

reading to this Bill, to bring out some of their contentions, and the complete lack of foundation to their 

contention. 

 

The Government, Mr. Speaker, a number of years ago, embarked on a long-term plan to improve rural 

living. The rural electrification program was the first step in this direction. This program received 

political criticism, too, Mr. Speaker, much the same as other programs have received over the years. 

These programs are, incidentally, still being sniped at. As I said before in this House, I can judge the 

merits of the beneficial effects of a Government program, by the kind of opposition we get, and the kind 

of criticism we get from the members opposite. 



 

March 11, 1960 

 

7 

Government Members:  Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Cameron:  We haven’t had a chance to speak on it, yet. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  The second significant step, Mr. Speaker, taken in connection with the improved 

farm living, was the grid road system, or the provision of better transportation services from farms to 

marketing centres to shopping centres, and to provide transportation to children going to school. It is 

now felt that since the rural electrification program is nearing completion, although not all farms in the 

province are wired for electricity, nevertheless practically all farms in the province are now within reach 

of obtaining the service when they desire it. Therefore, this is the logical time to take two additional 

steps to complete the Government’s overall program, and to improve rural services, and raise living 

standards by providing legislative authority to bring water and sewer facilities to our farm people. This 

legislation will provide such services to farmsteads, and this is the third step, taken as a part of this 

overall program directed towards improved rural living. 

 

The fourth step is, to provide water and sewerage facilities to towns and villages, which legislation will 

be introduced by my colleague, the hon. Minister of Municipal Affairs. These combined four programs 

will round out the Government’s long-term plans for better rural living, in keeping with modern trends. 

 

One may ask why is this new legislation, and these new services necessary. Well, there are two good 

reasons. One, most urban centres lack these facilities, and only 10 per cent of Saskatchewan’s 

farmsteads have the modern convenience of water in the home. Two, since the rural electrification 

program is nearing completion, it is now possible to provide the conveniences of water and sewerages 

facilities. The rural electrification program was a basic service, necessary to make possible these follow-

up programs. There will be many problems involved, as there were with the power program. There will 

be the problem of water supply; the problem of varying circumstances and conditions from farm to farm, 

which will vary greatly from farmstead to farmstead; distance from water supplies will be an important 

factor. In the matter of water supply, as everyone knows, assistance is available for storage of surface 

water under P.F.R.A., and above the P.F.R.A. line the Provincial Government itself provides similar 

assistance for the construction of dug-outs and small reservoirs. 

 

The most unique and most important part of this legislation is the provision of technical assistance and 

the purchase of materials. The technical assistance will be made available to farmers without cost. The 

lack of technical assistance on a public service basis has been the retarding factor in all programs 

directed towards modernizing farmsteads. 



 

March 11, 1960 

 

 

8 

Loans have been made available in the past, Mr. Speaker, by various other provincial governments, and 

by the Federal Government as well, but this has not resulted in any great degree of farmstead 

improvement. So I say that these added services, these added technical services, plus the bulk purchase 

of primary materials which will greatly reduce the costs, particularly in the light of the farmers’ severe 

financial position, and also the bulk purchase of pumps and other primary supplies, pipes, septic tanks, 

materials associated with bringing the water to the home, and also providing these disposal facilities all 

will encourage, we believe, a tremendous interest in this program. 

 

In the matter of bulk purchase, I refer to the provision in this legislation for a $3 million advance 

account, or a revolving fund which will provide for the bulk purchase of materials. It is our hope to 

make these materials available to farmers at greatly reduced costs not only because of savings involved 

in bulk purchases, but also the savings in transportation costs; savings in both transportation costs for 

materials and for travelling expenses associated with the work of the technical staff, will be greatly 

reduced by initiating this program on a group basis, somewhat similar to the procedure followed in the 

rural electrification program. 

 

This legislation also provides authority for guaranteeing loans made by the Credit Union to farms for the 

construction and installation of water and sewerage facilities under a program sponsored by the Family 

Farm Improvement Branch. The legislation also provides authority for making direct financial grants. In 

the coming year, direct cash grants of 15 per cent of the installation costs will be available to farmers 

who participate in the program, up to a maximum of $300. 

 

It has been mentioned in this House by the members opposite, that this assistance, by some method of 

calculation completely foreign to me, and I am sure everyone else – I believe it was the hon. member for 

Maple Creek arrived at the. . .  

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Cameron:  Is the hon. Minister discussing the budget? 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! The hon. member may not refer to. . .  

 

Mr. Cameron:  Absolutely not, He tries to get away with everything! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  I am aware I was referring to a matter that was raised in a previous debate, but I 

want to say to the House, for the benefit of the hon. member. . .  



 

March 11, 1960 

 

9 

Mr. Cameron:  Mr. Speaker, again on a point of privilege, or a point of order. . .  

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Cameron:  . . . he’s referring to a debate that has been voted on, and passed in this House. He 

can’t refer to things that I have said in a past debate, without giving me the opportunity to answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, that in order to correct any false impressions, the amount 

of available cash grant to any farmer taking part in this program is a 15 per cent cash grant up to a 

maximum of $300. Therefore, any type of criticism of this kind is unjustified. 

 

Mrs. Batten (Humboldt):  Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. Minister a question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  I’m saying that the people of this province know the reason the Opposition speaks 

so unceasingly, criticizes, condemns, snipes at and talks so much against such Government programs, is 

simply because they haven’t any program of their own worth talking about. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  Mr. Speaker, on another point of order. I don’t wish to keep interrupting the hon. 

Minister, but he is introducing a Bill, and there is nothing that he has spoken of yet that has reference to 

this Bill. In those few last remarks of his, he is making a political speech on the introduction of a Bill 

that has not yet been brought before the House. We have had no opportunity yet even to discuss it, let 

alone make comment on it. 

 

Mr. Gardiner (Melville):  Just because he’s on the air, he knows we can’t answer him. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  I think the hon. member for Maple Creek’s point is well taken. I would ask the hon. 

Minister to stay with this subject. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  Mr. Speaker, I feel very sorry if the hon. members across the way object, but we 

are talking about the introduction of legislation which will produce very beneficial programs for the 

farm people of this province. Budgetary provision has already been made for carrying out the program 

under this legislation, in the amount of $575,000. This will provide technical services and sufficient 

funds to pay the above grants, we hope, in the coming year, to some 1,500 farmsteads. This is an 

ambitious program for the first year of operation. This program and this budget, contrary to the opinions 

expressed outside and inside this House, will grow tremendously as it gathers momentum in the years 

ahead, and we hope it will. 



 

March 11, 1960 

 

 

10 

To sum up, Mr. Speaker, there are available credit facilities under the Family Farm Improvement Act, 

by way of guaranteed loans to Credit Unions, earned assistance grants of 15 per cent up to a $300 

maximum, and free technical services. I might say, with reference to technical services, this is a very 

important provision in this legislation, as I previously mentioned. I believe this has been one of the 

deterrents to farmers against putting in these installations. When one realized that as much as eight hours 

will be spent on each individual farm, laying out the design of the works, making the estimate of cost for 

the materials, which we hope we can then send to that farmstead as a package. As the result of the 

assessment made, an appraisal of cost, and estimate of materials, we can package the materials for each 

of the farmsteads, and have it on hand, on actual location when the work of installation gets under way. 

 

Aside from the above help, it is, of course, expected that a farmer will make financial arrangements in 

advance to pay for the materials and the actual installation work undertaken by the Department. In other 

words, the Department, by agreement with the farmer, undertakes to provide the services at greatly 

reduced cost. 

 

I am aware, Mr. Speaker, that there are financial problems insofar as the farmer is concerned. I am also 

aware that there are many homes on the Saskatchewan prairie that need replacing, but can one wait for a 

program of this kind until everybody has a new home? Obviously, a start must be made some time. 

Thank goodness that the rural electrification program was not delayed until most farmers had new 

houses. 

 

It has been suggested, and I hope I am not out of order now, Mr. Speaker, because I am going to refer to 

a statement made only yesterday by an hon. member opposite. I speak of a statement attributed to the 

hon. member for Humboldt, again knocking this program, and here is what she had to say yesterday: 

 

“It’s a sad plight, says the woman lawyer legislator acidly”. 

 

We’re quite used to her acid expressions, Mr. Speaker, but to go on with the quote: 

 

“when the government talks about giving you the more abundant life it ends up by giving you no more 

than flush toilets. That is what all these promises of water and sewerage mean and they mean mighty 

little to those who lack even a decent home to put the toilet in”. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, maybe my hon. friends opposite won’t applaud so loudly when I remind them of 

what another prominent Liberal, who is a member of the city council and was a Liberal candidate in this 

city, said. In the last election the most unusual assertion in criticizing 



 

March 11, 1960 

 

11 

the Power Corporation that they were bringing electricity to poverty-ridden homes, shacks and igloos. I 

would suggest to the hon. member for Humboldt that she should ask this gentleman to have a little more 

regard for the circumstances of our farm people before talking in those terms about them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this suggestion that we should wait until everyone has a new home before we start this 

program is perhaps the reason why the Liberals. . .  

 

Mrs. Batten:  Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. The hon. member doesn’t want to answer questions, 

but on a point of order. The hon. member has brought in that they are going to pay 15 per cent of the 

cost up to $300, but I can’t find it anywhere in the Act. I don’t know if he is talking about this Bill. It is 

impossible for us to follow this Bill, or the principle of the Bill, in the rantings of the hon. member, and 

certainly I can’t reply to the statements he has made as I have already spoken in this debate and have had 

no opportunity to answer him. 

 

Premier Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, on the point of order, I would submit that a Minister introducing 

second reading of a Bill, in discussing the principle of the Bill, has a perfect right to outline to the House 

what sums of money will be spent, what provision is intended to be put in the regulations under the Act 

and he is quite within his rights in telling what those regulations will be. How are the hon. members 

going to vote on the Bill unless they know what the provisions are? 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! Order! There will be an opportunity for the hon. members to debate this before 

second reading. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Humboldt is a lawyer and she should read the 

provisions in the Act which will permit the giving of financial aid, and the provisions under which 

regulations can be made. When I introduce the subject of grants, as they are associated with this 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, I submit that I am not out of order. 

 

Everyone knows that new farm homes would have meant little without rural electricity. Furthermore, 

rural electrification is a basic service requirement to make possible the benefits of water and sewerage 

installations. I hope, Mr. Speaker, I am not out of order when I suggest that this is a basic requirement 

and a forerunner to this legislation. I am certainly not ranging over wider fields than my hon. friends 

opposite have, throughout the debate during this session. The rural electrification program is nearing 

completion and the next logical step has now been taken. Instead of retarding the building of 



 

March 11, 1960 

 

 

12 

new farm homes, the rural electrification program has encouraged the building of new farm homes. This 

program will also encourage the building and construction of not only new homes, but homes with 

modern facilities. 

 

I stated previously that I am aware of the farmers’ financial position, perhaps more so than anyone else 

in the House. I am aware of the cost-price squeeze problem. We were aware of the farm income problem 

and the farmers’ financial ability to finance new services when the rural electrification program was 

introduced, when the grid road program was introduced, when the hospital plan was introduced, and 

when the University Hospital was built. We knew all this, but we also knew that we could not afford to 

wait until all the economic problems of the farmer were solved by our Federal Government, before 

discharging our responsibility in our own field of jurisdiction. Now, this is a field of jurisdiction where 

we have a responsibility, and where we are trying to do our best within our resources and financial 

means to improve rural living conditions for our farm people. 

 

All of these programs not only mean financial problems to the farmer, but present serious problems of 

financing to the Government as well, which I know all sensible people throughout the province will 

appreciate. Criticism has already been levelled at this program will appreciate. Criticism has already 

been levelled at this program and this legislation, that it wouldn’t put anything in the farmers’ pockets. 

This legislation wasn’t intended to put money in the farmers’ pockets. It was intended, though, to help 

the farmers save money, in providing these modern services and conveniences. 

 

Other programs that I have mentioned in another debate have certainly assisted the farmers financially. I 

would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that it is my understanding the Province of Manitoba is bringing in a 

plan very much similar to our own, and I hope the leader of the Conservative party in this province will 

cease to criticize this program, in view of the fact that his political colleagues in Manitoba have now 

seen fit to follow the lead given here. 

 

There are, though, real, compensating financial benefits to the farmers. What do they mean? To the 

farmer it means increased capital value to his farmstead, it means improved labour efficiency, and to the 

housewife, greater convenience, greater labour efficiency and, above all, greater comfort for the entire 

family. What does it mean to business? To business, generally, increased demands for various 

appliances and articles associated with improved living and more employment, generally. The power 

program proves this assertion to by right. People throughout Saskatchewan and business people, 

particularly in the small towns, have realized the beneficial effects in their businesses, as a result of the 

rural electrification program. I predict that this program will result in similar beneficial effects, not only 

for the farmer, not only in terms of employment, but to business generally. 



 

March 11, 1960 

 

13 

Now, Mr. Speaker, to sum up: completion of the plans I have enumerated, including the services under 

the provisions of this legislation, will round out the Government’s long-term program for improved 

living. They are, the rural electrification program, the grid program, and now the water and sewerage 

assistance program to farmsteads, towns and villages. It is my firm belief that these combined programs 

have already, and will in the future, do more toward improved living conditions, in making farming 

more attractive, especially to our young people, than any other program in operation to date. 

 

With these few well-chosen words, Mr. Speaker, I take great pleasure in moving second reading to the 

Bill. 

 

Mr. A.L.S. Brown (Bengough):  Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

Bill No. 55 – An Act to provide for Assistance to certain Municipalities in the Establishment or 

Improvement of Waterworks and Sewerage Systems. 

 

Hon. L.F. McIntosh (Prince Albert):  Mr. Speaker, in rising to move second reading of Bill No. 55, 

an Act to provide for Assistance to Certain Municipalities in the Establishment or Improvement of 

Waterworks and Sewerage Systems, I have a pretty deep appreciation of the economic problems 

associated with an adequate water supply, not only for the livestock industry in the province of 

Saskatchewan, but also an adequate and economic water supply for the large number of towns and 

villages where a great many of our citizens of the province live. 

 

As a matter of information, we now have 106 towns in the province of Saskatchewan, with a total 

population of 120,873. We have 373 villages with a population of 88,914. In our towns they range from 

a low of 165 people to a high of just under 5,000, and in our villages they range from a low of some 28 

to a high of some 900 in the village of Big River. Now, with 106 towns and 373 villages, there are 4 

towns and 3 villages with a water system only. There are 44 towns with water and sewer and there are 

14 towns and 2 villages with a sewer system only. That does indicate that a very large number of our 

towns and villages, embracing a very substantial number of people, are without these modern 

conveniences. 

 

Naturally, one of the first things in supplying these amenities to our smaller urban communities is the 

available water supply. I suppose, to some extent, at least, we are fortunate in having two main 



 

March 11, 1960 

 

 

14 

rivers spanning the province of Saskatchewan, the North and South Saskatchewan River. In addition, 

too, we have some smaller rivers such as the Carrot River and the Souris River and other smaller 

streams. In speaking of a supply of water, we must naturally keep in mind the available supply of water 

following the construction of the South Saskatchewan River Dam. The engineers suggest there will be a 

lake created behind the dam of some 145 miles in length. There will be possibilities of taking water from 

this source to supply some of the communities in that vicinity, in that part of our province. 

 

Then, of considerable interest to those who want sewer and water, will be the flow of water down the 

Qu’Appelle Valley, from a point near Elbow, on down the Qu’Appelle Valley, flowing eastward to the 

Manitoba boundary. It is our understanding that when the South Saskatchewan River Dam is completed, 

there will be an available supply of water under control flowing down through the Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

If we go further north on the Saskatchewan River, we have the Squaw Rapids dam and back of that dam 

will be created a lake of some 45 miles in length. It is suggested by the engineers that at one point it will 

be some 10 miles in width. That body of water, as a result of the Saskatchewan River Dam, will be, as I 

stated before, of considerable interest to those who want, not only water for their homes, but also for 

domestic purposes. 

 

I appreciate that there are communities now that have a great deal of difficulty in getting a supply of 

water. One community, in particular, comes to my mind where the council informs me that during the 

summer months the water is hauled in some 4 miles and distributed by pail or in barrels, and each 

householder is charged for the water which they get. In winter months they find it necessary to put up 

ice in order to have a supply of water during the winter months. This is a great inconvenience to a great 

number of people in some sections of the urban communities of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

During 1959 the Saskatchewan Research Councils have done some work, preparatory work, relative to 

the location of a supply of water, particularly surface water, and ways and means by which that surface 

water might be impounded for the use of the people of our own province. 

 

In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, the Department of Mineral Resources, from the samples of the cores 

that they have now in store as a result of the drilling for oil and for gas and for potash, can give some 

indication of the underground structure over quite an area of the province and the possibilities there 

might be of getting water in certain locations in different parts of the province. Then, the Department of 

Agriculture also has a considerable amount of information. 



 

March 11, 1960 

 

15 

available relative, in particular, to the impounding of surface water. So there is information that will be 

of value to the urban and rural communities, relative to an adequate supply of water for their needs. 

 

The Sanitation Branch of the Department of Health, also has a substantial amount of information relative 

to the quality of available supplies of water. I am sure we all appreciate that when we start to move 

water into the homes for general purposes, the question of the quality of water becomes very, very 

important. So, in introducing the second reading of Bill No. 55 we have in mind the Bill itself and the 

regulations that are mentioned in the Bill, covering the assistance that will be available to the urban 

communities. 

 

Might I say, Mr. Speaker, having in mind a number of towns and villages without a supply of water, and 

also having in mind the number of people who live in the different towns and villages, that naturally the 

question of health is a rather important question, and the question of health depends, to quite a degree, 

on the number of people and the services available within the confines of one community. So, no doubt, 

priorities will have to be considered in allocating Government assistance during the first few years of the 

operation of these plans, taking into consideration a number of factors, including the population, and 

also including the stability and the expansion and the public buildings that there might be associated 

with the community itself. 

 

Then there is another question which arises, and that is the question of the availability of the water near 

or close to the gate of the town or the village. It could be located very close; it could be located in ample 

quantities and of good quality. There are other communities where it may be necessary to go out a few 

miles and sink wells some 200 feet or more in depth, in order to get quantity and quality to supply that 

community. There are other communities where it may become necessary to impound surface runoff in 

order to supply the community with the quantity and quality of water necessary. 

 

Then there comes the question of whether or not water is pure enough without being treated, and the 

question arises again as to the type and kind of treatment that will be required before the water can be 

used for human consumption. 

 

One of the first major problems is getting the water in sufficient quantity and quality to the gates for 

distribution among the people of the community. Within a community there might be all the way from, 

possibly 100 up to 300 householder users and, again, quantity is going to be contingent upon the number 

of gallons necessary to supply that community. 



 

March 11, 1960 

 

 

16 

So, a good many things relative to the administration of the Act are left for consideration in the 

regulations and, if I may at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a word or two regarding the 

proposed Act and the regulations thereto. 

 

The main purpose of the legislation is to provide financial assistance to villages and to towns that wish 

to install waterwork systems or sewerage systems or both systems. The first problem will be finding an 

adequate supply of water if the village or town wish to install a waterworks system or a combination 

water-works and sewerage system. Assistance in locating an adequate supply of water will be restricted 

to furnishing the municipalities with such technical information as is available, such as reports of 

research conducted by the Saskatchewan Research Council, which indicates the probabilities of locating 

bodies of ground water and coring from oil wells which indicate deposits of sand or gravel which 

usually contain water. 

 

Once a adequate supply of water is proven, the village or town may then apply for financial assistance in 

constructing or installing a waterworks and sewerage system Applications will be accompanied by 

complete engineering reports, estimates of the annual expected revenues and expenditures, and a 

statement of the number of proposed connections supported by a deposit of $25.00. financial assistance 

will be restricted to a proportion of the capital cost of the waterworks system or a sewerage system; that 

is, once a sufficient supply of water is available, whether it is ground water or surface water, the cost of 

pumping or of building dams, or creating reservoirs, or of transmitting the water to the village or town, 

or building storage tanks in the municipality, or installing plants for the treatment and purification of 

water, or plans for the treatment or disposal of sewage will be considered to be capital cost and, 

therefore, grants may be available for a portion of such cost as calculated by the formula to be decided 

upon. 

 

Now, I might mention here, Mr. Speaker, that last summer there were a number of communities of a 

fairly substantial size that ran short of water. In other words, their supply is not adequate to meet an 

adverse situation such as a comparatively light snowfall in the wintertime and a comparatively dry 

summer. Consequently, they had to go further afield in order to replenish their reservoirs or dams with 

water to take care of their distribution system in their community. The formula to be adopted as the basis 

for the grant structure while not necessarily finalized will, it is expected, take into account the ability of 

the village or town to finance a certain portion of the capital cost of a water or a sewerage system. I 

might be pardoned for just mentioning when I was giving Second Reading to the Town Act, yesterday, I 

made mention of an increase in the percentage of the borrowing power based upon the assessment, also 

making provisions whereby debentures could be issued against the revenues derived from a sewer and 

water 



 

March 11, 1960 

 

17 

system. that gives the town an increased borrowing power under their assessment and makes provisions 

for them to issue debentures against the revenues to be derived from a sale of sewer and water. It is 

expected that every such municipality should be able to finance that portion of capital cost of a 

waterworks system and a sewerage system through the repayment of debentures by providing revenues 

at approximately $6 per month per household, with the added condition that 65 per cent of the 

households capable of being connected to the system will be so connected. In other words, the local 

council make their survey – we are suggesting to them that a minimum of 65 per cent of the 

householders be signed up and a deposit made of some $25 per unit, then their engineering will reveal 

the cost. The Government will sit in with the municipality and authorize a grant up to an amount of, all 

other things being equal, $300 per household connection in the community. 

 

Now, leave out the business connections and the public building connections, because it is generally 

figured that the revenue derived from the use of water in those buildings will be necessary for the 

maintenance of their waterworks for their sewage system, then, where a community may just wish to put 

in a waterworks system (and we’re suggesting their 65 per cent of the household sign-up) the cost in a 

sewer system then, $2 a month for that service. It is estimated at the moment that $6 for the two services 

will, along with the grants available, carry very close to the cost of the installation of those services over 

a period of 20 years. So I think it is rather important to keep in mind the amendments to The Town and 

the Village Act, whereby debentures can be issued against the revenues derived from the sale of the 

sewer and water. Now, we’ve also suggested a ceiling that is, we say $300 per household connection 

with a ceiling of $75,000 per community, whichever is the lesser. 

 

In the regulations themselves provisions are made for the setting up of what is referred to as a Board. 

The Board will consist of a representative of the Department of Health. The Sanitation Director will 

probably be the representative from the Department of Health. Having the knowledge that he has, and 

the connection that he has, I think that he would be a valuable member of the Board. We are also 

suggesting that there be a member from the Local Government Board on this particular Board. As we 

are all aware, the Local Government Board has a great deal of knowledge of the finances and the ability 

of the communities to meet financial responsibilities. We felt it necessary, also, to have a representative 

from the Department of Agriculture because of the use we may be making of the engineers in that 

Department to assist local communities in the locating of available supply of run-off water, where it can 

be found, how it can be impounded, and if there is sufficient quantity there to take care of 



 

March 11, 1960 

 

 

18 

the needs of that community. We felt, also, that a representative from the Department of Municipal 

Affairs with the Minister of Municipal Affairs administering the Act and the regulations in connection 

therewith would be advisable. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, we have some 106 towns and the total population of those 

106 towns, 120,873 people, we have a total of 373 villages with a population of 88,914, and in the 

towns, as I stated before, we have a low of 165 in one community which is still a town, and a high of 

just under 5,000, one of the largest towns. Then in the villages, again, they dropped to a population of 

28, and a high of 900 in the villages. Now, I think probably we can see by that, a change is taking place 

and a shifting of population from some communities to other communities. In other words, some 

communities are expanding and some are not expanding, and it is going to be necessary for the Board to 

keep in mind those communities that are expanding and possibly decide then whether or not those are 

the communities that should have priorities in the establishment of a sewer and water system. 

 

I don’t propose at this time to make any mention of the purchase of debentures by the Government of 

the province of Saskatchewan, other than to say that the community that will be making application for 

sewer and water will be somewhat interested in the disposition of the debentures that they issue against 

that project. In two communities that come to my mind at the moment that placed their debentures on 

the market, they sold well over 50 per cent of the debentures in the local community. The balance of the 

debentures undoubtedly can be purchased, or could be purchased, by the Provincial Government. There 

is this to be said, that when the municipal council, a town or a village council, lays the proper foundation 

with the support of their ratepayers for a sewer or a water system, and if they make a reasonably good 

job of selling the idea to the people, that they can be reasonably assured that a substantial per cent of 

those debentures will be purchased locally and, I am sure, we all appreciate that there is a problem 

associated with going on the money market with a debenture of $100,000, $150,000 or $200,000. There 

are problems associated with marketing those kind of debentures in what is commonly referred to as the 

‘money market’. So, the local purchasing of the debenture maintains a substantial interest in the project 

locally, and it is hoped that the province will be in a position to materially assist these communities that 

have in mind the establishment of a sewer and water system during the present and the coming years. 

 

Now, finally, Mr. Speaker, as I stated before, when a community, be it a town or a village, makes an 

application, the application should be accompanied by a complete engineering report. Then 



 

March 11, 1960 

 

19 

that application goes before the Board and consideration is then given on the basis of the formula that I 

have outlined as to the financial assistance that would be available to that community. Up to the present 

time, it appears as though there are in the neighbourhood of about 20 to 30 communities that have 

advanced some distance in the preparation for water or sewer and water. Some of them have their 

engineering practically completed, some have a certain percentage of their engineering done, and there 

is some evidence, fairly substantial evidence, that this is going to be a very popular, and a very 

important, service to the people who live in our smaller towns and villages throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan. So, I am happy to see that provisions were made, both financially and otherwise, to make 

a start on this type of service to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I take a great deal of pleasure in moving Second Reading of Bill No. 55 – An 

Act to provide for Assistance to Certain Municipalities in the Establishment or Improvement of 

Waterworks and Sewerage Systems. 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Regina City):  Mr. Speaker, before you put the motion, I would like to amplify the 

point that was raised at the last by the Minister. The Province has, for some time now, adopted the 

policy of buying debentures of municipalities. This was first announced in 1954 in my budget address 

when I pointed out, “the investment policy had been further extended to provide for a limited purchase 

of debentures issued by municipal governments for the purpose of financing self-liquidating projects”, 

and then, again, in 1957, when I pointed out that I had given an undertaking at the provincial local 

government conference to set aside $15 million in the school lands’ fund as a revolving fund for the 

purchase of debentures from those needy local governments which are encountering genuine difficulty 

in marketing their bonds. In undertaking the purchase of up to 50 per cent of the debentures in such local 

governments, we were giving formal recognition to the fact that local governments are encountering, as 

we are, real difficulties in keeping pace with economic and population changes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that was in 1957. We have endeavoured to get the school lands’ fund in a position 

where we will have complete control over it, and to use the entire fund which now amounts to some $32 

million. As a local improvement fund, unfortunately, we have not been able to get a decision from the 

Federal Government, and until they amend the legislation, it will not be possible for us to do this. I 

wrote to the Hon. Mr. Fleming a year ago November. He acknowledged my letter and said that the 

Minister of Northern Affairs was interested in it, so he was forwarding it to him for attention. Not 

having heard anything from him in several months’ time, I followed it up with 



 

March 11, 1960 

 

 

20 

further correspondence. I must confess that I have had no reply yet in spite of the fact that I have sent at 

least a half dozen letters and telegrams to the Federal Ministers, as has the province of Alberta. They, 

too, would like to get control over their school lands’ fund. We even drafted the necessary legislation for 

the Federal Government, hoping that this might speed it up but, so far, our efforts have been in vain. 

Nevertheless, we have used our school lands’ fund for the purchase of debentures, and this is one way in 

which we can help the municipalities still further under this Act. 

 

Now, I think the hon. members might be interested to know that in the last six years we have purchased 

$14,132,000 of these debentures. Last year alone, for instance, we purchased some $3,140,000 of 

debentures and among these some $667,000 of town and village debentures. This represented a third of 

all the debentures that were issued. It was only today that two slips came to my desk pointing out that 

the Town of Eastend had a new issue of $61,000. They issued these debentures at a rate of 6 ¼ per cent. 

Incidentally, that is a better rate of interest than the Province of British Columbia got this week. The 

City of Regina, for instance, brought an issue out yesterday at a rate, I believe of 6.70 per cent; the City 

of Calgary, 6.50; Niagara Falls, 6.40; Barrie, Ontario, 6.50; and a number of others 6.50 per cent. These 

Saskatchewan people went out and sold them 50 per cent locally at 6 ¼ per cent, and we, in turn, bought 

$30,000 from the Town of Eastend. The same in Broadview. I am sure that the Leader of the Opposition 

will be glad to know that they are putting in a sanitary sewerage system there, as they are, too, in 

Eastend, and out of a total issue of $60,000 they sold some $17,000 locally, and we are buying $43,000. 

Now, probably this is hardly fair to say that we are buying such a large proportion in this case, because 

earlier, in July, 1959, they issued debentures of $37,000, and on that occasion sold $32,000, and we took 

$5,000 so that all together we will be buying $48,000 of a total issue of $97,000 for the town of 

Broadview. And, again, those are 6 ¼ per cent debentures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this is a very important thing to remember in connection with this Bill that has just 

been brought before Government, grants which could amount up to 10 – 15 per cent of the total cost of 

the project. It could even go higher. In addition, we are prepared to buy debentures up to 50 per cent. I 

should point out that this year alone we have bought $3,140,000 of debentures – of municipal and school 

district debentures. $3,140,000 is a very large proportion. If you leave out the borrowings of our major 

centres like Regina and Saskatoon, it becomes a very important part. I have here, for example, the last 

report of the Local Government Board, and I find, for instance, that the villages only issued debentures 

amounting to $5,500 in 1958; in 1959 it increased very substantially to $156,000. 



 

March 11, 1960 

 

21 

Our cities, on the other hand, had debentures issued last year, of some $14 ½ million and, of course, as 

we all know, one of the principal reasons for these is for the water and sewerage program. As a matter of 

fact, the water and sewerage program is the principal one in our cities today, because of the rapid 

expansion of our cities and towns. So, Mr. Speaker, I just want the hon. members to know that the 

Government is prepared to back this program financially in these two ways – in fact, three ways: first, 

through the engineering assistance which we will give, and second, through the actual grants based upon 

the need in the particular communities and then, of course, in the third way, the purchase of the 

debentures. I notice, for example, that we have towns such as Davidson that are considering a water and 

sewerage extension system; Lemberg, Macklin, Mossbank, Redvers, Rocanville, Watson, Broadview – 

all of these are working on plans for water and sewerage during 1960. This is only a very few, with a 

total of some 49 towns and villages. 

 

Mr. Loptson:  Do you speak for your successor? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  No, Mr. Speaker, I am speaking for the Government, and the Government policy is 

very clear in this respect. Government policy is to buy these debentures and that has been the policy in 

the past, and will be the policy of the Government in the future. And I will just point out that… 

 

Mr. Loptson:  How can you speak for the next Government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  . . . we have had requests now from some 49 communities in the province, 

including some of the ones I mentioned, and some others like the town of Esterhazy in the constituency 

of my hon. friend who just interrupted, making inquiries about projects for the coming year, so that this 

is not going to be just window-dressing. This is going to be genuine assistance on the part of the 

Government to endeavour to give the people of Saskatchewan some of the amenities which we believe it 

is their right to have. We feel there shouldn’t be a town or village left in this province without water and 

sewerage, just as we believe that the people on the farms are entitled to have these facilities, too. We 

believe that we shouldn’t have two classes in a community – one class that can enjoy these amenities, 

and the other class that cannot enjoy them because they are out in an individual unit, or because they live 

in a small town or village. So, Mr. Speaker, I have much pleasure in supporting this motion. 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek):  Mr. Speaker, may I ask a question? For these debentures which you 

are buying – where are you getting the funds to do it – from general revenues of the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  No, we have been putting them mostly into the school lands fund, into 

superannuation funds, we haven’t used our sinking funds at all for this purpose, but it’s mostly school 

lands funds and teachers’ superannuation funds, insurance office, and things of that sort. That is the 

question, is it not? 



 

March 11, 1960 

 

 

22 

Mr. Cameron:  Yes, I am happy to get that information, Mr. Provincial Treasurer, because you will 

recall a few years back I think I advocated you do just that thing, and at that time I think your answer 

was that any Provincial Treasurer who would tamper with these trust funds would find himself in jail 

within 24 hours. 

 

Premier Douglas:  Oh no. 

 

Mr. A.C. Cameron:  I agree with the policy because we have been advocating that. If we take these 

trust funds and we put them to work within the provinces themselves, and when you say that the 

Government is buying these, I suppose it is correct to say that but, technically it is these trust funds that 

are investing their money in these bonds of the towns and villages and that is how you are extending this 

program. But, it doesn’t come near the need of a revolving fund – something set up, adjusted to 

commitments given and a program that would outline to these towns exactly the requirements needed, 

and how they could come in and get assistance under it. It still doesn’t remove the need of the towns 

coming in, presenting their case to Government officials and having to negotiate every time they want a 

bit of assistance, and each town is negotiating on a different set of circumstances to what others are. It 

hasn’t removed this problem of these towns having to come in with long-draw-out negotiations. As I 

said the other day, some of the towns in my constituency have been coming down here for four years in 

an attempt to get assistance for sewer and water, and they haven’t been able to finalize the contract with 

the Government, as yet. 

 

Premier Douglas:  Did the hon. member hear the Minister of Municipal Affairs outline the financial 

formula? It’s a set formula; it isn’t a master of negotiation; it is a formula that is clearly set out in the 

regulations. 

 

Mr. Cameron:  But they’re still negotiating on the same basis as they were before, as I understand it. 

 

Premier Douglas:  Do you mean the debentures or the grants? 

 

Mr. Cameron:  That’s the point that I want to make, Mr. Speaker, that it is the trust funds of the 

Province that are being used to advance this money to them, and this is the thing that I have been 

advocating for sometime. 

 

With those few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I would like leave to adjourn this debate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines:  Before the hon. member sits down, does he not know that this has been done now 

for approximately 10 years – we have been doing this very thing. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 



 

March 11, 1960 

 

23 

Bill No. 54 – An Act respecting Villages 

 

Hon. L.F. McIntosh (Minister of Municipal Affairs): Mr. Speaker, in covering the amendments 

associated with The Town Act, they are very similar in principle with the amendment proposed in The 

Village Act, and I don’t think it is necessary at this time to go over the whole amendment to The Village 

Act on second reading because of similarity in the amendments in The Town Act that I dealt with 

yesterday. I think they can be adequately dealt with in Community; therefore I move second reading of 

Bill No. 54 – an Act respecting Villages. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to and the Bill referred to a Community of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

Bill No. 56 – An Act to Amend The City Act 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh:  Again, Mr. Speaker, the amendments here to the City Act are very similar to 

the amendments proposed in the Town Act, and I think they can be adequately dealt with in Community. 

For that reason, therefore, I move second reading of Bill No. 56 – an Act to amend The City Act. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to and the Bill referred to a Community of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

Bill No. 57 – An Act to amend The Community Planning Act, 1957. 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh:  Mr. Speaker, there are just two slight amendments to The Community Planning 

Act, brought about as the result of some experiences that we had last year with the towns and the cities 

that were making use of the Community Planning Act. 

 

One amendment, and it is largely for the use of clarification, is that when a re-zoning scheme or bylaw 

has been passed by the community, go under construction prior to the bylaw coming into effect, that 

building conforms or it does not conform. The suggested amendment here is that if a city re-zones an 

area, and issues a building permit located on a certain area of property and the builder hasn’t 

commenced construction prior to any other re-zoning, that building that he has received a permit to build 

would be considered a building that does not conform with the true re-zoning of that area. Therefore, it 

is suggested that it should be included as a building on which a municipality has issued a building 

permit, and has agreed that it should be located on that property. 



 

March 11, 1960 

 

 

24 

Then there is the question of an exchange of property in a re-plotting area. A community, for example, 

may go out to re-plot an area, and they may say that the lots in that particular area should be of a certain 

size and there might be privately owned lots in that area that are smaller than the size desired by the city 

in their re-plotting area, and so provisions are made whereby the city either gives, if they can, an 

exchange for a larger lot for the smaller lot, or make compensation if a person takes a smaller lot. 

 

Those are the two principal amendments in The Community Planning Act. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 

move second reading of Bill No. 57 – an Act to amend The Community Planning Act. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Community of the Whole at the next 

sitting of the House. 

 

Bill No. 64 – An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Election Act 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier):  Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 64 is to amend The Saskatchewan Election 

Act, to strike out the clause in the Act which prohibits treaty Indians from voting in provincial elections. 

 

As the hon. members know, the present Government has been interested for many years in removing this 

provision. Our difficulty has lain in the fact that there has always been in the mind of the treaty Indians a 

certain amount of confusion between the terms ‘being enfranchised to vote’ and ‘enfranchised under the 

Indian Act of Canada’ which means to lose their treaty rights. This has caused a good deal of fear, and I 

am afraid that even yet some concern is felt on the part of the Indian people. It was my privilege to call a 

conference of the Indian groups in the province, representing all the Indian bands across Saskatchewan, 

in 1947, when we first discussed this matter. I found that the Indians were quite fearful that any 

legislation granting them the franchise would automatically exempt them from their benefits under the 

treaty rights and from tax exemptions which they enjoy through Federal legislation. For that reason we 

didn’t proceed with the legislation at that time. 

 

I know that the matter has been raised here in the Legislature on a number of occasions, by members on 

both sides of the House, who have expressed the opinion that the franchise should be granted to treaty 

Indians. I think we have all felt, with possibly few exceptions, that it is not in keeping with a democratic 

society that we should have second-class citizens, that there ought not to be any group of human beings 

who live in this province, and least of all the aborigines of the province who lived here before our 

forefathers did, who are deprived the right to cast a vote in a provincial election. So we have followed 

the matter up by holding successive conferences. the last two conferences were held – one in 1958 and 

one in 1959, and again we invited the chiefs and counsellors of the various Indian bands 



 

March 11, 1960 

 

25 

across Saskatchewan to attend a conference. At least we made this much progress that the groups 

themselves formed the Saskatchewan Federation of Indians, and we have been able to give them some 

assistance in preparing a brief which they are going to submit to the Special Parliamentary Community 

on Indian Affairs. 

 

As the hon. members know, the Federal Government has referred to a special parliamentary community 

the whole question of The Indian Act, and it is now under discussion. It is our hope that our 

Saskatchewan Federation of Indians will make a very good brief, and we have given them some 

assistance in preparing it. 

 

I must also confess to the hon. members, so that there will be no misunderstanding, that neither the 

conference in 1958 nor 1959, did the Indians feel that they were yet prepared to ask, as a body, that we 

should introduce this legislation. On the other hand, there were many of the younger Indians who were 

quite specific, that even if the older Indians did not want to vote; even though there were some of the 

Indians who had this fear that exercising their franchise might result in the loss of the treaty rights, that 

we as a Legislature, had no right to deprive these younger Indians of their voting privileges. I had made 

some commitment some years ago and said to the Indians that, unless you ask this, we are not going to 

force it down your throats. There is not sense in a democracy trying to make people accept the franchise. 

But the Government feels that there are two reasons now why we are justified in introducing this 

legislation, we are asking the Legislature to pass. 

 

The first is, as I said, a growing number of younger Indians wanted it, and feel that until they get the 

vote they are not going to have a voice in the affairs of the province, and they are not going to have the 

interest taken in their problems by elected members, federally or provincially, that they would have if 

they were voters and constituents of those members. 

 

The second reason is that the Federal Government itself has just introduced legislation, and we feel that 

it ought now to be abundantly clear to the Indians that if the Federal Government can give them the 

franchise without interfering with the treaty rights they enjoy under the Federal legislation, surely it 

should be abundantly clear that provincial legislation giving them the vote would not in any way 

encroach upon their treaty rights. 

 

I feel, Mr. Speaker, that this is the time when we ought to take steps. My only regret is that it has been 

so long; I regret that I can’t report to the Legislature that the Indian groups at conferences are now 

unanimously in favour of asking for this, but I can say that I think a growing number are asking for it 

and when, prior to submitting this legislation, I wrote to the chief of each of the bands attending the 

conference, and explained to them that while they hadn’t asked for it, we felt that there was sufficient 

support that we were not justified any longer in being bound to any commitment that we wouldn’t put 

this through until there was general support for it. We feel there is sufficient support, and in the light of 

the Federal Government’s action, all fear which may have existed before ought now to be removed. 



 

March 11, 1960 

 

 

26 

I am very hopeful, Mr. Speaker, that the Legislature will pass this unanimously. I think those of us of the 

white race can’t be too proud of the fact that in all these years of our Indian citizens have been deprived 

of the franchise. I hope that more and more of the Indians will make use of this privilege that is now 

being accorded them by the Legislature. I would certainly not suggest for a moment granting people the 

vote would solve all their problems. They have very deep sociological and economic problems, many of 

which are, of course, beyond the purview of this Legislature. I have always felt strongly that the mere 

fact that the Indian has the vote, and that the Federal and Provincial members had to ask for their 

support, would make those of us who are candidates in either federal or provincial elections more 

cognizant of the Indians’ problems and more sensitive to their wishes and their desires. I certainly hope 

that this will be the result. I hope that this is the first step toward an improvement in the condition of the 

Indian people in this province, and I feel that this now removes the last obstacle to a universal franchise 

in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would therefore move second reading of Bill No. 64. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to and the Bill referred to a Community of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

Bill No. 65 – An Act to amend The Executive Council Act. 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Weyburn):  Mr. Speaker, this Bill No. 65 is simply to amend the Executive 

Council Act, so as to change the title of the Minister of Travel and Information to the Minister of 

Industry and Information. 

 

With that explanation, I would move that Bill No. 65 be read a second time. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to and the Bill referred to a Community of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 


