



















































Hansard: March 04, 1960


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

17th Day 

 

Friday, March 4, 1960 

 

The House met at 2:00 o'clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

REFERENCE TO DEATHS OF MR. AND MRS. MITCHELL 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are proceeded 

with, I thought it very worthwhile to bring to the attention the House the passing of two outstanding 

Saskatchewan citizens in the persons of Mr. Alex Mitchell, of Lloydminster, Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Mitchell, as all members know, was known in agricultural circles throughout Canada. He was one of the 

outstanding Canadian Hereford breeders in Canada. In addition, he was a wonderful community worker, 

greatly interested in boys and girls and their activities and was known as nature's gentleman. I want to 

say to the House that the passing of these two people occurred within an hour of each other. I was told 

before I came into the House that Mr. Mitchell died of a heart attack, and an hour later Mrs. Mitchell 

died. These two outstanding people were widely known in their own community for their many good 

works of public service locally and elsewhere, and I thought it very worthwhile to bring to the attention 

of this House the passing of these two very fine people. 

 

WELCOME TO SCOUTS 

 

Mr. James Gibson (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are proceeded with, I would 

like to draw the attention of the House to a group of Boy Scouts in the gallery to your left. They are here 

today, on a visit to the Buildings, with their leaders, Rev. Douglas Miller, Mr. 'Barney' Molkirk and Mr. 

Vernon Rowe. I am sure you and all hon. members hope they will have a profitable and enjoyable visit. 

 

HELIUM GAS DISCOVERY 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce 

to the House that Texaco Oil Company has made another discovery of helium gas in a deep test well in 

Township 5, Range 8, West of the Third Meridian, at Mankota. Texaco has set production casings, but 

the company is not yet prepared to make any statement as to whether or not the helium in this well is a 

commercial proposition. Helium has been discovered in two other wells in significant quantities. These 

wells are located near Swift Current and Vidora. 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

2 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed from Thursday, March 3, 1960, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 

the Hon. Mr. Fines: That Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair (The Assembly go into the Committee of 

Supply): 

 

Hon. J.T. Douglas (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, when I adjourned the debate, yesterday, I 

had answered some of the statements that had been issued by some of the various Opposition parties, 

and I was rather surprised to note, when I glanced over my notes that evening, that on one occasion, at 

least, I could say that I had agreed with the member for Saltcoats. You may recall at that time that he 

told us the Liberal Party was on the march, and I agreed with him that they were — but like Napoleon 

from Moscow, they are on the march to defeat and oblivion! 

 

Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I also note from the press that the new Leader of the Liberal Party 

had a little difficulty, the other night, trying to change his tune a little bit when he was speaking at a 

meeting where there were some labour people. Out in the country, these labour people are really a bunch 

of stinkers, but when the Liberals get back to the city these labour people are not too bad at all. I noticed 

he told them that the major, or most advanced, labour legislation had been brought down by the Liberal 

Party. Knowing something about his past on labour matters, I presume he was referring to labour 

legislation brought down by. 'Joey' Smallwood in Newfoundland. 

 

However, I do not intend at this time to deal with the straw man they have set up, and kicked around 

quite a bit; it's getting rather dirty and a bit dusty, so I intend to deal with my own Department largely 

today. In doing so, I am afraid I am going to irritate the members opposite by referring to the year 1944. 

 

Opposition Members: — Oh! Oh! 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — But I'm going to be fair, though. I assure you I am going to describe the situation 

as existed then by a report which, I am afraid, I used in this House before, but I am going to use it again. 

It was a report which was submitted to the Special Committee of the House of Commons, in April 1944, 

and it reads as follows: 

 

"According to the Department of Highways and Transportation, there are 8,390.2 miles of provincial 

highway that should be improved and built. Only 23.4 miles have been constructed to a standard of 

hard-surface requirements." 

 

If I said nothing else, that is a terrible indictment of a party. It means the entire highway system, on their 

own statement, required rebuilding, and there was practically no hard-surfacing in the entire province. I 

will admit the 23 miles they speak of was built to a standard accepted at that time. Today, we would not 

accept that standard. But that is only part 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

3 

of a sad story. I found there were only nine professional engineers in the entire Department of Highways 

to undertake the supervision of the most extensive highway system of any province in Canada. I also 

found there was practically nothing in the way of modern equipment, and there was no long range 

planning, whatsoever. But that is the type of thing this Government had to face when they took office in 

1944, and I want to assure you, Mr. Speaker, that we tackled this problem with earnest, and we made a 

considerable amount of progress, even during the first two years we were in operation. 

 

It might be of interest if I read to this Assembly a letter which I received from the province of Ontario in 

the spring of 1947. It says, in part: 

 

"Saskatchewan's highway program for this year is causing a good deal of favourable comment 

throughout the provinces and in the east. Saskatchewan roads have been disgraceful for so long that I 

think everyone is glad to see someone finally doing something about them." 

 

In three years' time, that is the statement which we were receiving from the party in eastern Canada at 

that time. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Who was that written by? 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — It was written by Ross Thatcher! 

 

That is only part of the picture, of course, and I should have told you that in addition to the dilapidated 

condition of the highway system at that time, they left a debt of $32,800,000 which represented 37 1/2 

per cent of the entire amount of money that had been spent on the provincial highway system in this 

province from 1905 to 1944. That includes construction and maintenance, every dollar that was spent on 

the entire highway system in those years. 

 

That is quite a different picture from what we have today; if you will look up your estimates, you will 

find that amount has been greatly reduced. In other words, we have been paying for the work which we 

have done on our highway system from that day to this. We tackled the problem which was placed 

before us in earnest, as I said, and I wanted to point out that the main problem facing us was to get the 

travelling public of this province out of the mud. The other thing was to get a highway system that 

would give all-year travel, winter and summer. We have pretty well completed that initial problem, and 

we are now well advanced on the second phase of the improved highway system. I need not point out to 

you that already we have 25 per cent, or one-quarter of our entire highway system now dust-free, and the 

program, which I will announce today, will indicate to you that we are going to continue with that 

program, and extend those services to the people of the province. 

 

The construction year just finished was not a very good one insofar 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

4 

as highway construction work was concerned. Yet within that period, I find that we have had a very 

successful year, despite the handicaps we faced this fall, and I find that, during the season, we completed 

428 1/4 miles of grade, 330 miles of gravelling, 120.8 miles of bituminous surface, and 139 miles of oil 

treatment. In addition to that, we re-gravelled under maintenance 825 miles, and resurfaced under 

maintenance 86 1/3 miles. You realize, Mr. Speaker, this was done with a budget of less than $24 

million, as we did not spend the entire amount last year. It refutes the statement that was made yesterday 

by the hon. member for Redberry (Mr. Korchinski), when he accused this Department for not spending 

money wisely. I want to say there is no place else in the Dominion of Canada, nor in the United States, 

where you will find that amount of work done with the small amount of money which we have spent in 

this province this last year. 

 

I said a moment ago, we had started the second phase of our construction. That has been made necessary 

because of the increased traffic on our highways. It has been steadily increasing, and, if we are to 

provide better highways, highways that will carry heavier loads, highways that will be safe and 

comfortable to travel over, then we have got to increase the standards that we have been building and 

this we have been doing. 

 

I might point out to you that, since 1945 when we had approximately 147,000 motor vehicles in this 

province, we have almost reached the 330,000 mark in 1959, and our estimate for 1980 is that we will 

have 570,000 motor vehicles in this province at that time. That is certainly no indication of any 

slackening of the growth of this province, and it certainly gives the lie to the statements being made by 

the Opposition Members that this province is on the down-grade under this Government. In 1945, we 

covered some 640,000,000 vehicle miles; by 1959, this has been increased by almost four times to 

2,400,000,000 vehicle miles. Our estimates for 1980 are double that 5,500,000,000 vehicle miles. The 

population trend which we expect — and I may say that the figures we used in our Department are 

slightly lower than those used in the report which the Stanford people put out; but on that basis, we 

expect we will have a motor vehicle in Saskatchewan for every two people in the province. At the 

present time we lead all Canada in the number of motor vehicles per person in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This increase in traffic has been generated from a number of causes. One, of course, is the increase in 

our population, and secondly, I would say, the mechanization of agriculture; and as our farms become 

mechanized, more and more of our people travel. There is a greater need for motor vehicles on our farms 

than there were even 10 years ago. Then, of course, we have the steady increase of industry in this 

province, which has made it necessary for more trucks to be travelling our roads. The steady increase in 

freight tonnage that is being transported over our highways is also one of the reasons for the increase in 

traffic. Not only does 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

5 

it help in the increase in the number of vehicles, but it is putting a much greater strain upon our 

highways, because of the increased tonnage which we are now carrying as compared with five or 10 

years ago. 

 

All of these things do call for an. increase in the standard of roads which we must construct. As I said a 

moment ago, 25 per cent of our entire highway system in now dust-free. Today, you have dust-free 

connections to every city in the province. You have dust-free connections to the three international 

border crossings, and you have dust-free connections to three inter-provincial connections in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

As a matter of fact, quite a number of our highways are today carrying peak loads that are greater than is 

safe on a two-lane highway. We are now commencing the construction of several four-lane arteries in 

the province. The problem which the Department is concerned with is that if this traffic increase 

continues at the rate which we would expect (and in the past we have always been conservative in our 

estimates), we may be faced with the need of more four-lane highways than we can financially afford at 

this time, because this type of road calls for higher standards and a much higher cost. 

 

A good illustration of what we can expect from higher standard roads is the increase in traffic that 

occurred on the Trans-Canada Highway after it was constructed. In 1957, the year that road was 

constructed throughout Saskatchewan, we found that the motor vehicle travel increased by some 15 per 

cent. The following year, it was 14 per cent, and I find that, in 1957, 18 per cent of the motor vehicle 

miles travelled over the entire provincial highway system was over the Trans-Canada Highway. It 

carried 10 per cent of the total provincial traffic. That is some idea of what you can expect when we 

upgrade some of these main arteries in the province, and I can assure you that it is the intention of this 

Government to continue the upgrading of these roads. 

 

I said, a moment ago, that the upgrading of this system is going to cost more money, and again we have 

done some planning and some estimating of the cost. On the basis that a highway will last 10 years, and 

with the expectation of a certain amount of obsolescence, and without any extensions whatsoever to this 

highway system, we estimate that it will cost over $600 million to do the job that must be done in this 

province during the next 20 years. I am quite satisfied it will be done. I can assure you we have the staff 

in the Department of Highways to undertake any work that may be required, and instead of the nine 

professional engineers which were in this Department when we took over in 1944, we now have a 

department very well staffed, although not all we would like to have; but this is a staff that can do the 

type of job that must be done in the building and maintaining of a modern highway system. 

 

I think I can realize that the electorates of this province are not going to take any chances with any of the 

Opposition parties in this province taking over after this year, because we have heard sufficient from the 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

6 

Opposition, in their reference to the firing of engineers, in their reference to the arrogance of the civil 

servants, to know what they have in the back of their minds. I can assure them the people of this 

province will take no chances that the very fine services which have been built up in Saskatchewan are 

not going to be sabotaged by the people across the way. 

 

Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — I said, a moment ago, that this system of highways is going to cost more money. 

I want to point out to this Assembly that throughout the last number of years, we have been spending 

more money on our highway system and on our road system than we collect from the road users' tax, 

namely, the gasoline tax and their car licences. A year ago I think it was something like 137 per cent of 

the entire amount of money collected from this source that has been expended on our roads and 

highways. It is the intentions of the Government to continue such a policy; but if we are to do the job 

that must be done over the next 20 years, then I realize that even more money than this will have to be 

expended, because, in addition to the present highway system, there is going to be the need of taking 

over and extending the system into the north, extending roads into provincial parks, and these were not 

included in the estimates which I gave, a moment ago, of over $600 million required in the next 20 

years. 

 

So that brings us to the question of the need for Federal aid for our provincial highway system. I have 

mentioned this repeatedly; I have worked on this problem for a number of years. We were able to get 

support from a number of influential organizations in this country. As a matter of fact, working through 

the Boards of Trade in this province, we were able to got the Dominion organization, a few years ago, to 

take up the case for Federal assistance for roads. Working through the Prairie Road Builders' 

Organization, they also took the matter to their national organization, and we now have that organization 

pressing for a system of comprehensive Federal aid. So there is a great deal of pressure being exerted 

today upon the Federal Government, but it took a great deal of prodding on the part of the provinces and 

on the part of other organizations, before we could got the Federal Government to move even on the 

Trans-Canada Highway. 

 

While I was pleased to be able to assist in that project, I want to point out that, while that project proves 

that you could have a plan of highway construction, assisted by Ottawa, and carried out to the 

satisfaction of both governments, nevertheless, it had its weaknesses. It had a weakness, inasmuch as too 

much money was expended on a given route at one time. That is the reason, I think, that only one 

province in the Dominion of Canada to date has completed this section of the road, and that is the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I should say, however, that when we were called into Ottawa to discuss ways and means of speeding up 

the work on the Trans-Canada Highway, I pointed out to the Minister in charge that if they really wanted 

to speed up work on 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

7 

the Trans-Canada Highway, the thing for them to do was to assure the provinces that, as soon as any 

province could complete their portion of the road, they would continue to receive Federal aid on other 

projects. We could not convince them to do that, and, as a result, those provinces who saw the efforts we 

had made in Saskatchewan, and saw we were left holding the bag after we had co-operated with the 

Federal Government, they undertook to take their time in the completion of this project. I was hoping 

that, with the change of Government, we might have a change of policy. We had heard a great deal from 

the Conservatives when they were in as Opposition, as to what they were going to do when they 

obtained office. I have some clippings here that I think will be of interest to this Legislature: 

 

"Mr. Hees, now Minister of Transport, speaking in Newcastle, said that if his party was elected it 

would start on a Canadian-wide highway program similar to the $100 billion scheme now under way 

in the States. He said Progressive Conservative leader John Diefenbaker had promised to start on such 

a program when his party was elected." 

 

Then, speaking in Saskatoon, and referring to the Trans-Canada Highway, he says: 

 

"It has become obvious that if the highway is to be built in the next 5 years the Federal Government 

must finance its construction. Mr. Hees said in addition, Canada needs a national highway program by 

which the Federal Government will join with the province in building highways which will enable the 

development of the tourist trade, natural resources and the defence program." 

 

And then we have Mr. Diefenbaker, after he was elected, speaking in Edmonton. Of highways, he said: 

 

"To bring about immediately, or at the earliest possible date, a second Trans-Canada or Trans-

Continental highway, starting at the present time at Winnipeg, thence to Edmonton, then through the 

passes west of there." 

 

Those were fine statements when they were in Opposition, but to date they have done nothing about it. 

It's another case of the Conservatives repudiating the promises they made to electors before the election. 

 

I should point out that this matter of pressure on the Federal Government of federal aid is not new. I find 

that, in 1937, when you had one Liberal government speaking to another — a Liberal government in 

Saskatchewan 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

8 

and a Liberal government in Ottawa the brief presented to Ottawa on Dominion-Provincial Relations, 

page 32, states: 

 

"The Government of Canada should construct and maintain a trans-Canada highway of a permanent 

type, as well as permanent highways from Canada to the U.S. border and to the several national parks 

of Canada." 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — They say hear, hear! over there. Well, they did nothing about it until they were 

prodded for 20 years. On September 24, 1943, the Federal Advisory Committee on Reconstruction, 

dealing with roads, on page 32 of its report on Publicly Financed Construction projects, said: 

 

"What is needed is a careful distinction between the different types of roads and the service they 

perform and above all, some attempt to relate all road programs in the country to a master plan of 

national communications." 

 

Those are mighty fine words; but what has either the Liberal or Conservative Governments at Ottawa 

done about it? At the present time, for the past number of months, we have been pressing the federal 

Minister of Public Works to meet with the highway ministers of Canada and up to the present time we 

have been unsuccessful in getting a date when he would meet with us and discuss this very pressing 

problem. 

 

I want to state that the Liberal government showed very poor foresight in the original plan of the Trans-

Canada Highway. At that time, the time when they originally met the provinces and we discussed this 

matter, it was pressed upon them that provision should be made for upgrading certain sections of this 

road. It was realized at that time that certain sections of the Trans-Canada would likely be out of date by 

the time it was completed, if it was built as a two-lane highway only. We were unable to get the Federal 

Government, at that time, to extend its assistance to more than two lanes, and we already have the 

results of that in this province where portions of this highway already are overtaxed. Already with 

portions of the highway constructed only a few years, they are now in need of upgrading to cope with 

the traffic. What is true of Saskatchewan is true of other areas, and I say it was a shortsighted policy on 

the part of the Federal Government. 

 

I said, a moment ago, that there is no indication that the Federal Government had any intention of 

assisting with the highway system other than their northern roads, and I notice that the Hon. Alvin 

Hamilton, in a statement to the press, the other day, on his "roads-to-resources" program, stated this: 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

9 

"Roads to resources, and I must make this clear, is not a program designed to assist the province to 

meet their normal highway commitments." 

 

When I said last year that the roads-to-resources program was no substitute for an overall and 

comprehensive system from Ottawa, Alvin Hamilton agreed with that, and stated quite definitely that 

this is not a plan to help with the overall highway system of Canada. 

 

Unfortunately, Canada today is the only major country in the world without a national highway 

program, and it is not something we can be proud of. I found just a year ago, when I attended the 

International Road Federation conference in Mexico City, that Canada was looked upon by the other 

nations as possibly the second road-building nation of the world; but I was rather ashamed to tell them 

that we did not have a national highway policy, and that the responsibility for roads and highways was 

left to the provinces and the municipalities concerned. 

 

Now, I maintain that the province of Saskatchewan has had a rather raw deal from the Federal 

Government. After we had gone all-out to complete our section of the Trans-Canada Highway, we have 

been left holding the bag insofar as further federal aid is concerned. I want to say further, how we can 

expect to compete with our neighbouring states across the border, when they are receiving such 

generous treatment from their federal government? The treatment they are receiving today is not new; 

they have been getting federal aid across the line since 1916. I got the figures, the other day, as to what 

they are getting at the present time. The fiscal year for their construction period ends on June 30th, and I 

find that the State of Montana, for the 1960 season which will end on 30th June, they are receiving $32.2 

millions from the Federal Government and, for 1961, the year commencing July 1, they will receive $33 

million; North Dakota will receive $17.2 million and $16.9 million; South Dakota $32.2 million and 

$17.4 million; Wyoming $26.6 million and $27.5 million. In other words, the State of Wyoming will get 

more assistance from the Federal Government than our entire budget for highways in this province. How 

can we expect to compete under conditions such as these? 

 

I would like to turn for a moment to a statement that appeared in the 'Trade Press' the other day. It is 

headed 'The Key to North's Hidden Wealth", and it is attributed to the Hon. Alvin Hamilton, Minister of 

Northern Affairs. I do not intend to spend any time on the article itself, but I do want to call the attention 

of this Legislature to the map included in this article, and the table. This map indicates the roads which 

are included in the northern roads, and for the province of Saskatchewan they show three roads, one 

leading from the town of Hudson Bay and towards Le Pas, known as the Ataskawin road; one leading to 

Flin From on No. 55 Highway, which is known as the Hanson Lake road, and the other one from Lac La 

Ronge to Uranium City. The table gives the total of these as 824 miles at an estimated cost of $20 

million. I want to point out to you, 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

10 

Mr. Speaker, that this is the greatest piece of political hypocrisy that I have seen for a long while. 

 

Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — In the first place they do not intend to assist all the way on that road from La 

Ronge to Uranium City. As a matter of fact after the Ataskawin road and the Hanson Lake road are 

completed, I question that there will be much more than $3 million left to spend on that road, and it is 

going to cost $22 million to build a road from La Ronge to Uranium City. Yet he leaves the impression 

in this article that this is the assistance they are giving to the province of Saskatchewan. As a matter of 

fact, they have gone even further than that. You may recall that a year ago, I told you I had signed an 

agreement with the Hon. Alvin Hamilton for the construction of a bridge across the North Saskatchewan 

River at Prince Albert. That agreement was signed between the Department of Highways and the 

Department of Northern Affairs and Natural Resources, which had nothing to do whatever with the 

northern roads program, but now when he writes to my colleague, the Minister of Natural Resources 

(Hon. Mr. Kuziak), he tells him they are going to deduct the price of the Prince Albert Bridge from the 

$13 million with which they are supposed to build these northern roads. Another case of 'welshing' on 

the commitments they made to the City of Prince Albert during the election campaign. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): — Don't look at us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — I thought you would like to have this information. Maybe you don't; but that is 

the type of thing. It's another case of the Federal Government 'welshing' on their plan, just as they have 

'welshed' on the farmers of this province in regard getting them a fair price and a fair share of the 

national income. They are not a bit better than the Liberals in that respect. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, time is going on and I do want to announce the program for this year, before my time 

runs out. 

 

Commencing with No. 1 Highway, I want to announce the construction of a 4-lane facility from 

Balgonie to Regina, and from east of Tompkins to Sidewood there will be some seal coating done. On 

No. 2 Highway from Moose Jaw to Tuxford, will be grading and bituminous surfacing, and from Young. 

on No. 5 Highway, bituminous surfacing, and from Prince Albert north, grading and bituminous 

surfacing — that is the section with the approach to the new bridge which will be completed, this fall; 

No. 3 Highway, from Tisdale to Naisberry corner, grading, Melfort to Weldon, oil treatment.; No. 2 

Highway to Shell River, grading, and from No. 40 Highway to Polworth, Completion of grading and 

gravelling; No. 4 Highway, Cadillac to No. 43, oil treatment; No. 1 Highway to old No. 32, bituminous 

surfacing, and from Elrose to Rosetown, completion of the grading and bituminous surfacing; Battle 

River to Battleford, oil treatment; Cochin to Glaslyn, grading and gravelling; No. 5 Highway, Coleville 

to No. 7 Highway, grading and gravelling; Humboldt to Bruno corner, grading 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

11 

and gravelling; No. 6 Highway, Southey to Raymore completion of bituminous surfacing; Watson to 

Melfort, completion of grading and gravelling; Pleasantdale to Melfort, completion of bituminous 

surfacing; Highway No. 7, Vanscoy to junction of new No. 14 Highway, grading and bituminous 

surfacing; No. 8 Highway, Swan Plain to the Porcupine Forest Reserve, completion of grading and 

gravelling; Churchbridge to Wroxton, grading and gravelling; Highway No. 9, Alameda to No. 13 

Highway, completion of grading and gravelling; No. 49 Highway, oil treatment, and with that will be the 

relocation at Crystal Lake; No. 10 Highway, Manitoba border west, completion of grading and 

gravelling; Tonkin to Wroxton, completion of bituminous surfacing; Highway No. 11, junction of No. 6 

Highway to Lumsden, grading of 4-lane facility; from 5 miles north of No. 5 Highway to Rosthern, 

completion of oil treatment commenced last year; west of Rosthern to Duck Lake, completion of grading 

and gravelling — that should be north, from Duck Lake to Highway No. 2, grading and gravelling; 

Highway No. 13, Carlyle to Stoughton, oil treatment; Highway No. 14, Saskatoon west, completion of 

grading and from Saskatoon to Hawarden, bituminous surfacing; Biggar to No. 51 Highway, oil 

treatment; from Wilkie to Unity, oil treatment, and west of Unity to the Alberta border, grading and 

gravelling (that, by the way. completes almost entirely the improvement of No. 14 from the Manitoba 

border to the Alberta border); No. 16 Highway, Manitoba to Maryfield, completion of grading and 

gravelling, Windthorst to Kendal, completion of grading and gravelling; No. 17 Highway, Lloydminster 

north and Lloydminster south, completion of oil treatment; No. 18 Highway, Carnduff to Glen Ewen, 

completion of grading and gravelling, Oxbow to Frobisher, bituminous surfacing; Frobisher west to 

Bienfait, completion of bituminous surfacing; No. 39 Highway to Estevan, grading;, Estevan to 

Torquay, grading and gravelling; No. 19 Highway, from north of Vogel to No. 1 Highway, grading and 

gravelling; from No. 42 Highway to Elbow, grading and gravelling. This last, of course, is work under 

the South Saskatchewan River Dam agreement; No. 20 Highway from No. 11 to No. 22, grading and 

gravelling, and from Crystal Springs to Domremy, grading and gravelling; No. 22 Highway, from No. 9 

Highway to No. 47, completion of grading and gravelling; No. 26 Highway, Mervin to Turtleford, 

completion of grading and gravelling; No. 32 Highway from Highway No. 1 to Success, oil treatment; 

No. 33 Highway, Richardson to No. 1, completion of grading and gravelling; No, 34 Highway, U.S. 

boundary to Bengough, grading and gravelling; No. 35 Highway. U.S. boundary to Tribune, grading and 

gravelling; Weyburn, to Cedoux, grading and gravelling; Flin Flon to Creighton, completion of grading 

and bituminous surfacing; No. 37 Highway, Shaunavon north, oil treatment; No. 38 Highway, Chelan to 

Greenwater Lake, completion of grading and gravelling; No, 39 Highway, U.S. boundary to No. 18 

Highway, grading, Yellowgrass to Corinne, seal coating; No. 40 Highway, Shellbrook to No. 55, oil 

treatment; No. 42 Highway from the new junction of No. 2 Highway to the old junction No. 2, grading; 

No. 43 Highway, Gravelbourg, completion of grading and gravelling; No. 45 Highway, Birsay to South 

Saskatchewan River Dam, grading and gravelling — this is also under the South Saskatchewan River 

Dam agreement; Highway No. 49, from No. 9 Highway to Preeceville, completion of grading and oil 

surfacing; No. 50 Highway, Torquay south, grading and gravelling; No, 51 Highway, Kerrobert to 

Major, grading and gravelling; No. 55 Highway from No. 40 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

12 

 to Mount Nebo, oil treatment; No. 57 Highway, Manitoba boundary to No. 5 Highway, completion of 

grading and gravelling; No. 60 Highway, Pike Lake to No. 7 Highway, completion of grading and oil 

treatment. You will note that No. 60 Highway is a new addition to the highway system as of this year. 

 

A summary of this work means that we will be grading 566.4 miles of road; gravelling 516.9; 

bituminous surfacing, 199.73, and oil treating, 221.39 miles. In addition, the following work will be 

undertaken by the Maintenance Branch: regravelling, 820 miles; resurfacing, 30 miles; seal coating, 25 

miles. 

 

I have not mentioned the road which we will undertake for the Northern Roads-to-Resources program 

from La Ronge north. We hope this year to complete the road to the Churchill River, and we also hope 

that, within the present month, the bridge over the Churchill River will be completed. 

 

In addition to that, I should point out, we hope to complete roads at a very early date to Squaw Rapids, 

to assist in the power project which the Power people have undertaken in damming the Saskatchewan 

River. 

 

I would also like to announce that we hope, early this fall, to complete the bridge across the river at 

Prince Albert, and we will also call for tenders and start the construction of the bridge over the North 

Saskatchewan River in the vicinity of Petrofka ferry. 

 

In addition to that, I might mention that our Planning Branch will be carrying on a very extensive 

program. Two projects I should like to mention are: One on the meridian south of Lloydminster, where 

we will carry on the necessary reconnaissance and economic surveys required before we undertake to 

bring roads into the highway system, on that section during the present year. A similar survey will be 

carried out from Erwood to the Manitoba border, also during the present year. This, of course, is a 

continuation of No. 3 Highway. 

 

The last few years I have adopted a policy of announcing to this Legislature a number of projects on 

which we would like to call for tenders during the fall and winter months. By doing this we are able to 

assist the contractors in getting their equipment put to the job during the winter months, before bans are 

placed on the roads. It also extends the work for our own Department, so we do not have as great a rush 

for certain types of work, This year I would like, as I have in the past, to name a few of the projects. I 

don't need to quote the whole program for 1961, but I would like to name a few of the projects on which 

we would call for tenders during the coming fall of 1960. 

 

Starting with No. 3 Highway, Shell River to Shellbrook, would be grading and bituminous surfacing; 

Weldon to junction No. 2 Highway, oil treatment; Tisdale to Naisberry, bituminous surfacing and from 

Tisdale to Crooked River, oil treatment; Highway No. 5, from its junction with No. 6 Highway to the 

junction with No. 20, grading; from Humboldt to the junction of No. 22, bituminous surfacing; Highway 

No. 6, Dafoe to Watson, oil treatment; 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

13 

Watson to Lac Vert, bituminous surfacing. I may say that these improvements on No. 6 means that we 

will have continuous dust-free surface all the way from the international border to Melfort. No. 13 

Highway from east junction with 36 to Assiniboia, grading; No. 14 Highway, Foam Lake to junction of 

No. 10 Highway, oil treatment; Highway No. 15, junction No. 6 to Junction No. 20, grading; Ituna to 

junction No. 10, grading; Highway No. 26, Spruce Lake to St. Walburg, grading; No. 31 Highway, 

Kerrobert to Salvador, grading; No. 39 Highway, Estevan to U.S. border, bituminous surfacing; Blaine 

Like from No. 11 Highway, grading, That will give a connection between Nos. 40 and 11 Highways that 

will synchronize with the junction of the bridge across the river at Petrofka. 

 

That pretty well completes the work that I propose for the Department of Highways, but before I close I 

would like to say that in addition to the work we have done on our highway system provision will be 

made for extension of the grid road program and for assistance to urban municipalities. 

 

Again I would like to point out to the members of this Assembly, and again possibly irritate my hon. 

friends across the way by doing so, that grants to municipalities in 1943-44 were only $450,000. When 

you compare it with 1958-59, plus about $107,000 which was spent through the L.I.D., plus the amount 

of money which my Department spent in grants in the surveying of these roads, it was a lot more money 

than the municipalities ever expected to get from a Liberal Government — I am afraid a lot more than 

they ever would get if they were ever to return to power, because I could not help but think as the 

members across the way have been talking the past few days, when they talk about this Government 

bringing in a program which they cannot fulfil. We know we can fulfil it. They are basing their thinking 

on the facts of what would happen if they, the Liberals, ware returned to power; but, of course, the 

people of the province are not going to take any chances. 

 

Before I sit down I would like to say one word about the Saskatchewan Transportation Company, which 

I have the honour to supervise. I want to report that we have completed a very successful year, I think 

possibly the most successful year that we have accomplished since we commenced the organization in 

1946. I want to refute the statement made by the member for Gravelbourg (Mr. Coderre) that this 

company has never made any contribution to paying off this debt, nor has it made any contribution 

towards general revenues. I want to point out that we have retired $350,000 of the moneys which were 

advanced to us, and in the past year, in addition, paid to treasury the surplus which we will have (it will 

be a very nice surplus) of over $100,000. We have also contributed to the gasoline tax, education and 

hospital tax, licence fees, a total of $52,292. We have paid to municipalities, in lieu of taxes, a sum of 

$34,393. 

 

This company, of courses was not organized to make money. It was 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

14 

organized to give service, and today I can say that we are giving service in areas that no private 

company would ever undertake to service. We are giving the type of service which is the very best kind 

of bus service known anywhere in this country. I cannot help but compare this with the record, again, of 

the Conservative Government in Ottawa, who in my opinion are doing their very utmost to sabotage 

another Crown-owned organization known as the Trans-Canada Airways. Two years ago in this House I 

draw the attention of members to the fact that there was every indication that the Conservative 

Government of the day was intending to sabotage the Trans-Canada Airways by allowing C.P.A. to cut 

into that business, after the Trans-Canada Airways had built up a very substantial business, and given, I 

would say, the very best service of any airways on this continent. 

 

The only result of this will be that T.C.A. must reduce their services or possibly take a loss. That is what 

we can expect from the Conservative Government, and I am afraid it is what we would expect from our 

friends across the way, who a few years ago said they would throw all these Crown Corporations out of 

the window, but the people of this province are not going to stand for it. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — That's not true! 

 

Hon. Mr. Douglas: — And now, Mr. Speaker, I see my time is up. In closing, I want to say that it has 

been a great privilege for me to have this opportunity to vote for a budget that will undertake to provide 

the necessary money for the programs which have been outlined in the Speech from the Throne and 

again in the budget before us. And so. Mr. Speaker, needless to say, I will support the motion. 

 

Mr. Eldon A. Johnson (Kerrobert-Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate, I 

would like to congratulate the Minister of Highways (Hon. J.T. Douglas) on his excellent address. I 

would also like to congratulate the Minister who has been in charge of the Department for the past 16 

years, on a very efficient and capable department which he has established. Certainly, this department 

has put Saskatchewan roads in a condition that we can certainly be proud of, and today can travel all 

across the populated area of this province in safety and comfort. I take great pleasure in complimenting 

the Minister at this time, as it may be my last opportunity to do so. 

 

Also, on this debate on the budget, I would like to congratulate the Provincial Treasurer (Hon. C.M. 

Fines) for presenting to this House the excellent budget which they have given to us. This budget is one 

which provides for continuation of past services that we will continue to enjoy. This budget also makes 

provision for the people of this province. I am pleased to note that it makes provision for the initiation of 

a medical-care program which is something we have long looked forward to, and its fulfillment will 

certainly be another stop in the progress of Saskatchewan. 

 

I am also pleased to note the provision for a mental hospital at 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

15 

Yorkton, and also pleased that there is a geriatric centre at Swift Current. These projects will be of 

immense benefit to the people of this province. 

 

I am also pleased that this budget provides for the future of this province. Certainly, there is no better 

way to provide for the future than to provide for the young people and the education which they acquire. 

This budget provides for an increased allotment for education and a substantially increased allotment for 

our University. These projects will immensely help the future of this province. We must not forget the 

provision for the Saskatchewan Research Council and many other projects that are very worthy of 

mention, but I will not take time to deal with them at this time. I think the people in this province should 

be very satisfied that this budget makes these provisions for a larger budget with no new tax or any 

increase in any existent tax. Furthermore, this budget is one that indicates our net per capita debt is now 

down to the nominal sum of $21. 

 

Opposition Member: — You don't mean $21. 

 

Mr. Johnson: — Per capita debt. That is what I said, Mr. Speaker. $21 per capita debt. That is what I 

meant. 

 

Mr. R.A. McCarthy: — Why don't you take up a collection and pay for it? 

 

Mr. Johnson: — Also, provision is made in the budget for new borrowings for the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation and Saskatchewan Government Telephones. Certainly, no one can dispute the immense 

benefits that these Crown corporations are providing to this province. 

 

The budget has also indicated the changing nature of our economy. It has indicated that some 66 per 

cent of our provincial output, last year, was derived from non-agricultural sources. 

 

At this time, I would like to comment on the changing nature of agriculture in our province. I would first 

like to remark on the change in the labour force, and I would like to make comparisons between two 

years, on which I will give statistics from the census. In 1941, we had a farm labour force of some 

187,000. This, of course, includes the farm operator, the hired help and unpaid family. In 1956, this 

labour force had been reduced to some 147,000. In spite of this reduction in the labour force, we have 

been able to cultivate more land and produce more livestock. This has been mainly due, of course, to the 

changing nature of the technology of our province, and the impact of mechanization on our farms. This, 

again, is indicated by the fact that, in 1941, the farmers owned and operated some $142 million, which 

had increased in 1956 to some $564 million which, even taking into consideration the changing value of 

currency, is a most substantial increase. Farmers, the past few years, have been spending million every 

year to purchase new machinery. 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

16 

In term of individual farms, I will refer to results obtained through the Farm Management Division of 

the Agricultural Representatives Branch. As members in the House are aware, this Farm Management 

Division has gathered information that is of much value to us and also of great benefit to themselves. To 

cite a few instances; these clubs founded in the north-east portion of the province around the Carrot 

River Valley, farm capitalization was in the vicinity of $16 per cultivated acre. Of course this contrasts 

at the other end of the capitalization in my own area of some $10.62. But this is important and 

significant and is borne out by the annual cost of owning and operating machinery. In the north-east 

corner of the Carrot River Valley, it costs the farmers some $6.67 per cultivated acre to own and operate 

his machinery. This means, if a farmer seeds half of his cultivated acreage every year, he must set aside 

approximately 10 bushels of wheat in order to maintain his investment in machinery and to operate it. 

These things, of course, indicate the importance of machinery in our province, and economy. It is of 

great importance, and our Department of Agriculture and Government should be congratulated in 

helping the farmer to maintain this standard of equipment. For certainly, as every farmer knows, it is bad 

enough to have a breakage at some important time in a working season, but it is many times worse to 

find, when you have gone to town, that there are no parts available. 

 

The Agricultural Machinery Administration is aiding in improving the standard and quality of service 

available to farmers in Saskatchewan. Also, the Agricultural Machinery Administration has gone further 

for, in my own observation (and I am sure in the observation of many members of this House), many of 

the machines that have been offered for sale in this province have not been well designed nor properly 

built. The Machinery Testing Branch under the Agricultural Machinery Administration does just that; 

and even though they are only in their first year of operation, they have conducted tests that are of great 

interest to the farmers in the province. I would just like to cite two of the interesting and valuable tests 

which they have made. 

 

The members of this House are aware that 1959 was a disastrous year for farmers, especially in the 

northern areas, and we are well aware, of course, of the advice, every harvest, for the farmers to harvest 

their grain dry. This has had the result, in many instances, of leaving it there to this day. A possible 

solution to this, where we have a short season is to employ grain driers. The Agricultural Machinery 

Administration has conducted extensive tests on the performance and durability of grain driers, and the 

information which they gathered and passed on to the farmers is of tremendous benefit to the 

agricultural industry of this province. 

 

I would also like to cite another test which I regard as of great interest to the farmers in this province. As 

farming members know, a 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

17 

heavy duty cultivator has become practically a universal implement on Saskatchewan farms. One of the 

tests conducted by the Testing Branch of the Agricultural Machinery Administration was durability tests 

on cultivator sweeps. They tested 7 makes of sweeps that are currently available on the market. I think 

the results were astonishing and most enlightening because in the value that different makes of sweeps 

gave, they found that some were 2 1/2 times as good as the poorest in durability per dollar value. I think 

this is a good indication as to which one a farmer should purchase, if he is interested durability, and also, 

I think, this test will prompt many of the machine companies (at least it should) to conduct more and 

better research on the production of their sweeps. 

 

I would like also to comment, as I think the time is long since past, that consumers should be given more 

consideration by the manufacturer. An indication of the general neglect of the consumer is shown by the 

fact, in comparing these cultivator sweeps, there were only two of these which conformed to 

specifications laid by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers, which is a body which 

endeavours to provide conformity and standardization in various aspects of farm machinery. I think we 

have not the power to direct the companies to produce more standardized equipment, better equipment, 

but, certainly, if we as consumers are informed, we will be in a position to select most properly. 

Certainly, the A.M.A. is in a position to give us that help, which we very much need. 

 

I would also like to comment on the amount of money spent by the Agricultural Machinery 

Administration, which I think last year was one-fifth of one per cent of the money the farmers spent in 

purchasing farm machinery. It is a very modest sum and certainly of immense benefit to the farmers of 

this province. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I would like to express appreciation for another aspect of the budget, one which 

provides for assistance to rural telephone companies. Certainly, to comment on the necessity and 

desirability of communications in this day and age would be purely unnecessary. However, in listening 

to the Hon. Minister of Telephones (Hon. Mr. Williams) in this House, a couple days ago, he mentioned 

that there were some 952 rural telephone companies. I would like to contrast this with the telephone 

company that exists in my own constituency. The Kindersley Rural Telephone Company now consists 

of what had been some 18 smaller companies. This progressive policy of amalgamation has vastly 

improved the service in that, at the present day, a person can 'phone 1,600 members in his rural 

community without dialling long distance. I don't say that is necessarily a record, but I am indicating 

that it provides a very high quality of service. 

 

I would like to comment that all this assistance from the Government is much appreciated; but there is a 

great deal that people can do for themselves in improving their own service, and I would like to 

compliment the Kindersley Rural Telephone Company for the high standard of service they are 

providing. Nevertheless, the amount of money that is being provided 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

18 

for assistance to the rural telephone companies will be highly appreciated. 

 

In concluding, Mr. Speaker, I would like to indicate that I will certainly support this most excellent 

budget. 

 

Mr. Eiling Kramer (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, on rising to take part in this Budget debate, 

may I add my congratulations to yourself, Sir, and all the previous speakers. May I also express my 

regret at the retirement of several Ministers and private members. May I also express my regret to those 

members who may be retiring involuntarily — and I am looking across the way when I say this. I noted 

with interest that the member for Redberry (Mr. B.K. Korchinski) sang his swan song yesterday, and 

after listening to him complaining about his length of time on the air, I would suggest that he would 

have been better if he had said less. I understand they are recording that speech up in Redberry for the 

C.C.F. use in the next election. 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): — Good! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, sometimes I wonder when I am listening to some of the attempts of the 

Opposition of both parties, whether they have ever heard that it is better to remain silent and be thought 

dull, than to open their mouth and remove all doubt. 

 

I wish now to say a few things on behalf of this budget. First of all, I am surprised at this budget and 

very happily surprised. I am happily surprised at this budget because, in spite of the fact that we are in 

the midst of an agricultural depression in western Canada's greatest agricultural area, we are again able 

to increase our budget this year by some many millions of dollars, providing more extended service, 

better service, to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

It has also been brought to my attention, with regret, Mr. Speaker, that after all the fanfare and promises, 

after one thousand farmers went to Ottawa, last year, asking for deficiency payments which were 

promised by the Conservative party, the news has just come through that the Prime Minister of Canada 

has turned down deficiency payments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Shame! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker (Attorney General): — No better than the Liberals. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — This must be to the everlasting disgrace of the present Conservative party when you 

consider all the promises they made in the election in 1958. No better than the Liberals, is correct. 

 

I would like to say a few words about that now, if I may. Let us 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

19 

remember what the situation is: the people across the way are trying to get the farmers' eyes off the fact 

that the position the farmers are in today is directly the result of the inaction of the Liberal party in 

Ottawa over the years. There are two points about the situation we find ourselves in today. First of all, 

inflation. Inflation was brought about by the combined efforts of the Liberal, Tory and Social Credit 

parties after the war, when they combined in their efforts to remove price controls. 

 

Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — They were warned by the C.C.F. party in Ottawa at that time, by Mr. Coldwell, and 

they were also warned, incidentally, by organized labour, that this would ruin the Canadian economy 

eventually. Now they are crying crocodile tears about the situation. They never thought there was 

inflation until the government changed at Ottawa. You never thought there was such a thing as inflation; 

but now the Liberal party have finally become aware of the fact that there is inflation. 

 

Secondly, I want to point out that the agricultural situation is one of the most important problems which 

they face today. We hear these people again crying crocodile tears about the situation the farmer finds 

himself in, and they suggest that there is nothing in this budget for the farmer. Well, I am going to have 

a few things to say about that, a little later on. I am going to prove before I am through, Mr. Speaker, 

that more than 50 per cent of this budget is of direct benefit to the rural areas, of direct benefit to 

agriculture. My roots are deep in the soil of the farm and they are going to remain there. I think it is an 

everlasting disgrace that these people will take part in this debate in this house and say that nothing, or 

very little has been done, and cry with their carping criticism and suggest that somehow or other we are 

to blame for the situation. 

 

We had better take a look at the record of the Liberal party; and lot us remember, too, that the present 

Leader of the Liberal party chose to leave the C.C.F. party which was fighting for the farmer, and join 

up with the party that was going down to disgrace through disregard of the farmers in western Canada. 

Let us remember that he joined them right when they were refusing parity prices and refusing to do 

anything about western agriculture. This is when the new hero chose to leave the party that was fighting 

for the interests of western Canada. 

 

This just did not happen overnight. Liberal speakers would try to suggest that this just happened lately, 

since the Tories took office. Well, let us take a look, in 1949, the net income to Saskatchewan farmers 

was $344 million — that was an average year; then in 1953, it was about $600 million — and what 

happened? The last year the Liberals had anything to do with the economy of Canada it was down to 

$186 million: from $344 million in 1949 to $186 million in 1958. This was not the fault of the 

Conservatives; and don't forget, when you are talking of dollars, Mr. Speaker, that those dollars will buy 

a great deal less if you took the dollar comparison — $344 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

20 

million; $186 million — you would find out that the farmer was getting a net income of one-third of 

what he received in 1949. Mr. Speaker, this has been directly the result of the policies of the Liberal 

party in Ottawa. The only thing we can blame the Tory government for is that they have done nothing 

about it, and chosen to add to the difficulties of western Canada, chosen to do nothing until, today, when 

they have turned down what is a legitimate demand of the Wheat Pool, the Farmers' Unions, and so on. 

This is the situation, and that is why I say it is surprising that this budget could he as strong as it is, and 

this proves that we have other sources to draw on, the sources of diversification and of industrialization. 

 

I want to say a few words on behalf of the people of The Battlefords, and what has happened during the 

last few years since I was elected. I am proud, Mr. Speaker, to represent the people of The Battlefords, 

as I have been proud during the past eight years that I have represented them. We were elected on a 

program that was built through the conventions of the Saskatchewan people, and when we laid that 

program before the people in 1956, we said we would do certain things. These things have been done, 

and more. North Battleford was the first of the smaller cities in Saskatchewan to receive natural gas. The 

power program has been extended into practically every corner of north-western Saskatchewan. The 

extension to the telephone system has been something tremendous, some quarter of a million has been 

spent in the extension of the telephone system. I am pleased to see that dial service is going to be 

provided to the people of the town of Battleford, and I am sure they will be quite happy to learn that this 

is coming about in the very near future. 

 

We have an extensive grid road system — and yet these people across the way say we have done 

nothing for the farmers! Nothing for the farmers, indeed! Do, you know, Mr. Speaker, that, during the 

last three or four years since the grid road program was initiated, nearly $2 million was spent in the 

immediate area of north-western Saskatchewan in the North Battleford trading area; $2 million has been 

spent by the Department of Municipal Affairs on the grid road program, and all these gentlemen 

opposite can do is criticize and try to sabotage. There has been more money spent on grid roads in the 

Redberry constituency than probably any constituency in Saskatchewan, and yet we hear nothing but 

criticism. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — You should come and run in Redberry. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — You can go into that part of the country, Rabbit Lake and Meeting Lake, and gradually 

there is a system of all-weather roads coming to reality. These people have not just one highway through 

the area as has been suggested by the hon. member for Redberry, but the people now have access to grid 

roads all the way from nil to three or four miles away from them. 

 

Mr. Korchinski: — Well, come and run there then. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — I suggest the hon. member need not worry about a candidate. 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

21 

We have a candidate for Redberry, Mr. Speaker, and there is quite a little cyclone going through that 

area right now, as he will realize when the next election comes along. 

 

I am pleased to note, too, that added to all these things that I have enumerated that have been brought to 

the people of The Battlefords, I want to add, too, the improvement of the highways. There is not a single 

highway (I have said this before) that hasn't been completely rebuilt. There are seven highways to the 

trading areas of Battleford and North Battleford, these have all been rebuilt. No. 5, east and west has 

been hardtopped and maintained, and you have a good highway reaching all the way across and on into 

Alberta. Tragically enough, when it reaches Alberta it becomes a narrow, dangerous road, and there 

have been 15 deaths on that part of the road in Alberta. That's one of the reasons, I suggest, for the 

decrease in our population. If they would take out some of those dangerous turns in the Alberta 

highways instead of handing out 'funny money', they might accomplish a little more. 

 

The people of North Battleford are quite happy that finally Railway Avenue has been brought up to 

standard, properly drained and paved. I want to thank the Government for providing more than $100,000 

towards that particular project. We are pleased with the new provincial building which provides service 

and dignity to the city of North Battleford and the surrounding area. This building is the first of its kind 

in Saskatchewan and, certainly, we of The Battlefords and north-western Saskatchewan are very pleased 

with it. 

 

We want to express our pleasure as well for the geriatric wing at the Saskatchewan Hospital. We are 

also looking forward to the new park development in that area and the area further north. 

 

One of the stellar things about this budget is the fact that we are going to bring in farm improvements, 

sewer and water to farms. This is only a start, not large to begin with, it is true; but I am sure that this is 

going to be a boon, especially to the mothers and the housewives who will have the disadvantages that 

our people should have. When I think of the thousands of buckets of slop that the farm wives have 

carried over the years, I know that this progress is going to be accepted with enthusiasm. Also the 

program of water assistance to towns and villages. A good many farmers will also participate in this as 

many of them now live in the towns and villages. Mr. Speaker, these people across the way continue on 

with the old air, 'nothing for the farmers'. 

 

The health plan: I am very happy that this is coming in, and I want to suggest that this is going to be a 

real boon to the people of Saskatchewan. Some people say that private schemes can do this work better 

than an over-all provincial scheme. I would like to give you an instance of what a private scheme can 

do. Not so long ago, not too far out of North Battleford, there was a case of a small child, commonly 

known as a 'blue baby'. The child 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

22 

was two years old; the parents were hired help on a farm and they didn't have too much, but they did 

have medical services. They were paid-up members in Medical Services. They took this child to the 

specialist in Saskatoon and the specialist suggested that this child should go to Chicago, the only place 

they could perform the very delicate operation that was necessary. This would cost about $1,000. They 

applied to M.S.I, but the 'fine print' said, "no, it can't be done". The doctor and the mother got in touch 

with the Red Cross and the Red Cross made arrangements to pay for the operation in Chicago. Finally, 

the Department of Social Welfare in North Battleford heard of this. They knew that the child would need 

transportation as well as the mother, also keep while they were down there. So they provided the cost of 

the transportation and care for this child and mother. Contributions from the neighbours in that area 

provided further assistance. 

 

This is the kind of thing I think about when I contemplate a medical-care program. These are the things 

that you don't get in private plans. What we want is a system of universal care under which everyone has 

health security. Private plans do not offer complete coverage. 

 

I want to go over a few more things in my constituency and point out the tremendous benefits. I would 

like to suggest in the three larger units that are wholly or partly in my constituency, as well as the city of 

North Battleford, that education grants in those three areas alone have amounted to over $3 million in 

the past 4 years. Take, for instance in the city of North Battleford alone, the grants have been doubled in 

the past 4 years. Mr. Speaker, what is a grant? Is it nothing for the farmers? Well, a grant, in this 

instance for education, means that it is going to keep the tax rate down, especially in areas, in the lower 

assessed areas. 

 

I can suggest to you that in the area where it is somewhat submarginal, northeast of North Battleford, in 

the Medstead Unit, last year, if there had been no grant paid, farmers in that area would have paid 47 

mills more taxes, if it had not been for the grants to education. The budget indicates grants will again go 

up, and probably permit the Larger Units to hold the line against rising costs without tax increase. 

 

Let us take a look at the Department of Health, and what happened to the people of Battleford as far as 

health was concerned. We have two hospitals in the Battlefords area — the small hospital in Borden, 

and the larger Notre Dame city hospital, which is run by the Sisters and very well run, I might say. The 

Department, through the Hospital Services Plan paid out last year $671,000 in those two hospitals alone. 

Now let us take a look at what is happening in the Health Regions, and this is during the years 1955-56 

to 1959-60. Child health services, where they took care of half a million infants and children, prenatal 

classes were held and some 7,000 expectant mothers were taken care of. School services and school 

visits and pupils inspected numbered 220,000. In the immunization program — (of course there would 

not be any farmers taking part in this immunization 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

23 

program — the farmers never even think of this thing), smallpox and Salk vaccine, more than one 

million in the North Battleford Health Region during the last four years. The total number of visits for 

communicable disease and other reasons. again more than one million. Sanitation services, public 

inspection visits, water and sewage, providing health protection, 227,000 inspections by the sanitary 

officers. Of course, all that goes with this program never benefits any, farmer! 

 

I would like to get back to the grid road program and point out that the four municipal units which are 

wholly or partly in The Battlefords constituency received nearly $300,000 in grants. Then we come to a 

somewhat larger item. We have in the North Battlefords constituency an amount of some $2 million 

spent on highways, during the last four years. Of course, the farmers never get on to these highways at 

all! It might be noted, however, that the count of cattle trucks going to Saskatoon market and the market 

in North Battleford are somewhat tremendous because that area produces more cattle than any area in 

Saskatchewan. If these stockmen were travelling on those good old Liberal highways, trying to truck 

their cattle, they would not only be stuck in the mud, but the cattle would starve to death before they got 

there, to say nothing of the higher trucking rates. 

 

Hon. Mr. Sturdy: — They'd be all shaken to pieces! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — They'd be all shook up; that's for sure. But if they could get them there, they would 

probably be paying two to three times as much for hauling service. Either that, or they would remain at 

home at the mercy of the old cattle buyer who used to cow around before, buying at his own price! Two 

million dollars for highways in The Battlefords, and that is not one of the largest constituencies. 

 

I would like to go over the Public Works projects, as far as finance is concerned. I mentioned telephones 

before, and coupling telephones with the work done at the Provincial Hospital and the provincial office 

building, nearly $2 million again was spent in The Battlefords on public buildings. Of course, the 

farmers never get away from home; they never visit a provincial park; never go on a holiday; but the 

$750,000 which was spent on provincial parks throughout this province this year, I suggest was a great 

boon to the farmer and his family, Another $750,000 was spent on recreation service. 

 

I heard our friend from Rosthern (Mr. Elias) going on about how wonderful things were in Alberta, the 

other day. It is strange again that, under the management of this Government in Saskatchewan, it 

happened to be the only place in Canada where you can still make a nickel telephone call. Thinking of 

the nickel, I was reminded of a trip I took into Alberta last summer, visiting a niece of mine at Innisfail. 

We crossed the border, and the kids were kind of hard to keep occupied, so I started a little game. I said 

to the kids, "Now, every time you see a farm with a power pole, a transformer in it, I will give you a 

nickel." They were having quite a contest spotting these farms, and it became quite monotonous, 

because I only 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

24 

spent 30 cents in the first 100 miles, going in to Alberta. 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — What kind of a highway were you on? 

 

Mr. Kramer: — I was on the highway from Alsask west. A very good highway, much better than 

Lloydminster west. 

 

Also on my trip to Alberta, we visited a few friends. You know, it was surprising to hear the hon. 

members who represent Social Credit get up on their feet, when they were talking about purple gas, and 

suggest that purple gas should be allowed in farm trucks. We hold three political conventions, last 

summer, and the purple gas question was brought up, and discussed. When it was discussed, it was 

voted down almost unanimously with about two or three, possibly dissenting in our political convention 

made up mostly of farmers. For instance, for the benefit of the hon. member for Redberry (Mr. 

Korchinski) I would like to say that we had 263 farm delegates at that convention. I would suggest that 

those people who would say Alberta is allowing farmers to use purple gas ought to take a good look at 

some of the other things. Maybe they would like to have those, too, I have a friend in Alberta. His name 

(if you would like to make a note of this, and write him a letter, you may) is George Illingworth. He 

lives in Clive, Alberta, which is a farm community, Two years ago I was visiting there, and he had just 

sent in his money for the power. He had just sent in a cheque for $1,495. That was his cost of power for 

the same thing that we get for an average of around $500. Not only that; after that line had been built he 

was stuck for the maintenance, as well. This is the good deal that the farmers of Alberta are receiving. It 

will take an awful lot of purple gas to pay for that power. 

 

Premier Douglas: — What about their car insurance? 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Not only that, yes, the car insurance as well. Their car insurance in Alberta is double 

the amount, but they did come back on the one hand with their purple gas tax remission and allow their 

friends, the insurance companies to take it away with the other. 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — Two and three times over. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Yes, and a little more besides. Mr. Speaker, I would like to suggest that we are very 

appreciative of this budget. I could go on to great lengths and tell you a lot of the other things that are 

being done, and the reasons I have for supporting the Budget. However, I think I have said sufficient, 

and I have given every indication that I am going to support the Budget. I am going to support it, as I 

said at the outset, because it does a great deal for agriculture. In fact, this budget could be criticized in 

some areas, because it is weighted in favour of agriculture. I think it should be, because the rural areas, 

due to the neglect (as I said at the outset) of past Liberal Federal Governments and the present Tory 

Government, do need more help than some of the urban areas. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that 

I am very proud to support this budget. 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

25 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, to remove any doubt or 

worry on the part of any of the members, let me say that I am going to support the motion. I am sure that 

the hon. members would be quite satisfied if I said that, and stopped — that is my hon. friends opposite; 

but I just cannot do that on this occasion. I have a few things I would like to say. 

 

One of the things I would like to say is how proud I have been of the work of our Provincial Treasurer 

over these 16 years. I have had occasion to travel across Canada to different parts, and to meet people in 

business and in financial business, and I have heard a great many compliments as to his ability in 

financial affairs. That ability, combined with a realization of the meaning of the dollars when they are 

interpreted in terms of human well-being, is a very important combination. 

 

I also want to say that I am very proud of the speeches that the members from this aide of the House 

have made. They have set forth clearly and with good logic, their reasons for supporting the budget. The 

hon. members opposite have made some good speeches, except that come of their logic was rather weak. 

They made up for it with noise, and with some of their facts and assumptions which were far from being 

correct. We should not be too critical of them, because we must realize they are in rather a difficult 

position. 

 

One of their objectives during this Session has been that they have been trying to talk away the facts in 

regard to the mineral development which has taken place in this province over the past 10 to 16 years. 

They would like to talk that away. They would like to forget it. They would like not to see it any more. 

It is like a bad spectre or a ghost that haunts them, and they have to do something to try to get rid of it. I 

have no doubt that every night when they say their prayers, they also say, "I saw a man upon the stairs; a 

little man who wasn't there. He wasn't there again today; I wish that man would go away." 

 

Mrs. Batten: — At least we say our prayers, which is more than I can say of some of you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The development that has taken place over the province of Saskatchewan 

over the years. I am afraid, will not go away. It is here. It is a fact, and it will continue to grow. The hon. 

members opposite remind me, in regard to their attitude toward this development, of what, I believe, has 

been said about the Bourbons of France. They learn nothing; they forget nothing! 

 

Let us have a look at the facts. First, mineral production value for 1943, the total value of mineral 

production in this province was $26 million. That was produced in wartime, at high pressure, when all 

metals that could be produced were needed, and there was all kinds of pressure on the mines to produce 

all of the metals they could. 

 

I notice in 'The Leader-Post' for Thursday night, one of the Liberal 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

26 

candidates said: "The C.C.F. friends have declared they planted the province's natural resources in the 

ground in the first place." Well, Mr. Speaker, it is obvious we didn't. We have never claimed it; but my 

hon. friends over there would like the people of this province to believe that the resources were just not 

here when they were in power. I want to disclaim any credit for having put the resources here in this 

province. 

 

In 1943, under wartime pressure, $26 million was the total value of minerals produced in the province; 

in 1959, an estimated $210 million, over eight times as much. This measure in 1959 is not a measure at 

high prices. The prices of minerals, of oil, are all down from what they were a few years ago, so this 

figure of $210 million at the high prices of a few years ago could have been many millions higher. It is 

not an inflated figure. 

 

Crude oil production; in 1947, Saskatchewan produced about half a million barrels of crude oil. That 

was less than one-tenth of the crude oil that was produced in Alberta during that year. In 1955, 

Saskatchewan produced approximately 11 million barrels of crude oil which was over one-tenth of what 

was produced in Alberta during that year. In 1956, our production was 21 million barrels of crude oil, or 

over one-seventh of the production which had taken place in the province of Alberta. In 1957, we 

produced 37 million barrels of crude oil, which was over one-quarter of the production in Alberta. In 

1958, our production was 44,600,000 barrels, over one-third of the Alberta production. In 1959, our 

production is estimated to be close to 49 million barrels, a little more than one-third of what was 

produced in Alberta for the same year. 

 

We should also remember that Alberta has about two and one-half times as much by volume of 

sedimentary rock as Saskatchewan has. The sediments are much deeper, and over a greater area. Their 

sedimentary area extends right through to the north of the province, going on away down to the 

Mackenzie River Valley. I do not think that either Social Credit, Liberals, or C.C.F. or Conservatives 

had any responsibility for putting those sediments there. 

 

The footage of drilling that has taken place (and I hope my hon. friends will listen to this) in 1943, 

33,700 feet of drilling. Actually that was just a few post-holes. In 1946, 107,000; in 1950, there were 

239,000 feet of drilling done, in 1954, the drilling amounted to two and one-half million feet, in 1957, 

the drilling amounted to over five million feet, and in 1959, it was still 3,200,000 feet, or almost 100 

times the amount of drilling that was done in this province in 1943. I don't know what my hon. friends 

expect, as that has been quite a substantial increase in activity. 

 

I have mentioned before the importance of revenue for the people of Saskatchewan from minerals. I 

want to mention that again. In 1944-45, 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

27 

the revenue was less than one-quarter million. Our peak year for revenue from mineral resources was in 

1957-58, when there was almost $25 million in revenue from mineral resources. In the last complete 

fiscal years 1958-59, the revenue was approximately $22,500,000 and the estimate for the coming year 

of this revenue is now under $20 million. 

 

My hon. friends say it's all gone. It may not do any good to explain to them, but I'm going to try once 

again, Mr. Speaker. When there are oil strikes — and certainly we had them here in Saskatchewan in 

rapid succession at Smiley and Fosterton in the Swift Current area, and then one after another in 

Frobisher, Steelman, Weyburn and Midale, and Carnduff, and so on, down in the southeast of the 

province this Government had the foresight to set aside certain lands as Crown reserves, so that when 

there were a lot of discoveries and there were fields proven up, we had some very valuable lands to sell 

at lease sales. In those years we got a very high return. That situation can only happen when two things 

prevail; first of all, when there is a general boom in the oil business, and, secondly, when you have 

discoveries in the new fields, For the last couple of years, I am sorry to say, there have been no new 

major discoveries in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Why? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — One of my hon. friends asks why. How many major discoveries were there 

in the province of Saskatchewan prior to 1944? Why? 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Ah! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The hon. member for Cannington says 'Ah'. He doesn't like it. He doesn't 

want to believe that little man upon the stairs; the little man that wasn't there." That is a bad ghost! 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — I don't care. I was here long before that! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Nothing was done. Nothing was accomplished, but I am not blaming the 

government of that day for that. But my friends opposite are absolutely dishonest when they blame the 

Government because there has been a couple of years without any major discoveries here. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — You've been blaming us for that, right along. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — You're absolutely dishonest when you do that. I have never blamed the 

government. I have only drawn the comparison. It was my hon. friend's conscience that was hurting him. 

Mr. Speaker, as I have said before, they never learn. They would certainly like to forget. 

 

The production of practically all minerals today is in surplus. 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

28 

There is more copper, more zinc, more nickel, more iron that could be produced and go to market than 

there is a market for, today. There could be more oil produced, a lot more oil produced, than is being 

produced today. In Saskatchewan we could produce nearly 50 per cent more oil than we are producing at 

the present time, if there was a market. That is not the fault of the Government. In the province of 

Alberta. they could produce 100 per cent more oil than they are producing today. That is not the fault of 

the Alberta government. Prices are lower. Prices of crude oil have gone down; prices of metals have 

gone down; and, naturally, under these circumstances, exploration generally has slowed down. I never 

denied that. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Why don't you tell the Minister of Agriculture about that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — That is taking place not only here. In all other parts of Canada and the 

United States, the same situation exists. Production in some places is down, as well as exploration, but 

not in Saskatchewan. Our production has been going up, or holding its own. Our oil production is up; 

but in Alberta, as I mentioned, they are only producing half of what they could produce. In Ontario, they 

are talking about ghost mining towns today. There isn't the market. There isn't the demand for it to be 

produced, and they are going to shut down, as they have over the years shut down many mines in the 

province of Ontario. In a situation like this it is very natural that companies should endeavour to make 

all the economics they can under these circumstances. That is true. It is happening all over the country. 

 

The Leader of the Liberal Party has been naming off the list of companies, but I wasn't able to get them 

until they were made public in 'The Leader-Post' last night, and I feel grateful to 'The Leader-Post' for 

having published that list of companies. I want to run over that list of 14 companies which the Leader of 

the Liberal Party said had moved out, lock, stock, and barrel. It is true that some of them have moved 

their offices from Regina. That is one of the risks that the City of Regina never ran when there was a 

Liberal Government. There was no danger that they would ever lose an oil company; they didn't have 

any to lose! Of these 14 oil companies which have moved from Regina, I want to point out that two had 

never had an office in Regina. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — What about California Standard? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — California Standard has a staff of 18, approximately. Sinclair of Canada Oil 

Company moved in 1959, and their over-all acreage of land increased by about 150,000 acres in permits 

and leases. The Pan-American Oil Company moved in January of this year, and their acreage is down in 

permits, but they have assigned that acreage to United Canso Oil and Gas Company, Limited. The 14th 

one, Canadian Superior Oil of California is still here, and have a little more acreage than they had 

before. 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

29 

So to sum up, of the 14, two never had an office in Regina, two are still here, three have more acreage 

now than they had before, and a couple of them never had land in Saskatchewan at all. That is the great 

disaster which has befallen this province! 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — No wonder these people didn't want Thatcher for the leadership! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — They don't want him in the House, obviously, because none of them were 

jumping up and down offering him a chance to got into the House, last fall. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — You were afraid to open a seat . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, the member for Cannington is a nice chap. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Thank you! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I kind of like him, but I never thought he was so simple — so simple as to 

think that another political party would open a seat for his leader. What was the matter with him? Why 

didn't he open Cannington? Didn't he think his leader would be elected in Cannington? Didn't he want 

his leader in the, House? 

 

Opposition Members: — We're in no hurry; but you are! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Our leader was in the House of Commons right up to the time of the 

election campaign, right up to then. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Yes, he was playing politics and drawing his indemnity! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — We had a government in office at that time, and you didn't know when they 

were going to call an election. They didn't call an election for six years. I didn't resign because I was 

trying to do just the same job that my hon. friend is trying to do over there in this Legislature, and, Mr. 

Speaker, I think I was doing a better job of it, too. I hope so! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Your real leader was overseas fighting a war. You stole it away from him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, let us get back and talk about the oil industry just a little more. 

In the province of Saskatchewan we have better provisions for giving credit against rentals on either 

permits or leases, or refunds of those rentals, for work, either exploration work or drilling as the case 

may require, than any other province 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

30 

or any other jurisdiction. Again. I want to point out that, over the years, these credits and refunds have 

amounted to $12 1/2 million — a 12 1/2 million credit of rentals towards the doing of the work, toward 

exploration and the drilling of wells. That does not look like we were being unreasonable with the oil 

companies. 

 

I want to say also, that more than one oil man phoned me after this fiasco took place in the Trianon, the 

other night. They were pretty mad about what was said about the oil companies. They don't like that. 

The only reason that they are not doing more here is exactly the same reason that they are not doing 

more in other places across Canada. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. Would the hon. Minister be prepared to give the 

names of the oil companies that phoned him? Or are you just dragging up some old shadow that you saw 

on the stairs, but you wouldn't name him. I say nobody phoned you! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I have listened, Mr. Speaker, to the hon. members opposite . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — There's the man on the stairs. He had a little dream! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . talking about what somebody told them. I have listened to them all 

during this Session. They never present any names in evidence, and if they don't want to believe that the 

oil companies don't like this kind of thing, they don't need to, it isn't helping them any to keep on with 

this kind of stuff. 

 

Another thing, we have established here in Saskatchewan the best system of keeping correlating, and 

supplying geological information to the companies that are doing the exploring, through our core and 

sample laboratory on Dewdney Avenue. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — That's not what the Stanford Report says. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say just a word or two about industrial 

development. This is the last issue of the magazine, 'Trade and Commerce', February, 1960. It is headed 

'Saskatchewan Sees Busy Summer Ahead for 1960', and it starts out: 

 

"Saskatchewan's big building spree continued during 1959 with only minor setbacks, our research 

department learned through 26 completed questionnaires filled in, after 28 major communities were 

contacted. 

 

"Nipawin saw five times as much spent on new homes in 1959 as in 1958, Canora, Lloydminster, 

Melfort and Shaunavon doubled their mark over the previous year. 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

31 

"The growing towns of Weyburn and Yorkton have now topped the 81 million mark, and again 

building construction in Saskatchewan in 1959 reached peak level, with a number of major provincial 

centres reporting the biggest building year in their history. 

 

"The outlook is for another busy construction year in 1960 with several big money projects or the 

drafting boar.," 

 

It doesn't look exactly like a complete failure! You know, if people would read the papers, even 'The 

Leader-Post' they would find out what is going on. I pick up this issue of 'The Leader-Post', and I find 

under the dateline 'Weyburn' the assessment roll for 1960 has been approved at $6 million. Last year, the 

figure was $5.7 million, and in 1957, it was $4.9 million. This is an increase in the value of the buildings 

and property in Weyburn, indicating the building that has been going on. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — They've had a re-assessment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, here is North Battleford, A new $500,000 Safeway store has been 

announced for the city of North Battleford. That doesn't look as though things are completely going to 

the dogs, when that kind of thing is taking place. So, I think this question has been well dealt with, this 

question of industrial development. The people all over the province of Saskatchewan can see what is 

happening. They don't have to listen, and they certainly don't pay much attention to the gloomy stories 

told by my hon. friends opposite. 

 

It may be true that, according to Parliamentary rules, the budget debate is no place to discuss the internal 

affairs of a political party; but apparently we have had a little bit of that here, and I would like to say just 

a few words on the question of political parties. The concern for the welfare of the C.C.F. which is 

shown by the Liberals and by others is extremely touching. It is hard to know what they are getting at. I 

didn't think they were concerned about the welfare of the C.C.F. so much, but obviously they really do 

care. They just don't want us to get into any trouble at all. Here was the member for Turtleford (Mr. 

Foley) making a speech — no, it was in Regina. This was taken from 'The Leader-Post' of August 20, 

1959, and I think he was out on an election campaign about that time. 

 

Mr. Foley: — That's old history now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, it is almost old history. As a matter of fact, it is older than they think! 

The headline says: 'Dissension Among the C.C.F. Says Foley". I would suggest, first of all, that we do 

appreciate the sympathy and concern which the Liberals feel for us, but don't be too worried about that 

dissension. You may have in your own 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

32 

ranks come dissension that may need a little attention. As a matter of fact, it is a good thing to have 

some dissension and difference of opinion, but I never worry about that. But one thing that doesn't look 

good is when a political party gets what is obviously a prepared program, and they adopt it just like that, 

on one convention. The Social Credit candidate for one of the constituencies — and again this is 'The 

Leader-Post', February 24, 1960 — says this, at Yorkton: 

 

"Amalgamation of the C.C.F. and labour is the biggest threat we are facing, not only in Saskatchewan, 

but also in Canada. It is time for everyone to join forces and fight evil." 

 

Since when were farmers and labour people evil? I want to know. I want to know since when it was evil 

for farmers and labour to organize to work together. I don't think it is. I don't agree about that at all. 

 

The Liberals have indicated, too, that they think this proposed joining up of labour forces and farmers is 

a bad thing and a dangerous thing. They have been talking about it, and the leader of the Liberal Party 

says that the main issue in this election is as to whether or not farmers and labourers should work 

together. Mr. Speaker, I have here 'The Leader-Post'. 

 

"Liberals believe," he said, "that one of the vital issues in the coming campaign is the proposed 

amalgamation." 

 

But wait a minute: 

 

"The Liberal leader dismissed the prepaid medical plan proposed by the Government as a 

smokescreen, behind which the C.C.F. hopes to hide its many . . . but the vital issue is this merger in 

question." 

 

Opposition Members: — Where's the farmer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Personally, Mr. Speaker, I am quite prepared to tell the leader of the Liberal 

Party that it is not his business whether the farmers and the labour people want to get together in a 

political party or not. The only thing that hurts him, and hurts my friends opposite, is the fact that if this 

succeeds, they can't have them. That is the trouble; and they have been telling both farmer and labour 

people all through the years, "Come into our party; we can look after your interests whether you are 

farmer or labour". But they say, "Oh, these people simply couldn't work together in a political party of 

their own"; but if big business runs it, like it runs the Liberal party, they will be all right there. This is 

the kind of malarkey they have been trying to give to the people 

 

What is this new party that they talk about, anyway? Well, it 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

33 

is nothing else but exactly what we have had in the province of Saskatchewan for the last 20 years. We 

have had here labour and farmer and white-collared worker, professional people, small business people, 

all working together in a political party. It is the rest of Canada again looking to Saskatchewan in the 

lead to try to copy this, and to get these working people all across Canada on the farms, in the factories 

and in the mines, co-operating in a political party to look after their interests and the interests of this 

country. 

 

Douglas Fisher, in the House of Commons for the C.C.F. has been quoted in this House before, and I 

think it is proper that he should be quoted again. It is (of all places) on the editorial pages of 'The Leader 

Post', and it is just a short quotation. Listen: 

 

"Some people, usually opponents of the new party, have argued that a principle is negated if an 

economic association, that is, the labour movement, takes political action through a specific political 

vehicle. There is no need to consider this seriously, he says. 

 

"Of course, there is the widely mooted North American tradition in labour against such action. This is 

not inviolable nor sacred any more than is the contrary tradition to labour political action in Great 

Britain." 

 

Again he says: 

 

"Both the Conservatives and the Liberals behave as if the main role of a political party is to follow, not 

lead, the nation." 

 

The trouble is, they followed too far behind. 

 

"Each is beleaguered or enveloped by the mystic phrase of free enterprise, not knowing, as yet, that 

the nation could not afford free enterprise, as a first consideration, even if we did have it, rather than a 

corporation monopoly enterprise of the present. Ironically these monoliths are as futile in their 

structure as a medieval duchy and as bureaucratic as any government. 

 

Just one more short quotation: 

 

"The central difficulty of the labour movement in politics is that so many union people have 

swallowed the folklore of capitalists — even that part of the lore which limns labour as the 

irresponsible and destructive element which prevents the perfect working of the system." 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

34 

Even that part they have swallowed in the past. My friends opposite are afraid that something will 

happen, and that the labour people will see that this just does not work for them. 

 

A lot of nasty things have been said about some of the labour leaders on this continent, but my hon. 

friends opposite have never taken trouble to say any nice things about any labour leaders. So I want to 

read a short quotation from an address by James E. Ruth. Chairman of the Board, and President of the 

Pittston Company, before the New York Society of Security Analysts, November 5, 1959. The Pittston 

Company is one of the largest coal companies in the United States, and they have other interests as well. 

He says: 

 

Finally, I would recommend to you an article written by Mr. Donald I. Rogers, business and financial 

editor of the New York Herald Tribune, September 16, 1959." 

 

This is from the article: 

 

"Much of the credit for the bituminous coal industry being able to give wage increases and at the same 

time not adding to the inflationary spiral by increasing the price of its products, can be attributed to 

John L. Lewis and his associates of the United Mine Workers of America. Mr. Lewis has been far-

sighted enough to see that only through modernization and the resulting higher productivity can the 

operator pay the high wages and benefits that the miners receive today. He has encouraged 

mechanization, and demanded his share of the profits which I have no dispute with. He has not 

condoned or allowed featherbedding in any form or manner, and he has co-operated with the operators 

financially and otherwise, to maintain and increase our markets." 

 

That, I think, Mr. Speaker, is enough from that quotation. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Have you got one on Hoffa there too? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I have another clipping here from the 'Star-Phoenix', January 29, and the 

headline is 'Grit M.L.A. says Provincial Affairs in Critical Shape'. It says: 

 

"We are paying something like $17 million annually for interest payments alone." 

 

When there are so many irresponsible Grits making speeches around the country, somebody has got to 

keep track of them, Mr. Speaker. The member for Turtleford (Mr. Foley) made the statement — 

conditions are critical, we are paying $17 million a year in interest. Well, he knows very well there is 

over $300 million invested in Power and Telephones. What would he do? Would he 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

35 

have the people of Saskatchewan do without power and telephones or would he prefer to let private 

enterprise organize the companies to put in this service? 

 

Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. Might I ask, is the hon. Minister denying the truth of the statement 

or simply complaining because they made it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, that wasn't a point of privilege, but in fact was only a short 

speech — thank goodness for that! I don't know which he would do; whether he would sooner see the 

people go without the service or have private enterprise do the job. But, if he had private enterprise do 

the job, the Power company and the Telephone company (and it could be done, you know), they would 

have to finance this operation through common stock in the company, through bonds and debentures 

which they would sell, and they would have to sell them at a higher interest rate than the Government 

bonds, and the shareholders would expect a bigger return on their common stock than just the bare 

interest rates. There would be the same debt to create the same system of power and telephones, and the 

same people would have to pay it off, except that the debt would be a little bit bigger. When the hon. 

member goes out leaving the impression that this is an ordinary provincial debt, it isn't very honest to do 

that kind of, to try to make the taxpayers of this province think they have to pay off this kind of debt. 

 

I was very interested in the convention that took place, and in one particular statement made by one 

candidate. You will find it on Page 3; 'Fred Johnston described C.C.F.ers as a sanctimonious group of 

Pharisees'. That is very interesting. You know, there are nearly 35,000 people in the province of 

Saskatchewan who are paid-up members of the C.C.F. Those are the 'sanctimonious group of Pharisees'. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — He only described those C.C.F. members of the Government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — You can't welsh on this one. No, he wasn't. That is what the paper says. 

That is what my hon. friends over them applauded and the people of Saskatchewan will be very 

interested to hear this opinion. For example, here is a whole list of the people in my constituency, who in 

February took out memberships in the C.C.F. and there are 102 of them. They will be interested to know 

that my hon. friends think that they are 'sanctimonious Pharisees'. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. Minister has accused me . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member must have a point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of privilege. The hon. Minister has accused me of 

dishonesty. I made a statement that we had a provincial gross debt in excess of $300 million, and that 

the total interest payments were in excess of $17 million. I believe 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

36 

that statement is correct and can be verified. I would like the Minister to withdraw his remarks . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I deplore the use of this word 'dishonesty' across the floor of the House. I think there 

are other words that could be used perfectly well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I don't think I said the word 'dishonesty'. 

 

Opposition Members: — Yes, you did. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Just a minute. I didn't interrupt when the hon. member was speaking, and if 

he hasn't got the good manners to sit still . . . 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — You're a fine one to talk about good manners. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I don't think I used the word 'dishonest' in this connection, anyway. I think 

what I said was, 'that was not very honest'. If that offends my hon. friends I will withdraw it. I'm sorry. 

 

This budget that we have before us, Mr. Speaker, is certainly one of the best, if not the best, that has ever 

been presented in this House. I say that because it provides for programs which we need for better living 

in Saskatchewan; because it has in it the beginning of a medical-care program which has been one of the 

dreams of the people of Saskatchewan for a long, long time, The Liberal Minister of Public Health, in 

1934, speaking to the delegates at the S.A.R.M. Convention, promised state medicine. He said, "State 

medicine is the only thing," on that occasion. Every time they got into a pinch they talked about it a little 

bit. In 1944, they didn't do anything, but they passed an Act about it, but it was too late. This Farm 

Home Improvement Act is one which can hardly be over-estimated, and, likewise, the improvement of 

urban homes in the small towns and villages, Lack of good sanitation in the thickly-settled areas is even 

worse than lack of good sanitation when you are living in isolation, so I think both these programs will 

be very much appreciated. 

 

The extension and progress that will be made in regard to power and natural gas is also going to be 

appreciated. The highways and roads — these are things that are going to make living better, and the 

people in the far north have not been forgotten. Further co-operative actions, the housing in the north — 

this is going to help those people to do things for themselves, together with the opportunities they got for 

education, to fit them to take their places in our country, as they will some day be able to do. 

 

This budget also provides for the growth of Saskatchewan's economy. Highways make a great 

contribution to that growth, and the power and gas; also in other lines — the additional geological 

surveys that are provided for; the assistance and encouragement shown in industrial development, our 

tourist 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

37 

trade has been increasing year by year. There are provisions in this budget to further increase that trade 

— the construction of our northern roads. These are all the things which are going to help build the 

economy of Saskatchewan. So, it is because I want the people of Saskatchewan to live well, and I want 

the economy of the province of Saskatchewan to grow and develop, that. I will support the motion, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. L.N. Nicholson (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to spend a few minutes on a few topics that 

have been brought up before I adjourn the debate. I want, with the rest of the hon. members to 

congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, for your services and thank you very much for your fairness during my 

years in the Legislature. I also am sorry to see a number of the older members, on both sides of the 

House, volunteering to back out of the picture. In some cases I think they would be out anyway after the 

next election, but I have enjoyed the association with these people on both sides of the House, and I 

have received very nice co-operation from them all. 

 

At the moment, I hear an awful lot about purple gas in farm trucks. As I recall, until this winter, I 

believe I have been the only man in this House to advocate highway tax-free gasoline for farm trucks, 

since I came into the Legislature. I tell you why I have done this. I realize, as well as anyone, that there 

is a huge difference in the amount of farm trucks used on highways, but I want to relate the situation as 

it exists in my constituency, and possibly the constituency of the hon. Minister of Mineral Resources, 

and in Cumberland constituency in the north area. I did at random interview 40 farmers in my 

constituency, and asked them how many miles per year they drove their farm trucks on highways. The 

average was less than 200 miles. 

 

The hon. Minister of Highways the other day said he wanted to be fair. If a person is going to be fair, it 

certainly is not fair for a farmer to pay 12 cents a gallon for highway tax to haul his grain from his 

combine to his bin. He must do that, because if he happens to be going along the highway with purple 

gas in his truck, he is liable to be fined for it. I don't feel it is fair for a farmer to have to pay 12 cents per 

gallon highway tax, when he is hauling grain from his combine to his bins, and in many instances, to his 

local elevator. In most instances, in our country particularly, he does not use the highway. He uses a 

municipal road which is taxed to keep up. I actually tried to find out in my area, and I want to repeat that 

I interviewed 40 farmers at random, and the average driven per year on the highway with their trucks 

was less than 200 miles. 

 

Now, let us follow that through just a little bit further. If a man has a large four-wheeled trailer and even 

possibly a diesel tractor he can haul his grain from his combine to his bin and also to his elevator and 

use diesel fuel to do it. So I cannot see that, if we are going to be fair, that situation should exist. I am 

going to be honest in this respect. I do 



 

March 4, 1960 
 

 

38 

believe a lot of truck owners nearer to our cities do use the highway. I also believe that, if a farm truck is 

using the highway to any great extent, they should pay the highway gas tax. Therefore, that is the reason 

we advocate purchase in bulk, That way, if a man leaves home and is going a distance with his truck, he 

is going to have to fill up, and I feel, should pay the highway gas tax; but in his locality where very little, 

if any, travelling is on a highway, then I believe it is being misused. 

 

I got rather a kick out of the hon. member from The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) this afternoon, 

condemning the highways of Alberta. I happened to have been out there last summer myself; but when 

he said he went on to No. 9 highway at Alsask, and he condemned that highway, that highway, I believe, 

is equal to our No. 1 Trans-Canada from the Saskatchewan border West. Coming back from Calgary, I 

was on this particular highway, and it was about 36 feet of beautiful blacktop, and all of a sudden you 

come to a sign which says 'Welcome To Saskatchewan.' You don't need the signs because the highway 

will tell you that it is certainly in Saskatchewan. Certainly there have been some improvements, I am not 

going to say there have not been; but a highway programs, like anything else, the more you can do, the 

more people are going to be served by it. 

 

There is just one other little reference I want to make before I adjourn the debate, and that is to the cost 

of power in Alberta as compared with Saskatchewan. It seems funny to me that it would cost $1,400 in 

the province of Alberta for power, and $500 in Saskatchewan, when no doubt the equipment, the holes, 

the wires, all the things that go into this power project, would cost basically the same price in both 

places. It is a case of who is going to pay for it, not what it costs, whether it is $500 or $1,400. I have 

checked this situation, and I find that in Alberta, they pay it out and they own it. The co-operative, the 

company or group or whatever you call it, in the specified area, pay it out, and, first of all, they go to the 

Government and borrow 85 per cent of the cost of the project. Then the farmers can pay it out in cash, or 

get individual loans from the Government to pay it out. 

I noticed the hon. member for The Battlefords mentioned his friend paid $1,400 cash. I wonder how he 

got $1,400 cash. Very few of our farmers would be able to do that. Anyway, the point is this. In this 

House, two years ago, the same thing came out, that it cost $550 in Saskatchewan, and in Select 

Committee, the hon. Minister of Power said that we paid $750. I asked who "we" were, and he said, "the 

Government". I said, "Who eventually pays that, $750?" He said, "the users of power". So who is going 

to pay for that power before that debenture has been paid for? The users of power; and to start with, the 

minimum charge of $2.15 more here than it is in Alberta in the rural areas. 

 

Those are two or three little things I wanted to mention. I thought there was another speaker going to get 

up this evening, so I was not prepared to speak too long. With those few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I beg 

leave to adjourn the Debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o'clock p.m. 


