



















































Hansard: March 18, 1960


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

27th Day 

 

Friday, March 18, 1960 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

DEATH OF FORMER DEPUTY MINISTER 

 

Hon. J.H. Sturdy (Minister without Portfolio):  Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all members of the 

Legislature will join with me in expressing regret and sorrow at the passing of Erle Eisenhauer, 

yesterday morning, in southern California. Erle Eisenhauer was, for many years, a faithful and efficient 

public servant, and for the past number of years, from 1944 to 1956, was a Deputy Minister in the public 

service. I recall that in 1944, I was assigned the new portfolio of Reconstruction and Rehabilitation. The 

transition from a wartime economy to a peacetime economy is a difficult one, and added thereto is the 

rehabilitation of many hundreds of returned men and women, and those who have been displaced from 

wartime industry. 

 

In searching for a competent deputy, one who was an engineer and who was familiar with government 

administration and organization, my selection fell on Erle Eisenhauer, and certainly he turned out to be a 

most efficient and competent engineer, an excellent administrator, and, above all, a good friend. 

 

Unfortunately, Erle, who retired four years ago, had not long to enjoy his retirement. But such was his 

zest for living, his great capacity for enjoyment, his appreciation for people, that these four years, I feel, 

have been for him very happy ones, indeed. I know you will join with me in extending to Mrs. 

Eisenhauer, to their son Hugh and his family, our deep regrets and sincere condolences. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  This comes as a considerable shock to myself. As must members of the House know, 

Mr. Eisenhauer was Deputy Minister of Public Works when I was Minister of that department. I am 

going to ask the House to rise and stand in two minutes’ silence. 

 

Premier Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all members from all parts of the House would be 

very happy if Your Honour saw fit to send a message of condolence to Mrs. Eisenhauer, not only on 

your own behalf, but on behalf of all the members of the Assembly here gathered. 



 

March 18, 1960 

 

 

2 

PETROCHEMICAL INDUSTRY 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition):  Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are 

proceeded with, I would like to ask the Premier a question, but before I ask the question I want to give 

some of the background for asking it. I note in March 12 issue of ‘The Financial Post’ an article by Mr. 

David Francis, and in this article he quotes part of an interview that he had with the Premier of 

Saskatchewan, with respect to a petrochemical industry for our province. It is my understanding that 

Italian and British interests are in our city, or have been in the city for the last few days, and I was 

wondering if the Premier had any further announcements to make on this particular industry, at this 

time. 

 

Premier Douglas:  I don’t think there is any announcement I could usefully make at this time. The 

gentlemen in question ‘phoned and said he understood that certain British and Italian interests had been 

in Regina, which they had. They had been here in the month of December, and he had also heard 

through channels in London that they were going to be back in March, and they are back now. All I can 

say is these groups are carrying on some investigations as to the feasibility of the chemical industry, but 

I think it would be unwise for any statement to come from me. If the interests, both British and Italian, 

want to make any statements, I think such a statement ought to come from them. For that reason, I do 

not think I can say anything at this time. 

 

MINERAL TAX ARREARS 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville):  Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Mineral Resources. He is no doubt aware that notices have gone out during 

the past year from his Department with regard to arrears of mineral tax. Because of the financial 

situation in the rural areas of the province, this present year, I am wondering if consideration has been 

given to extending the final date upon which farmers can pay their mineral tax, in order to prevent the 

Government from seizing their mineral rights. this particular notice which I have here states the 25th day 

of March, 1960, which is next week. that is the reason I think this matter is of urgent importance. I am 

wondering if the Minister could make a statement and say whether or not this date would be extended 

possibly at least until the end of this crop year. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Mineral Resources):  Mr. Speaker, if the person who received 

that statement makes an application for an extension of time, particularly if he is able to pay a part of the 

arrears, he will receive due consideration as they are dealt with, as individual cases. 



 

March 18, 1960 

 

3 

Mr. Isaak Elias (Rosthern):  Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of this House to a group 

of very fine young people, occupying the front section of the Speaker’s Gallery. They are the pupils of 

Grades XI and XII from the town of Rosthern, and accompanying them is their teacher, Mr. Thader. I 

hope that their stay here with us this afternoon, which is part of a two-day visit to Regina, will be 

pleasant and profitable. I hope that their experience will be such that they will go home with a better 

appreciation of democracy in action. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 76—An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly Act 

 

Premier Douglas (Weyburn):  Mr. Speaker, as hon. members know, this is amendments to the 

Legislative Assembly Act, Bill No. 76. The other day, the Assembly agreed to remove the prohibition 

which, up until now, has prevented Treaty Indians from voting at provincial elections. This has created 

something of a problem in that in a number of cases there are Indian Reserves straddling constituency 

boundaries. We have looked for these, and there are two instances where this needed to be rectified, 

affecting Shellbrook and Cumberland. There may be others, although the Chief Electoral Officer has 

looked the thing over pretty carefully and does not think, except in these two, that there is any real 

problem. I would certainly be prepared, when this gets into Committee of the Whole, to let it sit there for 

a while to give members a chance to look over the constituency boundaries, and see if there are any 

other suggestions they might want to make. 

 

This is certainly two cases where it would be much better to have the constituency boundary coincide 

with the reserve, so that the reserve is all in one constituency, or in another. If there are other 

constituencies, and you want to raise the matter in Committee of the Whole, there is no reason why we 

cannot do that. 

 

With that explanation, Mr. Speaker, I would move that Bill No. 76 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville):  Mr. Speaker, if I might just make one reference in this particular 

case. I know I considered the question in relationship to a problem in my own constituency down around 

the Crooked Lake area, and personally, I think the reserve should be left in the constituency in which the 

portion that comes into a constituency, belongs particularly in a case such as exists in my own seat, 

where the river divides the two constituencies. The river runs between them and the lakes. Another 

reason is because, largely, the problems of the Indian are taken care of by the Federal Government, 

which does not affect actually the relationship as between members, which it would do otherwise, if they 

are 



 

March 18, 1960 

 

 

4 

dealing with their Federal member. 

 

I would suggest that it would be better, rather than having them go long distances. I know in my own 

seat, with the boundaries that have been created, the reserve has been divided actually as three or four 

reserves; but the Indian vote has been divided into two pools, which actually is a separation, in that 

sense. I think in this case that actually the boundaries of the seat should be continued as they were 

previously, and the. . .  

 

Premier Douglas:  In these two? In Sherbrook and Cumberland? 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  No I am speaking of my own situation. 

 

Premier Douglas (Closing):  Mr. Speaker, may I say that if any of the members have problems with 

respect to constituency boundaries re the introduction of the vote to the Indians, I would suggest that it 

would save the Committee a lot of time if they would go and see Mr. Borrowman, who is the Chief 

Electoral Officer and who has been looking after this matter, and he would draft an amendment, which 

would save us a lot of time in Committee. Mr. Borrowman has large maps there, and he could discuss 

the matter with you. Then, if it looked as though an amendment were desirable, you could prepare the 

amendment, and we could then deal with it in Committee of the Whole, which would save us a good 

deal of time. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

Bill No. 77 – An Act to amend The Controverted Elections Act 

 

Premier Douglas:  Mr. Speaker, this is merely a routine amendment. You will remember that, last 

year, we changed the designation of having the Clerk of the Executive Council as the Chief Electoral 

Officer, and had it stated that the Chief Electoral Officer would be named by Order in Council, with the 

idea that the Assistant Clerk of the Legislative Assembly would become the Chief Electoral Officer. I 

think that is much better. The Clerk and the Assistant Clerk are familiar with the work of the Legislative 

Assembly, and the members are more familiar with working with them rather than with the Clerk of the 

Executive Council. So this was simply changed from the term the Clerk of the Executive Council, to the 

Chief Electoral Officer. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 



 

March 18, 1960 

 

5 

Bill No. 78 – An Act to amend The Workmen’s Compensation Act (Accident Fund), 1955 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour):  These are a few improvements to The Workmen’s 

Compensation (Accident Fund) Act, and I will enumerate them briefly. The first, and perhaps the most 

important, is the raising of the wage ceiling from $5,000 a year to $6,000, which means that employees 

who are now earning between $5,000 and $6,000 will be able to receive 75 per cent of their actual 

earnings, instead of previously at no higher rate than $5,000. The next is provision whereby widows will 

receive $100 per month – that is, widows of men killed in industry – until they reach the age of 70, when 

it will be reduced back to $75 a month, which is the present rate. The rate payable for orphans, the third 

point, will be $50 per month, increased from $45 per month. 

 

One more point in connection with widows; if and when they should remarry, they will receive the sum 

of $2,000. At the present time, it is $1,800. There are some other minor amendments which can better be 

discussed in Committee, and, with that explanation, I would move that Bill No. 78 be now read a second 

time. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to, and the Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

(The House in Committee of Supply until adjournment). 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 


