



















































Hansard: February 15, 1960


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

3rd Day 

 

Monday, February 15, 1960. 

 

The House met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Hon. J.H. Sturdy (Saskatoon): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to bring to the attention of the members 

of the House the arrival of the first contingent of Saskatoon students. These students, sitting in the 

government gallery, are from the Thornton School, and Mr. Dennis Straus is their proud teacher. If 

Dennis would rise we could recognize him. Mr. Straus, on behalf of the Premier and the Members of the 

Legislature, we bid you welcome here this afternoon and trust you enjoy your stay and carry back to the 

students who are coming here in the future a good report of Regina and of the Legislature. May I also 

point out, Mr. Speaker, that you are the host to a dinner tomorrow and one on Wednesday to the 

University students. I have been notified by the Debating Director and the International Students‟ Union 

that there will be 150 of them attending here tomorrow and the next day. I would like very much if the 

members would complete this form and hand it in so that we may make arrangements for the seating at 

the dinner to which you are host, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

Mr. Kim Thorson (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to move the traditional Motion to address 

the Reply to the Speech from the Throne. This is a great honour, not to me but to the people of Souris-

Estevan constituency whom I represent. I hope that I may prove worthy of the honour accorded to those 

fine people. Those Members who have not yet had an opportunity to visit my constituency, I hope will 

not delay any longer. You have all heard of some of the exciting developments which have taken place 

in the south-east part of the province. Later on in what I have to say, I hope to outline to what extent the 

programs of this Government have benefited, not only the people of my constituency, but all the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 



 

February 15, 1960 

 

 

2 

In reading the Speech from the Throne we catch a glimpse of the Province of Saskatchewan which the 

Throne Speech reflects. That, in broad outline, gives a picture of the province for 1960. We see a 

province of less than a million people, scattered over a wide area of our prairie, park and pre-Cambrian 

regions. They work hard on farms, in factories, in mines, in commercial enterprises and in transportation 

and other services. They produce wealth from our abundant resources, and they use this wealth wisely 

and fairly, distributing the greatest measure to where there is the greatest need. The thing that most 

impresses me about the people of Saskatchewan is that they face up and measure up to the challenges 

which are presented to them in this last half of the twentieth century. 

 

The Speech from the Throne also indicates the kind of government responsibility and government 

leadership which the people have come to expect. Here is the plan of intentions which is ambitious and 

challenging, as it should be for an energetic and enterprising people. I want to examine the background 

and some of the implications of the Speech from the Throne which we heard last Thursday. 

 

This Government, concerned as it is with universal human welfare, has taken a special interest in local 

governments in the province. Since the C.C.F. Government took office more and more assistance has 

been provided to local governments in order to bring the best benefits to the people which both the local 

and provincial governments serve. 

 

For instance, in the matter of assistance to local governments for schools, in 1944 when the C.C.F. 

Government took office local governments had to find almost 80 per cent of their operating budget out 

of current land taxation because the government of that day paid only 20 per cent in grants for school 

operating costs. By 1956 school operating grants had increased to the point where the Provincial 

Government was paying over 30 per cent and by 1959, last year, school operating grants were so large 

that they made up over 40 per cent of school operating costs of the province. 

 

The same thing can be said about assistance to local governments in the matter of health services. One 

of the important by-products of the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan is that it has had the effect of 

insuring that all of the legitimate operating costs of local and privately operated hospitals are met and 

are paid. Local officials no longer have to close hospitals or borrow money to meet their operating 

expenses. The Province of Saskatchewan was also one of the first to initiate a policy of providing grants 

in aid for the construction of local hospitals. The same can be said of other health services, the setting up 

and the operation of services provided by our health regions, which has been of great help in discharging 

local governments‟ responsibilities which formerly they had to bear alone. 

 

Similarly, in the field of social welfare, the Provincial Government 



 

February 15, 1960 

 

 
3 

has assumed more and more of the responsibilities by taking over the programs which were formerly left 

to local governments, by providing them with increasing grants and with technical assistance. We have 

our public assistance programs in the province; we also have the supplementary allowance program 

which provides not only monthly payments, but medical and hospital benefits to those people in the age 

group over 70 years who are on the supplementary allowance roll. In the fiscal year 1958-59, the 

Provincial Government paid out more than half a million dollars in hospital and in medical benefits to 

the recipients of supplemental allowances. 

 

This past year we had a change in the way social aid was administered in this province. It is estimated 

that out of a total of grants paid to recipients of social aid, the local governments will be paying on the 

average across the province much less than 10 per cent and the Provincial Government will be providing 

much more than 90 per cent of the grants to recipients of social aid. This is a far cry from the day, more 

than 20 years ago, when my grandfather served on a rural municipal council which had the 

responsibility of indigent persons and it was entirely the responsibility of local governments. 

 

This Government has also provided assistance to local governments for public works projects of various 

kinds. I want to mention that the Department of Highways, through its urban assistance program 

provides for grants up to 50 per cent of the cost of improving urban streets which are part of the 

provincial highway system. A good example of the assistance available is the more than $100,000.00 

made available to the city of Estevan for improvement to its streets which are part of No. 47 Highway. 

In communities of less than 5,000 population the provincial government assumes all of the responsibility 

for construction and maintenance of urban streets which are part of the highway system. 

 

But the most important assistance to local governments for roads is in the form of grants made to 

municipalities for the construction of the market grid road system. When this plan was inaugurated in 

1955 the Rural Municipal Association requested that the Provincial Government pay at least 50 per cent, 

across the province, of the construction costs. This the Government agreed to do. Construction began in 

1956 and we have now had 4 years‟ experience with the program, which is moving along in a very 

satisfactory way. Experience shows that construction costs are not averaging $4,000.00 per mile but well 

over $5,000.00 per mile. Nevertheless, Provincial Government grants have been so substantially 

increased that the Provincial Government is now bearing something like 60 per cent of the grid road 

system and the local governments are bearing something like 40 per cent. 

 

In 1956 the C.C.F. made a commitment to the people of Saskatchewan to spend on the average at least, 

each year, three million dollars for assistance to local governments for roads, bridges and ferries. The 

fact is that in the last three years yearly assistance to local governments for roads has averaged 

something like 5.7 million dollars and in the last fiscal year 



 

February 15, 1960 

 

 

4 

the amount was 7.8 million dollars. 

 

The Provincial Government has also had a policy of insuring the financial soundness of other public 

works projects by local governments. The Provincial Treasurer has carried out the Government‟s policy 

of buying with various provincial funds, debentures issued by local governments. Many of the schools 

and hospitals, sewer and water utilities throughout the province owe their existence to this policy of the 

Provincial Government. In the last year the Provincial Government bought well over three million 

dollars of debentures issued by local governments in the province. This represented almost one-third of 

the total debentures issued by the local governments that were assisted by assistance to these capital 

works projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I mention some of these ways in which the Provincial Government has assisted local 

governments in the service of the people of Saskatchewan, in order to emphasize the significance and 

the importance of those sections in the Speech from the Throne which indicates that these already 

established policies will be maintained and, in many cases, will be expanded and continued. 

 

We are also very pleased to see in the Speech from the Throne the announcement that additional 

assistance will be made available to urban communities, particularly towns and villages, in providing 

sewer and water facilities for their citizens. More and more communities in Saskatchewan are 

establishing these systems in their communities. I am particularly proud of the successful efforts made 

by the people in my constituency. In the past three years the towns of Bienfait, Carnduff, and Oxbow 

have installed complete sewer and water systems and the Village of Carievale has installed a water 

system. But there are other urban communities in my constituency and throughout the province that 

want these facilities but have not yet been able to solve the technical and financial problems which stand 

in their way. Therefore, it is very welcome indeed to see that the provincial government is now 

embarking on a program to assist towns and villages throughout the province in providing sewer and 

water facilities. It is my opinion that no home should have to go without these amenities. It is my 

conviction that this government cannot rest content until these kind of facilities are available to every 

home in the province. 

 

Before I leave the general subject of assistance to local government by the provincial Government, I 

want to say a word or two about the good relations which exist between the provincial and the local 

governments throughout the province. I think the Provincial Government is to be commended for having 

sought the co-operation and the advice of local government officials in order to do the best job possible 

for the people of the province. The consultations before and after inauguration of the grid road program 

and the new social aid program are good examples of what I mean. The Department of Agriculture has 

worked successfully in co-operation with rural municipalities in bringing about various programs of 

assistance to agriculture such as 



 

February 15, 1960 

 

 
5 

the pest and weed control program. 

 

One of the best examples of all is the effort being made by both local governments and the Provincial 

Government to find the right answers to the problems and questions of reorganization of local 

government boundaries, responsibilities, and finances. I am sure that the technical studies and the 

discussions carried on by the Local Government Continuing Committee, which is made up of 

representatives of both local governments and the Provincial Government, will eventually come up with 

the right answers. I trust that before the report of the Continuing Committee is finalized, the Continuing 

Committee itself will undertake to consult with as many people as possible throughout the province in 

local groups, and pass on to them the results of their technical studies and their discussions and seek 

advice from local people as to what should be in the report of recommendations for action on the 

question of local government reorganization. I should like to remind the members of this Assembly that 

the Government will not embark on any program of local government reorganization without the 

approval of local government officials and the widespread support of the general public in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an increasing standard of living, and increased services, whether from provincial or local 

governments, are only possible when we have an expanding economy and increasing wealth production. 

In this respect Saskatchewan has been fortunate in recent years. I don‟t want to take time to detail all of 

the exciting economic developments taking place in our province, although new mining operations, new 

manufacturing plants, the South Saskatchewan River Dam, new power plants and other programs, all 

make exciting stories in themselves. 

 

Let me just take a minute or two to present some statistics comparing our position in the province now 

with a few years ago. Our population in Saskatchewan reached a peak about 1930 and then it began to 

decline and continue to decline each year until shortly after the C.C.F. took office. It then began to 

increase and has increased every year since then. In 1952 our population was 843,000; in 1956, 881,000; 

last year, it is estimated that it stood at 907,000. The rate of increase in personal incomes of 

Saskatchewan people would be even larger than the rate of increase in our population had there not been 

such a decline in agricultural incomes in recent years. Wages and salaries in 1956 in Saskatchewan 

amounted to $499,000,000.00; last year they had jumped up to an estimated $600,000,000.00, but net 

farm income which in 1956 stood at $443,000,000.00 had declined by 1959 to an estimated 

$223,000,000.00. Despite this decline in agricultural income, the total personal income of Saskatchewan 

people has been maintained and somewhat increased. In 1956 it was 1.10 billion dollars; last year it was 

estimated at 1.17 billion dollars. Last year, 1959, the gross value of our commodity production was 

estimated at $1,424,000,000; about one-third of it came from agricultural sources and two-thirds of it 

from non-agricultural industries. But despite the decline in the agricultural industry, our economy is 

expanding; 



 

February 15, 1960 

 

 

6 

there is a wider diversification of our sources of income and our sources of wealth and production. There 

are many factors which contribute to this development and I want to outline some of them. 

 

First I want to deal with the role the Government has played directly in the economic development in 

Saskatchewan. We think first, of course, of our development of our electric power utility by the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation. We have witnessed in Saskatchewan the construction of an integrated 

grid of transmission lines and, at the end of these lines, distribution systems which take electric power to 

the urban communities throughout the province and to more than 54,000 farm homes. We have also 

witnessed, in the past four years, the doubling in the generating capacity of our province in order to keep 

pace with the increasing demand of farm, domestic, commercial and industrial uses of electricity. The 

rate of increase in power consumption in Saskatchewan stands at about 20 per cent per year, much 

higher than the national record. 

 

Similarly, in natural gas, we have the Saskatchewan Power Corporation distributing gas now to 

customers in all of the cities of the province and to 60 other communities. 

 

I am very pleased to see in the Speech from the Throne a renewal of the pledge made to the people of 

the province by the C.C.F. Government that as long as the C.C.F. Government remains in office in 

Saskatchewan, we can count on the rapid development of our power and natural gas utilities. We can 

count on it being done through public ownership on the basis of service at cost. 

 

Communications are also important in an expanding and modern economy, and in this field the 

Saskatchewan Government Telephones has done an outstanding job. Construction of the long distance 

microwave system, the increase in the number of exchanges with 24-hour service, the increase in the 

number of telephone exchanges with dial telephones, the extension of the long distance dialling system, 

and the installation in the past 5 years of more than 45,000 new telephones, all testify to the outstanding 

job being done by Saskatchewan Government Telephones. 

 

More welcome, I think, to farm people, is the announcement in the Speech from the Throne that the 

Government is to embark on a program of substantially increased technical and financial aid to improve 

and expand telephone services in the rural areas of the province. 

 

We have other Crown Corporations in the province, Mr. Speaker, but I don‟t want to deal with each one 

of them separately. I do want to give the overall picture. To the end of their financial year in 1958, all of 

these Crown Corporations, with the exception of Power and Telephones, had invested 9.1 million 

dollars. In that year they earned a return of 1.3 million dollars or 14 per cent of the invested capital. In 

1959 the advances to Crown Corporations for investment was reduced to 8.5 million dollars and the 



 

February 15, 1960 

 

 
7 

accumulated surplus, after deducting all deficits and all losses on the operations of any of the Crown 

Corporations, came to 10.7 million dollars. These Crown Corporations have been a success financially, 

but far more important than the fact that they have paid back more than was invested in them, far more 

important than the fact that they make a return each year to the Provincial Treasury, is the work they are 

doing in developing our resources and providing low cost services in the development of 

Saskatchewan‟s economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have already said something about assistance to local governments for roads and when 

you think of the importance of the transportation system in our economy, it is worthwhile taking a 

moment to emphasize how important these good local roads are to everyone who travels in rural 

Saskatchewan. I am sure they save every farmer in the province many dollars each year because the 

farmer can get to market and service centres in a more timely and convenient manner than ever before; 

and because of the savings in less wear and tear on his vehicles, I am convinced that the grid road 

program, and good rural roads in general, save farmers of this province more money each year than they 

could possibly realize from burning tax-free fuel in farm trucks. 

 

The C.C.F. Government has made outstanding improvements in our provincial highway system since it 

took office. This has not been easy. We have the highest ratio of miles of highways per capita of any 

province in the Dominion. But the Provincial Government has realized the importance of a good 

highway system, so that each year we spend more on our highways, roads, and our northern roads, than 

we collect in the form of gasoline taxes and license fees from people who use the roads. Our Provincial 

highway system of more than 8,200 miles — almost one-third of the way around the world, more miles 

than in the combined systems of Alberta and Manitoba — now has reached the point where about one-

quarter of it is either oiled or paved and is completely dust-free. Our standards of construction have been 

so substantially improved that highways today are not only safer, but more economical and more 

convenient for the travelling public. 

 

I do not want to leave this subject of highways without expressing the appreciation of the people of the 

constituency of Souris-Estevan for the good highway construction program that has been carried out 

there in the past three or four years. We still have some miles of highway to be improved, but at the 

present rate of construction our major problems will be solved within three years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, agriculture is still the largest single industry in the Province of Saskatchewan in terms of 

people employed directly or indirectly and in terms of wealth produced and incomes earned. Therefore, 

this Government has put forth some of its best efforts in service to farm people throughout the province. 

A Provincial Government cannot control the adverse cost-price relationships and the adverse trading 

relationships which have seriously, I should say drastically and tragically reduced farm income in recent 

years in 



 

February 15, 1960 

 

 

8 

western Canada, but the Provincial Government has gone to the limits of its resources to do two things 

for farm people in Saskatchewan. First, it has done everything possible to improve rural living 

conditions; grants for schools in rural areas, the health services, the welfare services, rural power 

program, all are examples of policies and programs aimed at improving rural living conditions. 

Secondly, the Government has aimed to improve the economic position of Saskatchewan farmers, to 

help them conserve and make the best use of their resources, to help them save money in their costs of 

operations and to realize the highest possible income from the productive work they do. We think of the 

services provided by the Agricultural Representative Branch, the Agricultural Machinery 

Administration, the various farm assistance programs, work done by the Conservation and Development 

Branch; these and other programs are combined in an integrated policy which has the best interest of the 

farm people of Saskatchewan as its ultimate goal. 

 

The Speech from the Throne indicates that a crop insurance program will be introduced at this Session 

of the Legislature. All members will welcome any step that can be taken to reduce the serious financial 

consequences of a crop failure in Saskatchewan. But I think the Government must be aware that the 

federal crop insurance legislation is most unfair to the provinces and is not well suited to the agricultural 

risk conditions in many parts of Saskatchewan. I think every step must be taken to have the Federal 

Government assume its proper responsibility in the matter of crop failure throughout western Canada. 

With its much wider credit and fiscal resources it should undertake the responsibility for underwriting 

the risk of losses in a crop insurance scheme. The province could then be allowed the privilege of 

subsidizing premium and administration costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Family Farm Credit Program which assists the Co-operative Trust Company in 

providing agricultural credit for specific purposes in the province is now well under way. This crop 

insurance program is designed specifically to assist qualified young men to take over economic farm 

units from members of the older generation. It was never intended to relieve the Federal Government of 

its responsibility for general agricultural credit which is so seriously affected by national fiscal, 

monetary, and trading policies. For the work that the Family Farm Credit program is doing and for the 

assistance it provides for the co-operative movement in doing that job, the Family Farm Credit Program 

deserves a great deal more support and encouragement than it has so far received from any spokesman 

from either the Conservative or the Liberal Party in this province. 

 

I am very pleased to see in the Speech from the Throne the announcement that the Government is setting 

up the Family Farm Improvement Branch and will make an immediate start in providing sewer and 

water facilities for farm homes. I have already expressed my conviction that every home in the province 

should have this amenity. I know there are some people who through ignorance or political pique will 

heap scorn and ridicule upon this program. For them I can only say that, although there is little or 

nothing we can do to assist them in removing a mental stoppage, we do intend to provide a facility for 

an 



 

February 15, 1960 

 

 
9 

activity in which they are more adept. Mr. Speaker, parliamentary rules and extreme youth prevent me 

from saying what I really think of those mentally bankrupt souls who oppose or ridicule a program to 

bring the simple virtues of modern plumbing to farm homes in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): — . . . You have my sympathy. 

 

Mr. Thorson: — I said earlier that our gross value production in 1959 was estimated at more than 1.4 

billion dollars. In 1956 the value of our mineral production stood at 122.7 million dollars; last year it had 

moved up to an estimated 213.7 million dollars. Factory shipments in that same period had moved from 

298 million dollars to a value estimated at 342 million dollars in 1959. Construction, or the value of 

construction, in 1956 as compared with 1959 also shows an increase. This kind of development in the 

non-agricultural sector of our economy has been made possible through the hard work of people in 

private and co-operative enterprises, whether the work they do required managerial, skilled, or unskilled 

labour. It has also been made possible by the direct role of the Government, which I outlined earlier and 

by a number of programs of this Government to provide research, regulation, assistance, and promotion 

in non-agricultural industry. 

 

The Saskatchewan Research Council and the work it is doing will undoubtedly pay good dividends to 

the people of the province. The work they do in seeking to find new uses for farm products and for new 

materials, the work they do in seeking to improve manufacturing processes is the kind of work that all of 

us would want to encourage and see extended. If we are to realize the maximum benefit from our 

resources and their development, whether it is oil or whether it is forests, we must have programs that 

insure good conservation practices and regulation of the development of those resources. In this field the 

Department of Natural Resources and the Department of Mineral Resources are both doing good work 

and I am sure that most of the people in the province would want to see those policies continued by 

those departments. 

 

The Government has also been active in promoting non-agricultural industry in the province. The work 

of the Industrial Development Office in providing information on costs, on markets, and on possibilities 

for establishing new industries, has paid off with the establishment of new manufacturing plants in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Other Government agencies have cooperated with the Industrial 

Development Office in this work. It is altogether appropriate that the Industrial Development Office and 

these other agencies should now be brought together in a single department as recommended by the 

Stanford Research group. We can expect better coordination and more effective results from the work 

done by provincial government agencies to promote and to bring in new industry in the province. 

 

We have also provided financial assistance for the establishment of various kinds of industries. For the 

smaller industries the financial aid 



 

February 15, 1960 

 

 

10 

available from the Industrial Development Fund has been critically important in many cases. The 

Provincial Government under-wrote some of the borrowed money to establish a cement plant in the 

province and for that service received a substantial fee. The Provincial Government has also under-

written some of the borrowed capital for the steel plant which is now being erected in the province. By 

doing that, the Government has insured two things; first, the establishment of a steel industry in 

Saskatchewan and, secondly the assurance that they will receive a return on the stock which they receive 

from the steel company when steel production begins. 

 

I am pleased to see in the Speech from the Throne the announcement that further assistance will be 

forthcoming in promoting and establishing industry throughout the province. I especially commend the 

program to assist local communities in setting up municipal development corporations to help them 

establish industry in their own local community. The Government will be especially active in the next 

few years in providing industrial sites and facilities for industry. This is a good place to mention the 

South Saskatchewan River Dam. We are all aware of its importance for agricultural stabilization through 

irrigation. But the project is called multi-purpose for a good reason. It will provide a source of water and 

a new power site, both of which are extremely important to bringing in new industry. It will provide a 

good recreation area as well in an area of the province that needs recreational facilities. Despite the high 

cost of the South Saskatchewan River Dam, 192 million dollars from the province and 118 million 

dollars from the Federal Government, I am sure all members support the project because we are 

convinced that it will pay good dividends for decades to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those who oppose this Government are often heard to say that the C.C.F. Government 

frightens industry away from the province. The new leader of the Liberal Party attempted to document 

this claim last fall in reference to a tire manufacturing company. Of course, he couldn‟t document the 

claim any more than any other statement of that kind could be documented. All he could do was prove 

his own lack of regard for facts and for honest statements. 

 

I want to say, and I am sure that most of the people of Saskatchewan agree with me, that no honest, fair-

dealing businessman or prospective investor has anything to fear from this Government. We will not 

permit the uncontrolled or short-sighted exploitation of our resources, nor will we sell them out for less 

than they are worth. We will not allow the unfair exploitation of people who work for wages and 

salaries. But I want to repeat, no honest or fair-dealing businessman has anything to fear. It is quite the 

contrary. This Government, as the record shows, is eager to develop this province and willing to assist 

any businessman or any investor who wants to share in that development and receive a fair return for his 

investment and for the work that he does. The business community can rely, again as the record shows, 

on the responsible management of this province‟s affairs by this Government. Many businessmen have 

already benefited significantly from 



 

February 15, 1960 

 

 
11 

programs developed by this Government. A growing population, rising incomes, naturally mean that 

more goods and services must be supplied by people in various kinds of business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Government is pledged to support public and private and co-operative enterprise in 

their respective fields. I want to complete what I have had to say about non-agricultural industries in the 

province by saying something about the co-operative movement. Saskatchewan attracts world-wide 

attention for the development in this field. That is not surprising when we look at some of the figures. 

Combined co-operative members in Saskatchewan in 1945 stood at less than 300,000; in 1958 it was up 

to 700,000. In that same period co-operatively-owned assets jumped from 71 million dollars to 271 

million dollars. The volume of business transacted by co-operatives rose from 199 million dollars in 

1945 to 560 million dollars in 1958. Co-operatives in Saskatchewan in 1958 earned for their members a 

total of 11.5 million dollars in patronage dividends. I am sure I speak for every member on this side of 

the Assembly when I say that the C.C.F. Government will leave no stone unturned to encourage and 

assist the co-operative movement and to help the development of these organizations for economic and 

social democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the record is clear. Public, private, and co-operative enterprise in Saskatchewan are all 

contributing to the diversification and to the expansion of our provincial economy. But more important 

than the fact that we are increasing our wealth production is how we use that wealth. I am proud to be 

associated with Saskatchewan people and with their Government because in this province we devote a 

larger and larger measure of our wealth to socially useful purposes. 

 

I have already said something about the assistance to local governments in the field of education. What 

is the record? In 1956-57 school grants were 13.4 million dollars; in 1959-60 they were 24.4 million 

dollars. That is an increase of 82 percent in school grants in three years. In addition the Government in 

this current fiscal year 1959-60 is spending something like 11 million dollars on other programs for 

education. These include grants to the University, the establishment and the operation of the Technical 

Institute, student loan fund, and the student scholarship program. All of these things will be continued 

and expanded in years to come. In addition, the Government is embarking on a new policy to provide 

headquarters buildings for regional libraries, to do more in the field of adult education and to provide for 

recreational facilities in the form of assistance to regional parks, and to extend our provincial parks 

program. 

 

In the field of social welfare, Saskatchewan well deserves its reputation for taking the lead in the 

development of worth-while social welfare programs. We have our public assistance programs which 

make financial resources available to those in particular groups who are in need. Just recently we have 

increased our grants for mothers‟ allowances and have increased our grants for social aid. Largely 

because of the concern of this Government for the welfare of people in our oldest generation, we now 

see a number of 



 

February 15, 1960 

 

 

12 

senior citizens‟ housing projects throughout the province. Fifty-six projects have been completed and 

twenty-six are under way, providing housing accommodation for something like 4,000 people. I am sure 

everyone in Saskatchewan is pleased to know that this program of grants for the construction of senior 

citizens‟ housing projects will be maintained and that operating grants for those projects already 

established will be increased in the coming fiscal year. I think we are also pleased to see that another 

geriatric centre will be built in the coming year. 

 

Before I leave this field of social welfare programs, I want to say just a word or two about basic human 

rights and social security. This Government has a good record of protecting basic human rights. I need 

only mention our legislation to provide a Bill of Rights, and our labour legislation, which has not only 

protected workers from unfair exploitation, but has had the result that in Saskatchewan we have less 

industrial discontent, less time lost in industrial disputes, and generally better employee-employer 

relations than in any province in Canada. The C.C.F. Government is pledged to maintain and to extend 

its legislation which protects basic human rights. 

 

When the C.C.F. Government first took office, one of the first jobs was to tackle the serious health 

problems of our people. The record has been extremely good. We now provide to those who need the 

service free cancer, free treatment of tuberculosis and treatment of mental illness. We have an air 

ambulance service that has saved the lives of hundreds of people in our widely scattered population. Our 

preventative health services through the operation of health regions has an enviable record in preventing 

and reducing the risk of serious epidemic and the serious spread of disease. 

 

We are pleased to see in the Speech from the Throne forecasts for improvement in these already 

established health services. We particularly commend the Government for embarking this year on the 

program to build a smaller community mental hospital on the basis of the well-known Saskatchewan 

plan. 

 

The C.C.F. Government also started the first prepaid comprehensive government-sponsored 

hospitalization service in North America. Again the record has been very good. Our hospitalization plan 

is so good, so well accepted, that it is being initiated in every province but one throughout Canada, and 

even that one is about to begin. 

 

The Speech from the Throne indicates that the Government desires now to introduce legislation to 

provide for a prepaid medical service that will supplement the hospital plan and will be a complement to 

all our other health services. Last December, the Premier, speaking for the Government, made clear the 

Government‟s intention so far as the medical care plan is concerned. Our feeling is that this plan must be 

universal so that medical care service is available to any person who needs it without financial 



 

February 15, 1960 

 

 
13 

barriers. It must be financed in part, at least, by direct contributions from those who receive the benefits. 

It must maintain, indeed must improve the high quality of medical service in the province, not only in 

the field of curative medicine, but in the field of preventative measures. To ensure that this plan will be 

acceptable both to the professional people who give the service and to the general public who receive it, 

the Government proposes to establish an advisory committee made up of lay, and Government, and 

professional people to work out the details of administration and organization of the plan. Finally, the 

Premier made it clear that the C.C.F. position is that this health scheme to provide medical care, must be 

organized and must be sponsored by the Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, health services are every man‟s concern and only the Government is representative of and 

responsible to every man. I do not want to labour this point but for the edification of my friends across 

the way I want to call to witness a leading champion of freedom and personal rights in our civilization. 

Here is John Stuart Mill in his essay “On Liberty”. He says: 

 

“A person should be free to do as he likes in his own concern, but he ought not to be free to do as he 

likes in acting for another under the pretext that the affairs of the other are his own affair. The State, 

while it respects the liberty of each and what specially regards itself, is bound to maintain the vigilant 

control over his exercise of any power which it allows him to possess over others.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of this Assembly who sit on your right are motivated by the conviction that the 

proper role for a democratic government is to enhance the quality of life of all of the people whom it 

represents and to whom it is responsible. We are concerned with the whole culture of our people. We 

reject the motion that it is enough for a government to sit idly by in the passive role of referee in 

economic and social affairs. This Government cannot and will not rest content so long as one human 

being is in need. In the C.C.F. we measure our deeds by whether or not they put humanity first. We love 

liberty and individual freedom. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Really, now! 

 

Mr. Thorson: — Our primary regard is for the rights, for the best development, and the free expression 

of human personality. Because of our faith in democracy we emphasize that our concern is for all 

people. It is . . . 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — All right. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — What about the regimentation? 

 

Mr. Thorson: — . . . because of our faith in democracy we emphasize that 



 

February 15, 1960 

 

 

14 

our concern is for all the people. It is not enough to do well for some and not so well for others. All of 

the people means just that. It means that all people and the needs of all people, or the needs of any one 

person takes priority over the artificial but devastating privileges of rank, wealth and property. 

 

After all, freedom which is not extended to every man; freedom which is universal is not freedom at all. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — It‟s freedom by compulsion. 

 

Mr. Thorson: — Our overriding concern with individual human happiness does not blind us to the 

obligations imposed by the fact that man must live with man. We know that man cannot live happily in a 

society based on autocratic dictatorship, or on destructive competition. Such dictatorship and such 

competition destroys, perverts and prevents the best development of man‟s best qualities and their free 

expression for all people. We are convinced that in order to have the best development of man‟s best 

qualities, in order to insure their free expression, we must live in a society based on co-operation. It must 

be co-operation that springs from something more than just mutual help occasionally for economic 

purposes. It must be the kind of co-operation that springs from the heart of man in his desire to do 

nothing else but to serve his fellows, and to serve them as honestly and as intelligently, as respectfully 

and as energetically as his human capacities will allow. Surely it is obvious that only in a co-operating 

society of men can we be sure that we will be able to keep those two commandments of Jesus Christ as 

they are set down near the end of the twenty-second Chapter of the Gospel of Matthew. “On these two 

commandments hand all the law, and all the prophets.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have said enough to indicate that the aim of man should be the aim of man‟s institution of 

government, and that these aims must be achieved by means that are consistent with the aims 

themselves. The government must have respect for universal human rights, for the best development and 

the free expression of individual human personality. The government must promote and protect a society 

based on co-operation, consent and mutual regard. We hear a good deal of loose talk these days about 

the so-called evils of expanding government activities. What rot that talk is, for the most part. Mr. 

Speaker, we all have the right to pass judgment on the merits or demerits of any public program. We all 

have the right to express in an appropriate democratic manner, our approval or disapproval of any public 

program. But we need not oppose public programs simply because they are organized, sponsored, or 

administered by public agencies. Those who oppose government activity for no other reason than to 

oppose government, are expressing and encouraging an immoral and irresponsible attitude toward public 

affairs and the needs of men. Their opposition springs either from special privileges which they seek to 

maintain, or else they are opposed to democracy itself, which, for want of understanding and for lack of 

courage, they are unwilling to make work. 



 

February 15, 1960 

 

 
15 

Members on this side of the Assembly have displayed the understanding and the courage necessary to 

make democracy a reality in Saskatchewan. We want our Government to work for the people. We intend 

to go on using it to that end. This is the essence of the message in the Speech from the Throne. 

Therefore, I move, seconded by the member from Kinistino (Mr. Thibault): 

 

“That an humble Address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor as follows: 

 

TO HIS HONOUR THE HONOURABLE FRANK LINDSAY BASTEDO: 

Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR: 

 

We, Her Majesty‟s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, in Session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious Speech which 

Your Honour has been pleased to address to us at the opening of the present Session.” 

 

Mr. Arthur Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to second the motion of the hon. Member for 

Souris-Estevan. 

 

The honour of seconding the Speech from the Throne is a great honour to the people of Kinistino. I am 

in this Legislature as a result of a by-election in my constituency made necessary by the tragic death of 

the former member, Mr. Henry Begrand. Knowing him as well as I did, and having worked with him for 

a long time, I know that he would want to be remembered by having the job he had begun so well 

carried on to its completion. He was a hard working and often inspired individual, and his example 

could be an inspiration to all of us. I have found that being an M.L.A. is an interesting job. When I was 

Reeve of my Municipality, it was always my practice to get acquainted with the people and their 

problems, and from that, to try to do my best to help them out. I hope to apply the same principles to my 

work here in the Legislature. 

 

I want to take this opportunity to thank the municipal, town, and village Councils and all the governing 

groups in my constituency for the wonderful co-operation they have given me since I have been elected. 

Words cannot express how gratifying it is to feel sure that such an atmosphere will continue to prevail. 

 

The Kinistino Constituency is located at the west end of the Carrot River Valley. Some of the most 

productive soil in Saskatchewan is 



 

February 15, 1960 

 

 

16 

found in this region. We also have our share of sub-marginal lands and problems associated with it. The 

people have come from many lands and have brought with them many different languages, customs and 

religions which they cherish. They have worked together and have a lot of respect for each other‟s 

traditions. They are a hard working people and take a great deal of interest in all forms of local 

government and community projects. The youth, in particular, take a great deal of interest in sports. I am 

also proud to report that Yellow Creek, the home of the 1959 Provincial High School Soccer 

Champions, is in my constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I share the views of the hon. Member for Souris-Estevan about the Speech from the 

Throne. The program it contains is aggressive and forward looking. To me these programs will 

guarantee that we will continue to have progress as we have experienced it in the past 15 years. 

 

I welcome the announcement in the Speech from the Throne that a Medical Care Program is the next 

step that this Government is taking to look after the health needs of the people of Saskatchewan. This is 

another pioneering program, just as we pioneered hospitalization in Canada. I can recall the days before 

hospitalization when my parents spent many evenings at the bedside of the sick in the neighbourhood. 

The neighbours would take turns in keeping vigil over them. This would go on for days, weeks, and 

sometimes months, without the help of modern medicine, just waiting for death to come to alleviate their 

suffering. Most of this was necessary because there was a price tag on health. I know, and Members of 

this House know, that we stood at the foot of many a grave that would not have been there had we had a 

hospitalization plan. 

 

I can recall what it was like in the past, which amounted to begging at the doors of the Municipal 

Councils. This charitable approach to health had completely vanished by the time I became Reeve of the 

R.M. of Invergordon 7 years ago. Oh yes, you may well say times have changed, but you can go to 

provinces that have no hospitalization plan and you will find such conditions still existing today. 

 

In 1947 we removed part of that price tag here in Saskatchewan by bringing about a hospitalization plan. 

It has proved so effective that the Federal Government chose, 10 years later, to adopt a national health 

plan. We planted the seed of hospitalization here in Saskatchewan, and it has grown into such a large 

tree that today other provinces are feeding on its fruits. We must thank this Government for having the 

courage to go ahead with such a program and not walking by on the other side when confronted with the 

obstacles that were put in its way. 

 

Now we are going to remove another piece of that price tag, until eventually it will exist no more, by 

bringing in a medical care plan that will make it possible for every one in this province to get the doctor 

care that he or she requires, regardless of their ability to pay. 



 

February 15, 1960 

 

 
17 

In my constituency some of the municipalities have had a doctor plan for some time and would not part 

with it. This provincial plan will certainly be welcomed by those municipalities. In the municipalities 

that have no doctor plan, there have been a lot of requests for it. It would also alleviate them of their 

doctor bills for social aid recipients, so all around I think it is a great step forward. 

 

I am pleased to see that the Throne Speech provides for progress that will continue to assist the farmers. 

Agricultural programs of this government, such as gully control, reclamation, drainage, tree planting, 

community pastures, and I should also mention the Ag. Rep. Program and the Veterinary Program, have 

helped a great many farmers in my constituency. Other programs have meant a lot to agriculture. These 

are power, grid roads, better highways, better schools. They have made life in farm homes more 

pleasant. I can remember ten years ago driving in the Carrot River Valley at night. All you could see 

was darkness. But today hamlets and villages and farm homes for miles are all lit up. Today 4 out of 5 

farms in the Kinistino constituency have power. 

 

The Grid Road Program in my constituency, and I am sure that it is the same in the rest of the province, 

is having a considerable influence on the lives of the people living in rural areas. We are beginning to do 

away with isolation of farms. As this program progresses, the problem of getting children to school is 

becoming easier. When this program is complete, it will stand as a monument to the efforts of the 

government, the municipalities and the people. 

 

Money spent on highways and grid roads in the past 15 years has been well spent. The improvement in 

highways in the Kinistino Constituency is noticeable and appreciated. We look forward to still greater 

improvement in highways, as announced in the Speech from the Throne. 

 

I am also pleased that in this year‟s program there will be greater aid to education. Even though there 

has been a great increase in the cost of education in the last five years, there has not been a noticeable 

increase in the mill rate levied by the school units in my constituency. At the same time there has been 

an increase in services noted by an increase of children attending high school and graduating from Grade 

12. There has been a great improvement in the school buildings and an increase in school buses. 

 

In my home district prior to this government taking office, when a child had attained Grade VIII, large 

sacrifices had to be made by the parents and the rest of the family to send these children to high school. 

Today in my constituency high schools are close enough that most of the children can attend, without 

any increased cost to the parents, and those who are still too far away can get high school assistance, 

thus making it much easier for our children to get a high school education. The Student Aid Loan Fund 

and scholarships will create an incentive for students graduating from Grade XII to continue with a 

university education. 

 

These programs have all made life in the rural areas better and they 



 

February 15, 1960 

 

 

18 

have contributed to the preservation of the Family Farm. The Family Farm is one I would like this 

House to pay attention to. This way of life is one of the best for our society. Being the father of five 

children and having lived on a farm all my life, there is no one who can be more aware of the need of 

preserving the family farm. On a family farm a child gets a well-balanced knowledge of life, nature, 

business, church and home. 

 

The Speech from the Throne announces that the Government will be introducing a Family Farm 

Improvement Program. Included in this will be technical and financial assistance for the installation of 

water and sewer systems on farms. My family has enjoyed these conveniences for some years. We know 

what it means. I am all for the government program to assist in bringing these conveniences to other 

farm homes. The farm family is just as entitled to these conveniences as the urban dweller. The family 

appreciates the farm more, and is more than likely to stay on the farm. 

 

Another program that is going to be well received is the one which will assist towns and villages to have 

water and sewerage systems. In my constituency we have the towns of Wakaw and Kinistino and the 

villages of Domremy, St. Louis, Birch Hills and Yellow Creek that are pretty good places to live in or 

even to retire in. I am quite sure that the program of this Government to assist in the installation of sewer 

and water will make these communities even better. I look forward to doing my small part with 

communities in my constituency to help them take advantage of this new program. 

 

I should also mention that the Government‟s gas program has made it possible to supply natural gas to 

Wakaw, Domremy, Hoey, St. Louis, Birch Hills and Kinistino. When gas was turned on in these 

communities, it was a real cause for celebration, and would not have been possible without a 

government program to do this. 

 

I am glad to see that in this year‟s program we will see aid given to regional parks. Such natural beauty 

spots and fishing centres are our heritage and I feel sure that the increased camping and boating points to 

the need of increased facilities. I am sure that the new program that is being brought in will assist local 

organizations to develop local summer resorts so as to provide facilities for all. In my constituency we 

have Wakaw Lake and Fishing Lake that are wonderful fishing grounds and serve a very large area. The 

local organizations have been doing a pretty good job of improving these recreation centres and I want 

to congratulate them for it. But I know that with increased help, they will be able to do a still better job. 

The local organizations deserve the help they are about to receive. I must express great satisfaction that 

our government recognizes this fact. 

 

The people I represent are now harvesting the fruits of their work and sharing in the benefits that have 

been brought about by their own efforts and by the progress of the C.C.F. Government, such as 

hospitalization, power, natural gas, highways, grid roads, improvements to parks and summer resorts 

and automobile insurance. Now they can look forward to a medical care program and other programs 

that will improve life. 



 

February 15, 1960 

 

 
19 

Conservation and development of our natural and other resources has contributed a good deal to the 

programs we have undertaken in the past and will help us to accomplish the objectives we have set for 

the future. But Agriculture will continue to be this province‟s most important industry. A reasonably 

healthy state in agriculture is essential for the continued progress of this province. 

 

Unfortunately, at the present time agriculture is suffering a severe setback. The spread in prices between 

the things a farmer must buy and the price he gets for the things he sells continues to be too great. This 

spread is dangerously increasing. The result is that farmers have been living on their capital and 

depreciation for a long time. This problem goes back to 1951. Since then we have seen no improvement 

in farm prices. Yet at the same time farm costs have continued to rise. But in a crisis such as this there 

does not appear to be any attempt by the Federal Government to face up to its responsibilities and stop 

this continuous spread. Take the production of eggs, for example. What a farmer receives for eggs and 

poultry today does not even pay for feed, let alone the work. Hog prices today barely cover the cost of 

hog feed. It is said that this statement could be challenged because the so-called efficient farmer can 

make a reasonable return. But who are these so-called “efficient” farmers. They have become more or 

less corporation farmers, who operate on a large scale. They are far removed from the family farm and 

in fact are making the job of the family farmer more and more difficult. Mr. Speaker, I emphasize that as 

long as the family farmer serves the public interest, his position must be protected by all means. 

 

Farmers must have their fair share of the National Income. There should be a control over the price on 

things the farmer must buy. We need a system which relates the prices farmers get for their efforts to his 

cost of production. A domestic price which varies from the export price would be some help. There is 

evidence that such a policy would be supported by many groups in Canada. 

 

A year ago a large delegation of farmers from the West called on the Federal Government in Ottawa and 

made a strong case for a fair deal for western agriculture. The farmers were justified in this March. 

 

So far very little has come of it. My constituency is one that was hard hit by the early snowfall. All the 

problems that my farmers have had to put up with, particularly since 1951, were aggravated severely by 

early winter this year. A large number applied for emergency acreage payments participated in by the 

province on the vicious terms laid down by the Federal Government. But if the Federal Government 

regards this program as any solution to basic agricultural problems, they have another “think” coming. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a matter of great concern to the farmers of the west that the Federal Government has 

still not taken any action to provide a measure of urgently needed assistance to the prairie grain 

producer. I am 



 

February 15, 1960 

 

 

20 

speaking now of the request for grain deficiency payments. Repeated enquiries regarding this matter 

have received nothing but evasive replies from Prime Minister Diefenbaker, and this whole matter 

points to the fallacy of relying on the parties whose whole approach to agriculture is based on no 

particular principle. In 1958 the Federal Government felt there was justification for assistance and made 

a welcome distribution of some $40 million among grain producers. Yet this year cash income from 

grain delivered will be lower than a year ago, in Saskatchewan, by some $20 million, and farm costs of 

production have risen, and still the Federal Government sits tight and when the farmers ask for the 

economic justice which is their right they are offered nothing but pious platitudes. 

 

They say that deficiency payments on grain are not in the best interests of the farmer himself; but they 

had promised it, and what are they doing about it? The truth of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that we are as 

far from obtaining parity prices or parity incomes as we were under the previous Liberal administration. 

The application of the principle of deficiency payments to hogs and eggs in itself is a farce. The Federal 

Government works things out solely on the basis of national averages. They don‟t want to establish a 

regional or provincial standard price. They won‟t go for a seasonal pool. As a result in most cases the 

deficiency payment looked for by our farmers will be a mirage. Thus, during the last part of 1959 the 

price of eggs in Saskatchewan fell way below their costs of production, but our farmers won‟t be getting 

any deficiency payments whatsoever for this period. Similarly with hogs. We have witnessed a 

temporary glut of hogs on the market in recent weeks as farmers attempted to deliver their hogs before 

the new federal support program for hogs came into effect. The prices received for Grade B1 hogs at 

Saskatoon during January, 1960, has been well below $19.00 per cwt. even though farmers were 

guaranteed a minimum higher than this by the Agricultural Price Stabilization Act. If farmers become 

discouraged by these prices, and pull out of hog production, the price in the latter part of the year may 

rise and again we will have no actual deficiency payments. And who has benefited from this plan? None 

but the packers. 

 

Small wonder, therefore, that the farm organizations are becoming disillusioned with such policies. For 

example, the Manitoba Farmers Union, in a recent brief to the Manitoba Government, stated as follows: 

 

“It appears that Federal Government policies are aimed at the associated problems of agriculture, 

skirting and circling the main problem which is, too low a price to meet cost of production for the 

average farmer. 

 

Hon. D.S. Harkness, Federal Minister of Agriculture, has even broken the Government‟s promise to 

guarantee the farmer a fair share of the national income, by reneging and conveniently forgetting more 

important sections of the Agricultural Stabilization Act which he piloted through the House of 

Commons and which 



 

February 15, 1960 

 

 
21 

constitutes the main agricultural price support legislation today.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, what disturbs me is that the situation prevails not because the Federal Government is 

ignorant of the true facts of the situation, but rather in spite of it. The Federal Minister of Agriculture, in 

his opening statement to the Federal-Provincial Agricultural Conference in Ottawa on November 12th, 

1958, stated: 

 

“Prices of agricultural commodities are in a chaotic condition. One might say that world prices do not 

exist.” 

 

After citing a few examples of this, he stated: 

 

“It is clear that there is no relationship in the prices of agricultural products in one country as compared 

to another. In other words, prices are no longer set in relation to a world market, but depend on the 

support programs and import policies of the various countries.” 

 

As a matter of fact the cost-price squeeze affecting our farmers remains. During the past 9 years the 

index measuring what Saskatchewan farmers receive for their produce has dropped 19 per cent; while at 

the same time the index measuring farm costs of production has risen by over 17 per cent. The 

Conservatives, like the Liberals before them, both dedicated to the interests of big business, are not 

doing anything about the farmers‟ biggest problem — the cost-price squeeze. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am satisfied that our Provincial Government is doing all that is in their power to do what 

they can with regard to farm problems. The Speech from the Throne proves that the people of 

Saskatchewan can expect continued progress on the provincial level. My job, as I said at the outset, is to 

do my best to serve the people I represent and I am doing so by seconding the Motion. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, first of all I would like to 

congratulate the new member for the constituency of Kinistino. I am sure that we are all pleased to see 

him in his place for this Session. He probably arrived here without the help of some of us, but on the 

other hand he had considerable help from some people who sit opposite. I do hope that his stay will be 

of short duration, but very enjoyable. 

 

At this time I would also like to congratulate the mover and seconder of the Address in Reply. I thought 

that the seconder made a very excellent address, considering it was his first address in this Legislature. I 

could see that he is vitally concerned with the problems that confront agriculture 



 

February 15, 1960 

 

 

22 

in our province, but I note that he is as blind to some of those problems as those people that he sits next 

to. We all realize that a good many of the problems that confront agriculture in Saskatchewan and 

western Canada cannot be rectified by any moves that a Provincial Government might, or might not, 

make. But there are certain rules and policies that the Government ought to implement in order to offset 

some of the so-called cost-price squeeze that confronts agriculture in the Province of Saskatchewan, and 

I intend to deal with many of those tomorrow. But on this occasion I want to refer to the remarks of the 

mover of the Address in Reply. I would have thought that after being here for three sessions, and after 

having been, I understand, an employee of the party that he now represents in the House, that he would 

at least be familiar with the background of that political party. In listening to him today, I thought that 

Utopia had arrived, or would be here, at least, after the programs announced in the Speech from the 

Throne were implemented. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Government has been in power now since 1944. That is a long time. Most of the 

programs that were announced in 1944 have never been implemented. Whether my friend is familiar 

with the background or not, I don‟t know, but again the Speech from the Throne nibbles away at some 

of the promises that were made sixteen, seventeen and eighteen years ago. Of course, the medical care 

program is one of them. I don‟t know whether my friend had ever seen this particular pamphlet or not. It 

was put out by the C.C.F. Party more than sixteen years ago, and of course they weren‟t talking about a 

contributory plan for the protection of people for medical accounts at that time. They promised a 

complete system of socialized health services, with special emphasis on preventative medicine, so that 

you and every other resident of Saskatchewan will receive adequate medical, surgical, dental, nursing 

and hospital care without charge. Now, Mr. Speaker, we are a far cry from receiving any such service 

without charge. We have a hospitalization plan, yes, that I think the people of this province are proud of; 

that I think the people of Canada are beginning to recognize would be of great benefit to all the people 

of this country. This is not without charge, Mr. Speaker. No government, Socialist or otherwise, can 

provide such a service for their people unless they first can extract by some manner or means the 

revenue from the citizens of that province or country to pay for that service. 

 

The same thing is going to happen with regard to a medical plan. Somebody is going to have to pay for 

it, and apparently the next move will be to bring in a plan to take care of the other problems that are 

mentioned in this particular program. I only mention this, Mr. Speaker, to indicate that it has taken this 

administration more than sixteen years to put in any implementation of the promises they made those 

many years ago. And again, they are not being implemented without charge. They are only being 

implemented as the people of Saskatchewan can afford to pay for those particular services. 

 

I want to refer to education. Now my hon. friend arrived at the 



 

February 15, 1960 

 

 
23 

percentages he mentioned, I am sure I don‟t know, and I am sure no one else knows. But again, as far as 

education was concerned, when this Government came into power they promised the people of this 

province that they would accept, the full responsibility for financing education. That was sixteen years 

ago. Now they have brought up their contribution to education to some 40 percent. If they are going to 

implement the program which they announced sixteen years ago, they would have to be in power an 

awfully long time, and I think the time is running a little short on them, Mr. Speaker, in order to 

endeavour to fulfil those promises. 

 

There are many other pamphlets I have in my possession that I would recommend that the hon. member 

from Souris-Estevan should read. Those two, the one on education and the other on health I would 

recommend for his reading. There is another one here: „Saskatchewan C.C.F. Platform and Policy‟ — I 

recommend that he read that. There is another: „C.C.F. Program for Saskatchewan‟; I would also 

recommend that he read not the condensed version of the Stanford Research Institute Report, but the 

Report in its entirety, and I am sure that part of his outlook will be changed. 

 

I wonder if he has ever read that section of the C.C.F. program dealing with how the Government was 

going to make certain economies. This is before they were elected to office. You will remember one 

economy they were going to bring in, Mr. Speaker. They were going to reduce Cabinet Ministers‟ 

salaries. Let us look at the record. They were going to reduce the number of members in the Legislature. 

Well, let us look at the record. They were going to reduce the interest that was paid on the public debt. 

We all know the consequences of that particular move — look at the record again. They were going to 

reorganize certain departments to prevent overlapping. There is so much overlapping now that you have 

to tag certain civil servants so that other civil servants will know who they work for. They were going to 

reduce the number of Government inspectors. Mr. Speaker, they‟ve got inspectors inspecting inspectors 

today, and then they have another inspector who goes over the inspectors who are inspecting the 

inspectors. 

 

This reminds me of a certain individual who was not successful in the last provincial election, so, like 

some other unsuccessful candidates he came into Regina. After the election he went to some of the 

members of the Government and said that he would be interested in employment. Finally he was sent 

around to the Premier. This story was given to me later on. The Premier said, “Well, certainly we can 

employ you; we‟d be glad to. You come back in two or three days‟ time and everything will be taken 

care of.” So this particular gentleman came back in with his brief-case three or four days later. The 

Premier had an office for him, a nice oak desk, two or three telephones, a nice carpet on the floor, and 

escorted him around to his office and said, “Now, there you are.” So this chap moved in, hung up his 

coat and hat, sat down, quite contented, but nothing happened. Nobody came to see him; the telephone 

never rang and he didn‟t know what it was all about. He put up with this for two or three days, and 

eventually when he went out one day to lunch there was a chap standing at the door. He said to this 

chap, 



 

February 15, 1960 

 

 

24 

“Is there something I can do for you?” His friend said, “No.” So he went off to lunch, and when he came 

back from lunch this chap was still standing there. He repeated the same conversation. This went on for 

several days with these same individuals at the door. Every time he came to work; every time he went to 

lunch, and finally he got very discouraged and sent down to the Premier and said, “I want to quit.” The 

Premier said, “What‟s the matter — aren‟t you happy?” “No”, he said, “I‟m not.” He said, “Are you 

working too hard?” “No, I‟m not. The telephone never rings; nobody has ever come in to see me.” So 

the Premier said, “What‟s the trouble?” “Well,” he said, “it‟s that fellow at my door all the time. Who is 

that?” The Premier said, “That‟s your assistant.” Mr. Speaker, that is about the case as I can see it, in 

many instances. 

 

With those few remarks I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:15 o‟clock p.m. 

 

 


