



















































Hansard: February 29, 1960


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — 13th Legislature 

13th Day 

 

Monday, February 29, 1960 

 

The House met at 2:30 o'clock. 

 

MESSAGE FROM HER MAJESTY, THE QUEEN 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Before the Orders of the Day, I have a message from her Majesty the Queen: 

 

"I sincerely thank the Members of the Legislative Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan for their 

kind message of congratulations to myself and my husband on the birth of our second son, and for the 

loyal assurances which they offer on behalf of the people whom they represent. 

 

Elizabeth R." 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are proceeded with, I would like on my 

own behalf, and I am sure on behalf of all hon. members of the Assembly, to express our pleasure at 

seeing the member for Meadow Lake and the Leader of the Social Credit group (Mr. Weber) back in his 

place. We were all deeply concerned when we heard of his illness. We all hope that his recovery will be 

speedy, and are glad to see that he is well enough to be back here with us. We hope his health continues 

to improve. 

 

Mr. A. H. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity of associating myself and, I 

am sure, the group that I represent on this side of the House, with the remarks of the Premier. We too, 

are most pleased to see the member for Meadow Lake back in the Legislature. We sincerely hope that his 

health will continue to improve, and that he can enjoy the balance of the session with us. 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

 

2 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would like to take the 

opportunity of welcoming a group of students from the St. Mary's Separate School in Saskatoon. I am 

sure all members will join in expressing how happy we are to have them here, and that they will come 

back in the future. We hope their stay here will be an enjoyable one. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed from Friday, February 26, 1960, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 

the Hon. Mr. Fines: 

 

That Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair (the House to go into Committee of Supply). 

 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in the Budget debate, I would 

first like to add my words to those of the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition with regard to the 

member for Meadow Lake (Mr. Weber). We are happy and pleased to have him back in his seat. While 

he has not been here to see the Session gradually warm up, I would advise him to sit back and relax, and 

let the other boys carry the battle for him for a while, because I am sure he will get along splendidly. 

 

Likewise, Mr. Speaker, before proceeding with my analysis of the budget, I would like to address a few 

remarks to you, sir, if I may. We all know, of course, that you have chosen not to run again in your 

constituency, and I would like in reference to yourself, to recall that you were elected Speaker of this 

Assembly and we expressed our appreciation and happiness in the choice at that time. I want to say that 

during your term of office you have brought dignity and decorum to the proceedings this House. 

Knowing something of your work in the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, I think it only fair 

that I should tell the members that our Speaker is held in the highest esteem in that association for the 

leadership which he has shown. We wish you well, Mr. Speaker, and many years of happiness. 

 

I would like also to extend my good wishes to the other members of the Legislature who will not be with 

us again. I would 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

3 
 

think first of my congenial, lovable and prakish friend, the member for Saltcoats (Mr. Loptson). I am 

sure many will regret the breaking up of this team that so many have affectionately referred to as the 

'Dead End Kids' . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — And the 'gold dust twins' over there! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — . . . and we do wish you the best of everything. I would like to extend those good 

wishes to the Minister of Social Welfare (Hon. Mr. Bentley). I have known the hon. Minister for a good 

many years and I sincerely wish you the best in your retirement from public office. 

 

Likewise to the Minister of Highways, and to the Minister without Portfolio, and to all others who will 

not be with us again. I cannot help but think that the Premier at times must surely have some relentless 

nights when he thinks that, before many moons, he will be called upon to direct his ship through a 

stormy channel with a great number of experienced hands not on board. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Thank you for that expression of confidence. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — it is not confidence. The ocean is very wide; there are many shoals. 

 

I cannot say, Mr. Speaker, that I regret this is the Provincial Treasurer's last budget. I think I would be 

less than honest if I should say that, in view of the impending election a few months away. But I do wish 

to say that it had been my hope that, in some time in the near future, we would have had the privilege of 

observing the Provincial Treasurer analyzing the budget through the eyes of the financial critic. The 

Provincial Treasurer, of course, has denied the House that privilege for all time to come. I have observed 

the Provincial Treasurer bring down 12 of his 16 budgets, and for a goodly number at those it has been 

my responsibility, as financial critic, to lead off the debate. 

 

Coming to the budget speech itself, first may I say there are certain provisions in the budget that we are 

happy to see. I am certainly happy that provision is being made for the construction of a small regional 

mental hospital. You will recall, Mr. Speaker, that I have been an advocate of this type of mental 

hospital for some years, and each year I have questioned the wisdom of the successive expensive 

renovations on the two present institutions in Weyburn and in North Battleford. I felt these expansions, 

totalling now some $15 millions were delaying the setting up of these small regional hospitals, 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

 

4 

and I am pleased to see that provision is being made to set up at least one up to lodge this undertaking of 

small mental hospitals. 

 

Likewise, I am very pleased that we are to have at least the beginning of a treatment centre for 

alcoholics. You will recall when we were considering the Report to the Committee on Liquor Outlets, 

that I strongly advocated the setting up of just such a centre in order to do something for this problem of 

alcoholics in the province. When you recall there are 10,000 alcoholics in the province of Saskatchewan, 

and it is estimated there are six to seven people that are directly or indirectly affected by alcohol for each 

alcoholic, you will get some conception of the tremendous effect this has on the province. 

 

I cannot say I am so happy, Mr. Speaker, with the grant to the Bureau of Alcoholism. Last year, I think I 

pointed out that, when the province of Saskatchewan sells $40 million worth of liquor, and as a result of 

that, brings into the coffers of the province some $13 millions of revenue, then I think that, since they 

sell this product, they must assume a great responsibility in overcoming the evil as a result of this sale. I 

don't think that to devote $75,000 to the Bureau of Alcoholism comes anywhere near the amount 

necessary to assist in meeting this problem which is growing each year, and with that I am certainly 

disappointed. I stated last year, that surely, if the Government assumes the responsibility of the sale of 

liquor, then it should assume a greater responsibility to the many evils that it leaves in its wake. I 

suggested perhaps of the liquor profits should be set aside for that very purpose. The money is there, and 

this problem must be met. This meagre contribution of $75,000, in my thinking, does not come near 

meeting the need. 

 

I might say we welcome the increase in school grants. Certainly, any further assistance that the schools 

will receive in meeting their operating expense is to be welcomed. This increase in school grants of 

some $4 million-odd will bring us a little more toward the objective of 50 per cent of the operating cost. 

While it will increase the percentage slightly, I do not feel, however that by increasing school grants we 

are attacking the financial problems of the, school in any concrete and practical manner. This will do 

nothing to remove the inequities in the whole tax system. It will do nothing to that fact that some people 

are asked to pay eight mills for education and others are asked to pay 38 mills, while others are not to 

contribute a nickel. It won't remove those inequities. Neither, will it remove the inequities in regard to 

equal opportunity for children in the classroom. We talk a great deal about the right of a child, regardless 

of whether he lives in the city or whether he lives in the remotest area in the province, to have an equal 

right 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

5 
 

with all others in the matter of education. And surely today we haven't nearly reached that stage, when 

some units are spending $270 per pupil while other are spending $365 to $400 per pupil in the type of 

program in the school. When we realize that it costs $250 to $270 a pupil, just to keep that little fellow 

in his seat, we can see that we haven't yet touched the problem of inequities in the opportunities for 

children in the matter of education. 

 

I can't say I am as happy about the lack of reference either in the budget or in any of the speeches that 

have been delivered to date, in regard to the Continuing Committee on Municipal Boundaries. I notice 

that we are being asked to vote another hundred thousand dollars again this year to pay the salaries of the 

research staff that has been working on this reorganization since the last election. You will recall, Mr. 

Speaker, in 1956, prior to the last election, the Government announced that it was conversant with the 

problems facing the local governments and that, if they were re-elected to office, one of the first things 

they would do would be to call a Provincial-Municipal conference, and that as a result of the conference, 

definite arrangements would be made in which to feed some of those revenues that come in from Ottawa 

to the province down through the province to reach the local levels of government and to play its part 

there. 

 

After the election was over, a conference was called and a committee was set up to study thins problem. 

During the discussions with municipal men the responsible Cabinet Ministers placed the emphasis on 

the reorganization of municipal boundaries. That was put as a first; that must come first before the 

Province would be in any position to make a greater contribution to the local governments. 

 

A Committee was set up, and for four years now that has been supposedly studying this problem. Last 

year the government submitted to the Legislature what was referred to as an Interim Report. We had 

asked, "What is the Continuing Committee doing: What objective have they now? What have they 

deduced? What do they plan to do? What course do they intend to follow?" As a result of that request 

there was tabled in the Legislature a little booklet consisting of three or four pages with some little 

drawings and diagrams of the various types of municipal units and school units that might be set up in 

the province. It gave the list of the Committee members; it listed the Cabinet Ministers that were on this 

Committee, and something of the number that is on the Planning Committee making arrangements for 

them; but nowhere in this booklet did it give one little bit of information as to what had been 

accomplished to date. 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

 

6 

This little booklet tabled in this Legislature, in view of the financial plight of local governments was no 

value either to the members of the House or to the general public or to anyone else. This year we have 

not received any Interim Report in connection with the Committee. Nothing has been said as to how near 

they are to a conclusion of the work or how many years it may proceed yet. Every indication is that it 

may proceed for a number of years yet, and that we will have a bill for that work probably equalling that 

of the Royal Commission on Agriculture — that Royal Commission that was to set the pattern or the 

direction we were to follows, as the Premier said, for the next quarter of a century. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is not good enough. Four years have gone by, and yet we are completely in the dark as 

to what type of municipal units this Government intends to set up, as to what type of larger units, or 

what changes may be made in the larger unit boundaries. All these things are cause for grave concern 

among officials. There is an air of uncertainty as to whether or not we are going to have the county 

system, whether or not we are going to have co-terminus boundaries, whether or not five out of six 

municipalities in the province are going to disappear. None of these questions have been answered. 

Neither have they done anything to assure the ratepayers or the people concerned that, in the event of 

reorganization, it will be put to a vote of the people concerned. None of these vital questions have been 

answered, and yet we are going into another election with the same Continuing Committee not yet 

reported to the House, and after four years, and after commitment given to the people in 1956 that this 

problem would be dealt with with great expedition. We are going into another election with nothing in 

any concrete form by which we can judge what, if anything, is to be accomplished. 

 

I notice in the budget that there is to be a new branch created as the Municipal Water Assistance Board 

under the Department of Municipal Affairs. The purpose of this Board, as I understand it, is to bring 

water and sewerage to the towns and to the villages and, since early winter, the Government has been 

issuing press statements, having ads in the papers, on radio and on TV informing the people of the 

province of the great program for sewer and water for the towns. We hoped, Mr. Speaker, that this would 

have been a revolving fund which we in the Opposition have been advocating down through the years — 

a revolving fund from which municipal officials could come and borrow and make arrangements to 

receive assistance in order to put in sewer and water. We had hoped that this would be backed up with a 

formula that would act out in concrete terms exactly the assistance that is available and exactly the terms 

of the contract that must be met to obtain it. If this had been done, town officials could take a look at 

their budget; 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

7 
 

they could take a look at the formula and determine the amount of assistance that they could earn, and 

they would know immediately what plans to make, if any, in instituting such a program. 

 

This doesn't answer those questions. It still has the municipal officials in all humility coming to the 

Government in delegation asking for assistance, asking for some financial arrangements to be worked 

out to assist them in installing sewer and water. I have found in my constituency that they have been 

sending delegations to this Government for four years trying to establish some arrangement whereby 

they could institute a program of water and sewer in the town. After four years of negotiation they are 

just as far away from a settlement as they were when they began. Is this the type of assistance we are 

offering to our municipal officials, that will keep them in that state of uncertainty and saddle them with 

all the expenses of delegations and long-drawn-out periods of negotiation, in order to even make a start 

on sewer and water in the towns? What does this new Board offer the town? We are to vote this new 

Board the sum of $400,000 and of this amount, $340,000 is voted for grants to the towns to install sewer 

and water — $340,000. 

 

This program was ushered in with great fanfare, yes, with the sounding of trumpets and the beating of 

drums. This was to be the solution to the sewer and water problems of our towns and villages. Now that 

the Provincial Treasurer in his budget has unveiled this program, let's take a look at it. After all we have 

a purse containing $340,000. Mr. Speaker, I ask you; into how many towns will this put sewer and water 

when we realize that takes from $150,000 to $200,000 to install sever and water in a town of 500 

population? This program will not install sewer and water; it will not remove the humiliation of urban 

officials having to come begging, and continue to witness as they have in the past assistance being doled 

out on a political patronage basis. It has done nothing to remove these things, and from the meagre vote 

of $340,000 there is no possibility of its beginning to do it this year either. 

 

Then we have heard a great, deal about sewer and water for farms. Certainly we are interested in sewer 

and water for farms. Certainly the farmers are as worthy of more amenities of life as any other citizen of 

the province. The Government went to even a better job of selling this program than it did on sewer and 

water for the towns. The Minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation has a great deal to 

say about this program. The Minister of Agriculture, too, has been very vocal about it; in fact he has 

employees of his Department holding meetings now and explaining to groups of farmers the great 

benefits to be derived from this program. The Premier, too, has added his voice to that of the others in 

regard to the benefits that would be received by the farmers as a result of this plan. 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

 

8 

I think, Mr. Speaker, it would be well to pause a moment and take a look at some of the statements that 

have been made in regard to sewer and water in farm homes. The Premier was speaking as reported in 

"The Leader-Post" of September 14th, 1959. He is said to have stated that the government crews will 

move into a district, and with one crew for excavating and another for placing septic tanks and pipes, 

will proceed with the program. Government crews, he went on to explain, would do outside work. The 

Minister of Agriculture seems to disagree; he says there will be all kinds of opportunities for private 

operators. 

 

I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that these officials at least get together so that they can come up with 

some common information upon which to base their personnel. The Premier says the Government crews 

will move into a district, they will establish your sewer and water and put in the sewer system and dig 

the trenches. The Minister of Agriculture (Hon. Mr. Nollet) says "No, that's not correct; why, all the 

private operators will have the right to move in and do it." The Minister of Power (Hon. Mr. Brown) 

says consideration is being given to putting in the bathtubs and the other fixtures in the home. The 

Premier says that is not correct. Others say the Department is giving consideration to it. That is the 

manner in which they are selling the program of sewer and water to the farmers. After all of this fanfare, 

after all this confusion, without even the Ministers knowing what it is all, about and how it's going to be 

done, the Provincial Treasurer crystallized it. He told us what it's going to be, and this is what they 

provided for: A new department of government would be set up. We are to vote $500,000 to this 

department, and of that $500,000 the hired help is to get $200,000 and the 90,000 farmers, $300,000. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Where do you get those figures? 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Of every five-dollar bill, the hired help is to get $2.00 (that's the staff) and the farmer 

is to get $3.00. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — That's the way you help farmers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — How many farmers? 

 

Mr. Cameron: — That's the $64,000 question. Well, Hon. Minister of Agriculture, I can understand 

why you can't assess my figures because none of your Ministers understand the program either and I'll 

repeat it for you. We are to vote $500,000 — correct? And of that $500,000, $200,000 is set away to 

pay, the salaries of the staff of the department, leaving $300,000 as grants for sewer and water. So for 

every five-dollar bill the hired help is to get $2.00 and the farmer is to get $3.00 — right? That's the 

$64,000 dollar question: How many farmers? 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

9 
 

This program, certainly, on the basis of this vote will not bring sewer and water to many farm homes. 

This program reeks of political bait designed solely to get the Government through the election. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — This program, Mr. Speaker, has been killed before it has been born. It has been 

strangled because there hasn't even been sufficient funds set aside to develop it and let it grow. I 

wondered when I read that, if it would be something like the Minister of Agriculture's program to assist 

the farmers to conserve fodder and grain. I can recall a few years back, the Minister of Agriculture 

saying: ''I'd like to call you back to the biblical days." He said: "Only commonsense dictates that in years 

of plenty we should prepare for years of scarcity," and he said: "Anyone familiar with the history of 

Saskatchewan knows it has a cycle of good crops followed by years of drought bringing poverty and 

hardship in its wake." He then said this is another "first" for Saskatchewan, it is another milestone and a 

living proof of what can and will be accomplished by a government whose driving force is based on the 

principle of "humanity first." 

 

That's the way that program was introduced the Legislature. The purpose of that was to encourage and 

assist the farmers and rural municipalities to store fodder and grain in surplus years in order to have it on 

hand in case of emergency. Actually we were interested in this program. I come from the southwest 

portion of the province, and we know more about drought conditions than anyone in the province. It was 

in 1946 that this plan was brought in; by 1948, the Government had stored 2,400 tons of hay. In 1956 we 

asked a question in the Legislature. We gave it seven or eight years to build up and get itself going, and 

ten years later in 1956, we asked a question in the Legislature, and it is recorded in the Journals of that 

day: "How many tons of hay has the Government in storage under its fodder and conservation program? 

The answer came back: "11,450 tons". In 1957 we asked: "How many tons of fodder have been added to 

the government reserve bank?" The answer: "Nil." in 1958, we asked the same question: "How many 

tons of fodder has the Government put in its reserves in 1958 to build up its surplus for the time of 

scarcity?" And the answer again was "None." 

 

We asked about the program in connection with building granaries and bins in which the farmers could 

store wheat in order that in case of a crop failure, they could withdraw the wheat from these bins. In 

1950 (again four years before we asked any questions), we asked how many bins had been built. The 

answer came back: "Fifty-three 2,000 bushel bins." We thought that at least a wholesome start. Then we 

asked a follow-up question: "How much grain is stored in these 53 bins?" 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

 

10 

This is the answer, Mr. Speaker, from the Minister of Agriculture. He says: "We have no record." 

"Consistent drought made it difficult for the to R.M.s to arrange storage." The bins were still empty. In 

1953 we asked the question: "How much grain have you got stored in these bins?" And in 1953 the 

answer came back: "We have no record of any grain being stored." Then we asked: "How many grain 

bins has the Government got on hand?" The answer came back: "Sixteen; we have sold thirty-seven of 

the bins to the farmers." in 1957 we asked again: "How many bins have you got in which to store grain?" 

And the answer was: "None. The sixteen remaining bins had been sold to the farmers." That was the 

great conservation under The Fodder and Conservation Act. It was to usher in a new approach for storing 

fodder and grain in times of plenty in order to haves it in times of drought, and scarcity. 

 

This fall, when all those farmers in northern Saskatchewan find themselves faced with a crisis, there is 

neither any fodder banks nor any bins from which to drew the reserve. That was the record of that great 

undertaking on behalf of the farmer. 

 

I hope these new programs are not like the amendment to The Implement Act in which they said: "We 

are setting up a program for the testing of farm implements to see that the dealers and the merchants at 

all times carry sufficient repairs to service the machines which they use in the fields." "Why," they said, 

"these dealers have been getting away too long with selling and making huge commissions on the 

original sale and not keeping sufficient stock in their bins with which to service the machine after it is in 

the farmer's hands. We're going to stop that." Then we asked last year . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, I must take exception to the hon. member 

constantly putting words into my mouth, that I, or any member of the Government, made the statement 

that he is just mentioning at the moment. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Speaker, that is not a point of privilege, because I had not mentioned the 

Minister's name. Never once did I mention the name in regard to The Implement Act, and then he rises 

and says I a, putting words in his mouth. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — You certainly are! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — On with the program. So in order to get this program going, they licensed the 

implement dealers. Last year we asked, "How is your program developing? . . . How many inspections 

have you made? . . . How many complaints have you received from the farmers with regard to lack of 

repairs on hand?" There the inspections were only 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

11 
 

a few, the complaints were even less. Then they indicated that they were going to get down to the 

problem at hand this year. So, comes the 1st April, they jumped the tax for the implement licence from 

$5.00 to $25.00, and they used this money to put on increased staff to inspect the dealers' stocks. Well 

then, we asked, the other day: "How many dealers' licences have been cancelled by this Government?" 

The answer came back: "In 1957-58, eight dealers lost their licence; in 1959-59, twenty-six lost their 

licence; in 1959-60, under the stepped-up program, 102 dealers loot their licence. This last year we have 

lost 102 dealers because they couldn't obtain a licence any more to carry on. Not only had they put 102 

dealers out of business but, last year, the papers were full of it, every day during the harvest season, with 

farmers complaining that it was the worst year in history in their efforts to obtain repairs to keep the 

machines operating. Why? Was it the fault of the little local dealers? No, Mr. Speaker. He has no control 

over the amount of repairs that his company kept in their factories or in their repair depots and he just 

was unable to obtain those repairs. 

 

I had a dealer come to me two months ago — and there are instances all over the province. He told me, 

"I sent in my $25.00 and I applied for a licence and I got a receipt, so I went on selling the few things 

that I do sell under The Implement Act. I went on selling stationary engines, grain loaders, and all of the 

little things that are covered along with big machines," and he said, towards fall one of the officials came 

in to inspect his stock. He said, "How many little engines have you sold," How many grain loaders?" He 

told him so many. "How much of this?" How much of that?" So he looked it over and he said, "You 

haven't sufficient stock; you can't be in business. Where's your license?" Then the inspector looked at it 

and said: "This is not a license, it is only a receipt. You haven't yet received a licence from the 

Department of Agriculture." And he said to this dealer; "You have been selling all year without a licence 

and you are subject to prosecution for having done so." "Well," the dealer said, "I sent in my money, I 

got my receipt; that's as much as I knew." The inspector said: "Not only have you been selling without a 

licence, which is contrary to regulations but I assess that you haven't got sufficient stock on hand, and I 

am making a recommendation that your licence be cancelled." — and it was! That was repeated up and 

down the province when you go out and talk to the machine dealers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I would certainly like to have the details . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think the hon. member is entitled to the name. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Oh, I'll give him fifty names; but I am not going to take my radio time now to divulge 

them. I will undertake to give it in private, as many as he wants. 

 

A great deal has said, and a great deal more will be 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

 

12 

said, about the economic growth of the province, and I want to deal with that for a few minutes. 

 

Speaking of the economic growth, one can leave whatever impression one chooses depending on the 

yardstick he chooses to measure it with. The Premier, I notice, has been using the yardstick, production 

figures. This is the yardstick with which he measures the economic growth of the province. He points 

out (and rightly so) that manufacturing is up, retail sales have reached an all-time high; he points out that 

uranium production to is up, oil production is up. The Provincial Treasurer with his yardstick (from what 

I could estimate) stresses the boost in revenue from our main sources of taxes — the sales tax, the 

gasoline tax, liquor profits. He points out that they have reached an all-time high. It's true there are 

increases in manufacturing, there are increases in oil production, in retail sales, and this indicates 

something of the economic growth and certainly, increased revenues from tax sources, taken by 

themselves, might show an upsurge in the economy. But, there are other factors, Mr. Speaker, equally 

important that must be considered. They also must be considered with these others as well. We can 

choose only a portion of the yardstick and by doing so we car point to the sun shining on the peak, but 

we don't reveal the clouds in the valley and, in order to got a true picture or the economy in the province 

we must use some criteria which will include both the peaks and the valley. If we are to arrive at the true 

assessment of the economic growth then we must consider factors which have a prime bearing on it. 

 

A healthy and buoyant economy will certainly reveal itself in an accelerated growth in population, an 

increased tempo of exploration and development, of mineral resources, of oil wells being brought into 

production, of mining claims being staked, and of mines being developed; it will reveal itself in 

increased earnings to the farm worker and to the labour force, and above all, a healthy and buoyant 

economy will make itself felt by the extent to which it has broadened the economic base of the province, 

and thus, by doing so, lifting from the books of the people some of the tax burden necessary to carry the 

essential services of the province. 

 

We must consider the picture in its entirety. If we break up the measuring stick into its component parts, 

then by using any one of these component parts alone, as I say, we can create any picture that we wish to 

make. It reminds me of a man, the other day, who said to me: "Why, Saskatchewan was never so 

prosperous in its history." He said: "Look at the amount of liquor sold last year — $40,000,0000". I 

asked him: "Do you think you can measure the prosperity of a province by the amount of liquor 

consumed?" And he thought a moment, and then said: "No, I guess not. It depends on how much the 

Government has watered the whiskey and jacked up the price." 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

13 
 

Well, I thought that man was speaking words of wisdom. I thought of this man, the other day, when the 

Provincial Treasurer brought down his budget when he said with a great flourish, "The gasoline tax of 15 

years ago yielded $4.4 million; next year we expect it will yield six times as much — $22.6 millions." 

No, he didn't water the gas; but he sure jacked up the price — a nickel a gallon! He said further, and I 

quote: "In 1945-46 a year before we removed the education tax of 2 per cent from all foodstuffs and 

meals, the yield of the tax was just over $5 1/2 million. Next year, the education and hospital tax of 3 per 

cent, with many additional exemptions, is expected to yield $22 1/2 million." Here again, he jacks up the 

price 50 per cent. 

 

Our economy has been strengthened; but (let no one try to forget it) we still have many soft spots in the 

economy of Saskatchewan, and some sections of our economy are in such a depressed state that it should 

cause grave concern. I'm going to deal with that in a moment. 

 

Canada, as a whole, has, during the past decade and a half, had a phenomenal growth. This has been 

reflected not only in the gross productivity; it has been reflected in population increases, it has been 

reflected in personal incomes. Fifteen years ago, Saskatchewan had 7 per cent of the population. This 

percentage is the lowest level in the history of the province, and our percentage of the population has 

gotten so low that, after the next redistribution, Saskatchewan will have fewer members in the House of 

Commons than the city of Toronto. Saskatchewan's voice in the House of Commons will be its weakest 

in the history of the province. Now in this interprovincial competition of people, the problem facing 

Saskatchewan is not merely to provide new industry and consequent job opportunity, it is to do it at an 

accelerated rate. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — This rate must be greater than it is at present if we are even to hold our own in regard 

to this growth. The Premier revealed something of the state of the economy when he stated this — and I 

was amazed, Mr. Speaker, to hear it because I didn't know that before. He said that 49 per cent of our 

farm and wage earners don't make enough to pay income tax. Well, if that is the state of our economy, I 

say that is just not good enough for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I said a moment ago there are segments of our economy . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege. If my hon. friend will quote all the 

sentence. I said that 44.9 per cent of the people of Canada did not earn enough to pay income tax. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — As I said a moment ago, there are segments of our economy that give us cause for 

concern, and I just pointed out that although the total value 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

 

14 

of agricultural output remained steady, farm cash receipts declined 6 per cent and as a result of result of 

this, cash farm income will be lower than a year ago by $20 million. 

 

From this evidence, it is clear that production figures in themselves do not indicate the condition of an 

industry. Farm production could very well have increased substantially and yet the farmer could have 

received millions of dollars less in his cash return, and when conditions such as this exist, that industry 

is in a depressed state. A few years back the Premier's theme song was that we in Saskatchewan were 

facing an agricultural depression in the midst of an economic boom. Well, if indications in those years 

pointed in that direction, they certainly do not today; we talked about all production going up. 

 

Speaking of oil, it is significant that the Provincial Treasurer in his budget speech mentioned the word 

"oil" only once; he made passing reference to the decline in wellhead prices for oil; and the word 

'uranium' doesn't even appear in his budget speech, We have observed the C.C.F. long enough and know 

that, when they are hollering from the housetops and making a lot of noise, something is doing; but 

when they are quiet, we had better pull the curtain aside and, take a peek, because mischief is afoot. That 

's what we're going to do here. Since the Provincial Treasurer didn't talk about oil or uranium, I'm going 

to do so. 

 

In 1957-58 the mineral production soared to unprecedented heights. Production was up 54 per cent over 

the previous years and the significant thing about this was that the revenue to the Province from this 

same source paralleled production in that it increased 53 per cent, the same year. However, last year, 

1958-59, mineral production again increased. It was up 30 cent over the year before, but, on the other 

hand, the revenue of the Province did not follow upwards with production; they headed exactly in the 

opposite direction. Production jumped by 20 per cent, but revenues tumbled downwards 10 per cent 

below the previous year's level. These revenues were almost in inverse proportion to the increased 

production. I wonder, in view of all this, if the Minister of Agriculture still holds to the view that there is 

no such thing as the law of supply and demand. 

 

I want to segregate from the total mineral production of the province the natural gas and petroleum 

industry, and if we segregate that out of the complete picture of industry, we can get a bird's-eye view of 

the state of the health of this industry. In 1958-59, petroleum and natural gas production was up 13 per 

cent (which the Premier talks about) over the year 1957 to tell us that the revenues to the provincial 

coffers here again headed downward as much as production headed upward. Production swung upward 

13 per cent; revenues to the Provincial Treasurer tumbled 15 per cent. Revenues in relation to 

exploration in the oil industry, bonus bids, lease rentals, have plunged downward by 26 per cent below 

the level of the previous year. 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

15 
 

How much risk capital is being invested in mineral exploration as revealed by the amount of revenue 

estimated from this source? Revenue estimated from bonus bids, lease rentals, permits (that is the non-

recurring revenue) shows a very interesting picture when you look at the tables in the budget. The non-

recurring revenue from the exploration days of the oil development in this province, in 1959 was 

estimated to bring $10 million to the Provincial coffers, in 1960, the Provincial Treasurer dropped his 

estimate to $3 million, and for the current year we are budgeting for, 1961, he is estimating $1 million, a 

drop from $10 million in 1959 to an estimated $1 million in 1961. 

 

If we omit the amount spent on construction of the Trans-Canada and the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation pipelines, plus the addition to the refineries in the city (this can't be classified as risk capital 

in the same sense as exploration for gas and oil is classified as risk capital), what do we find here? In 

1957-58 the amount expended by the oil companies for exploration in Saskatchewan was $133.5 million. 

In 1958-59, expenditures for exploration were $87 million — a drop of $46 1/2 million in their budget 

for exploring gas and oil in the province. They cut back their expenditures last year by 46 1/2 million. 

 

I have a chart here, Mr. Speaker, prepared by the Department of Mineral Resources. I am not giving you 

any information that is not verified and obtained from reports issued by the Government itself. It is put 

out in very beautiful chart form, and it portrays the picture much better than I could do it. If you look at 

this you will notice expenditure on gas and oil development (which I have just mentioned), wells drilled 

to completion. Here's a picture of an oil well. In 1937 there were 1,258 oil wells drilled to completion; in 

1958 it had dropped to 803 Then you go on to footage drilled, and it is less; and this chart points out the 

wells drilled to completion in 1958 were less than the wells drilled to completion in 1954. This chart 

states clearly the condition of the oil industry in this province. The exploration phase of the oil industry 

has ground to a complete halt, and there is no exploration going on within the confines of the province. 

 

We cannot attribute this alarming decline in exploration to exhaustion of oil reserves. There are great 

possibilities of reserves for oil in Saskatchewan down into the deeper layers. This is proven by the fact 

that right across the boundary, our neighbour in Montana is having success in finding oil in this same 

deeper strata. I am sure that oil has no respect for either provincial or international boundaries. The oil 

industry in this province, from the information that we can obtain in assessing these reports has been 

strangled. It has been strangled by government bureaucracy, by the regulations and controls imposed 

upon the industry, regulations and controls unknown in any other area of Canada. In 1957 the Minister of 

Mineral Resources jacked up the royalty to the oil companies a million-and-a-half. Last year, he brought, 

in a Bill that says we want a million dollars from the oil industry for the so-called oil that may be under 

the road allowance. "Why," he said, "it's not a royalty; it's not a tax, but it brings in a million dollars." 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

 

16 

We pointed out, last Session, the danger of this very principle of loading this extra charge and these 

regulations upon an industry which, at that time, was facing a difficult problem. But they were hungry 

for money and they proceed to do it. And the drop in revenues, as I pointed out from $10 million to $1 

million, has shown that they have jacked the taxes to the industry so high that they have come to the 

point of no return. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that we in Saskatchewan have paid dearly for the C.C.F. attitude toward big 

business. Oh, they try to keep it underhand, but it broke out again, the other day, as it does every year in 

this House when the hon. member for Cumberland stood up and said: "Why, the Federal Government 

looks after the big interests. Look what it did to with the uranium fields in northern Saskatchewan. Why, 

it guaranteed to those companies that they would make $14 millions in profits a year." He was standing 

in this House condemning the Federal Government and its and its interest in uranium, while if he had 

read, just a week or two before, the announcement, he would have noticed that his own Minister of 

Mineral Resources had been down to a conference demanding that something be done to ease the 

depressed condition of the uranium industry. Then we wonder why we do not get risk capital into 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. I can't remember being at any 

conference demanding that something be done about the uranium industry. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Speaker, that is no point of privilege. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — It certainly is privilege. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Well, then, if you weren't down there, you should have been down, because the other 

Ministers of Mineral Resources were. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — It is just too bad for Saskatchewan that you did not see fit to go there. 

 

A clipping from 'The Leader-Post' the other day said: 

 

"Mineral Resources Profitable" 

 

"The most profitable Department of the Government is Mineral Resources. Revenues were $20.6 

million; expenditures, $1.3 million." 

 

I would point out to 'The Leader-Post', to the members here, that in the budget just tabled, the other day, 

it sticks out like a sore thumb. The taxation department is the most profitable department the 

Government has ever operated, Education and Hospitalization tax, gasoline tax, motor and vehicle 

license, and the mineral tax brought into the provincial treasury $42.9 million, and the expense, 

$900,000. 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

17 
 

Let us take a look at some of these taxes the people are paying, the estimates taxes in this new budget 

from these sources. It is estimated that education, hospital, gasoline, vehicle licences will bring in $47 

million to the Province. Recent reports published in the Treasury Department of which I received a copy, 

indicate that the revenues for this year closing on March 31st will be $50 million, not $47 million 

estimate from this budget. The budget estimates how the Treasurer proposes to raise $148 million — to 

some it may sound frightening. When you break it down into simple form, it is quite readily understood. 

These four main sources of taxation — education, gasoline, vehicle licences, liquor profits — will bring 

in a total of $65.3 million. The mineral tax, licences, and forfeitures under the Attorney General's 

Department, all these other sources of revenues, will bring in $63.8 million. Ottawa will pay us $46.5. 

So of the $148 million, $115 comes from the taxpayers and from the Government at Ottawa. That leaves 

a balance of $30 million-odd to come out of all the mineral resources of this province. We hope to 

collect $30 million-odd from the 4,000 oil wells, from the uranium mines, the potash mines, the gold, 

copper and zinc mines, from sand and gravel, salt, coal and clay; $65.3 from the backs of the people, and 

half of that from the industrial development within the province. That shows the condition of the 

economy. The taxpayer contributes more to the budget than the revenue from all of these sources 

included. For every dollar that you receive from your oil fields, gold mines, and production of all the 

minerals, the taxpayer matches it, two to one. For every one dollar from that, two dollars from the 

taxpayer. 

 

It is significant to note from this budget estimated by the Provincial Treasurer and brought down just a 

few days ago, that the combined total revenue to the provincial coffers from all the oil and gas, mines 

and minerals and clays produced in this province will be less than the gasoline tax alone. 

 

Opposition Members: — Shame! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Then we talk about the broadening of the economic base of the province. Has the 

base been broadened, when all of the 4,000 oil fields, all the mines and minerals, bring into the 

provincial coffers less than the tax on gasoline alone? 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Maybe they want to give the farmers a rebate! 

 

Mr. Cameron: It is no wonder the Provincial Treasurer stressed the tax sources. I want to refer to a few 

of his statements. 

 

"Revenues are up than three and a half times since 1944-45 and in 1945-46 revenues from education, 

hospital tax was $5 1/2 million. Next year the education and hospital tax is expected to yield $22 1/2 

million." 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

 

18 

Still quoting from sentences in his speech, he said: 

 

"Gasoline tax 15 years ago yielded $4.4 million. Next year we expect it to yield six times as much — 

$21.6 million. Motor vehicle licences will have moved from $1.9 million to $7.7 million." 

 

I have always known that the Provincial Treasurer was a genius at extracting taxes, but I am surprised 

that he has gone to the extent where now he stands up and boasts about it. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — It's the last chance he'll have! 

 

Mrs. Batten: — He's leaving, anyway. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I noticed, Mr. Speaker, another thing in the budget. The Provincial Treasurer, like 

every C.C.F. speaker who spoke in the House, just the same as they do on TV and radio and in the press, 

kept running back to 1944. You know, I took the trouble to add up the number of trips the Provincial 

Treasurer made back to 1944 in an hour and a half, and he made 27 trips back to 1944! 

 

I have an Irish friend who is somewhat of a philosopher. One time when we were discussing politics, I 

said, "Over the number of years you have been voting, how have you arrived at your decision on which 

political party to support? He replied, "Well, you know, when you see a man who talks about the present 

and the future, you see a man who is virile and alive. On the other hand, when you see a man who talks 

about the past, you see a man who is senile and decadent. This same truth holds true of political parties," 

he said, "and when a party has reached the stage that it talks about the past, then I know it is time for a 

change." 

 

Speaking about time for a change, I would ask the C.C.F. to listen to the comments on the buses and the 

trains. Get out, and don't talk for a little while, and listen to what is being said in the rural areas in the 

towns and villages . . . 

 

Mr. Loptson (Saltcoats): — They'll all quit. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — . . . and you will be surprised how correct my Irishman is. They have assessed that it 

is time for a change. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to deal with the debt position for a moment. I am not 

going to take a long time to try and entangle the thinking of the Provincial Treasurer in regard to debt. 

He says that we are practically debt-free in the province, and I am sure, 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

19 
 

today he must regret that this, his last budget, could not have been like Premier Bennett's a debt-free 

budget. 

 

'The Leader-Post' carried an article the other day, taken from Public Accounts, just tabled, and it says: 

 

"The gross debt of the Province has doubled in the past ten years." 

 

Well, of course it has doubled. The gross debt of the Province today is $388 million and, on top of this, 

the Provincial Treasurer reveals in his budget that he is going to borrow $50 million and up for the 

coming year. How does the Provincial Treasurer arrive at the conclusion that Saskatchewan is almost 

debt free? I am afraid he is using exactly the same tactics as Mr. Bennett did in B.C. I am going to come 

to that in a moment. 

 

In reference to the borrowing, he said in the budget speech: 

 

"We, in common with other provinces, have borrowed large sums in the U.S.A., because there was not 

enough capital available in Canada." 

 

I checked on that statement, and I went to the report issued by D.B.S. on funded debts of the provinces 

of Canada, and I have it here in my hand. It gives a complete outline of the amount of bonded debt for 

Canadian provinces, and the amount each province has borrowed in the United States. Manitoba floated 

99 per cent of all its bonds in Canada; only one per cent in the United States; Quebec, 85 per cent of her 

money was raised in Canada, 15 per cent in the United States; Ontario, 74 per cent in Canada, 26 per 

cent of her bonded debt in the United States; New Brunswick, 87 per cent of her debt in Canada, and 13 

per cent in the United States. 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. As the figures are being quoted incorrectly, I 

have the right to correct them. The figures that are now being quoted do not count the money which has 

been borrowed by the Power Commissions of these various provinces: Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick 

. . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Speaker, he can make his speech when . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — He can speak twice; I can speak only once! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — Mr. Speaker, I am trying to correct the hon. member. I am not including the money 

borrowed by the different Crown Corporations, or the Telephone Companies. 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

 

20 

Mr. Danielson: — Sit down! 

 

Opposition Members: — So what? 

 

Mr. Cameron: — So what, even if they aren't? But I can assure you that they are. This report will show 

it to you. I know these figures hurt, Mr. Provincial Treasurer . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Fines: — No, they don't. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I know that you don't like to hear that you went to the United States to borrow 52 per 

cent of all your money when other provinces borrowed from one to two to 15 per cent. This is why he 

said in his budget speech, sure, there is some risk involved, but 52 per cent of your borrowings are in 

American money, and if the premium rate changes, (there is no guarantee; the evidence is that it will) — 

then we will be asked to put millions of dollars in interest charges to retire that debt. 

 

He said the money market wasn't available in Canada. The other provinces found the money. I would 

like to ask why the Premier and the Provincial Treasurer preferred to go to the American market and 

give the coupon clippers of New York the interest charges on our debt, instead of reserving it to the 

people of Canada. 

 

Opposition Members: — And Saskatchewan! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Premier Bennett announced his first free-debt budget in B.C. I want to read you what 

the C.C.F. in B.C. had to say about Mr. Bennett's so-called figuring of the budget. This is quoting from 

the C.C.F. News of B.C., July 27, 1959. Here is the editorial: 

 

"The so-called mortgage burning being staged in Kelowna by Premier Bennett is all but trappings of an 

ancient Paganistic ritual. In those days it was felt that the mass of people who were uneducated and 

unthinking could be kept content with bread and circuses, but in 1959, a circus is not acceptable as a 

substitute for truth. 

 

"At the very moment when the Kelowna spectacle is being staged, the absolute minimum debt 

responsibility of the Government of B.C. will be $95 million, and it could go higher." 

 

All this fuss about, a debt of $95 million. We have $380 million! It went on in a later issue of the 'C.C.F. 

NEWS', August 26: 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

21 
 

"It has screened its financial juggling by double-talk and has diverted the public attention by 

treacherous circus displays." 

 

All over $95 million! I would say, Mr. Speaker, our Provincial Treasurer has learned well at the knee of 

the Premier of British Columbia. He has learned so well that he is a living example today of a student 

who excels his master. 

 

I would say here to the Provincial Treasurer: "I will use the same thing here as the C.C.F. did in B.C." 

You know, it is funny, Mr. Speaker, how different a political party is when it is in power, and when it is 

out of power . . . 

 

Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — . . . and the C.C.F. are out of power in British Columbia. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — And the C.C.F. are in power in Saskatchewan. 

 

Govt. Member: — We'll start all over. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — But not for long. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I want to say in all sincerity that it is my belief that all these statements which the 

C.C.F. issue on TV, radio with your breakfast, your dinner hour, your bed-time story — those same 

familiar faces are there, telling the same old story in the same old say . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — You don't like it? 

 

Mr. Cameron: — . . . all about Saskatchewan's great reduction in debt. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Tens of thousands of dollars! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — If I had the time I would tell you something a lady told me the other day, about those 

faces on TV. 

 

I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that, in spite of all that is said, the people of Saskatchewan have pledged 

their resources to every dollar that the Provincial Treasurer has borrowed, and when the time comes for 

repayment they must meet every cent of the interest charges as well as the principal. All the talk in the 

world will not remove the fact that we have pledged the resources of Saskatchewan to the extent of $388 

million. This will not all be paid in visible taxes, no, it will be paid in invisible taxes — in the form of 

electric and gas rates, telephone rates, and all these things. In different ways, but coming out of the 

pockets of the same people of the province 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

 

22 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

I get awfully cross when they go before TV all over the province, and continue to repeat the story that 

Saskatchewan is almost debt-free. I say this is nothing but a shabby trick to hoodwink the gullible in the 

province. Statements such as this, in this House and on TV, in my judgment, at least, is just a sorry 

comment on the state of public morality. When the highest personages in public life resort to such 

trickery as this, it makes a mockery of the virtues of truth and nothing but the truth. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Speaker, in looking at the budget we must assess it, not only for the amount of 

money that is to be raised, but in the manner in which these moneys have been allocated for expenditure. 

There are several things that are evident in assessing the economy of Saskatchewan in bringing down a 

budget. These factors must have a bearing. It is true the construction industry has hit an all-time high; 

retail sales have hit an all-time-high; revenues to the Provincial Government from their tax sources were 

never more buoyant, have never been greater; production of many of our minerals are up, and that is 

good. We welcome it. But we must not overlook that there was a darker side as well. While mineral 

production is up, revenues to the province from this source are down. The oil industry has, to all intents 

and purposes, ceased its exploration program. This not only contributes to loss of job opportunity; it 

seriously dampens the hope of continued expansion in this whole mineral field. The oil industry has 

joined agriculture as a full partner in a depressed state in Saskatchewan. 

 

When our two major industries, agriculture and mineral resources, share this common state of 

depression, I think we have grave reasons for alarm. Saskatchewan has been stopped cold in its attempt 

to broaden her base, to broaden the economy in order to lift, off the backs of the people, some of burdens 

necessary to carry the responsibilities of the Government. That we have neglected to do that is evident 

from the fact that the ratio of the taxes collected in comparison to that received from the production of 

oil, uranium and other minerals. 

 

For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, the fact that we have been unable to do these things, I think the 

desperate need of Saskatchewan to secure new industries and new developments, but it must do so at a 

much greatly accelerated rate. This the Government has been unable to do. This is evident by the heavy 

dependence on taxes for its revenue, and on the ever-increasing dependence on Ottawa for assistance. 

 

Sixteen years in office has had its effect. It has beclouded the vision and the efficiency of this 

Government, which has failed to relieve the load of school officials, municipal officials and local 

government; which has failed to provide an accelerated program of broadening the economic base of the 

province. In these things it has failed, and because of that, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the motion. 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

23 
 

Mr. A.L.S. Brown (Bengough): — Mr. Speaker, at the outset I want to associate myself with the 

member who has just taken his seat in, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. McDonald, and the Premier in 

welcoming once again into our midst the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. Weber). I want to associate 

myself with the remarks made by the member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) when he made reference 

to your health. I feel that those are the sentiments of all of the members who sat with you during your 

term of office, and during your term as a Minister of the Crown, and sat with you when you were, as I 

am, one of the backbenchers on this side of the House. 

 

I want at the outset to extend my congratulations to the Provincial Treasurer (Hon. Mr. Fines) on the 

budget which he brought down here, last Friday, not only for the contents, but for the manner in which it 

was presented in the House. I have sat in this House and heard the Provincial Treasurer bring down some 

16 budgets, and I am prepared to predict that this very best budget (and I am not slurring the previous 

ones) that has been brought down in this House. However, there is one thing that I cannot ignore, and 

that was when he indicated in his remarks that this is the last budget he would be bringing down. I know 

I express the feelings on this side of the House, and I would like to suggest to him that we bring in a 

House amendment striking out those words. 

 

I am in somewhat the same position as the Provincial Treasurer, as this be my last opportunity to take 

part in a budget debate. I am in the same category for another reason; for I can very well remember some 

25 or more years ago, when the Provincial Treasurer was down organizing in the area from which my 

Leader was elected. So we have something in common in our background, and it is possible that the 

reasons he made up his mind to retire from public life are not too far different from those reasons which 

made me make up my mind not to remain in public life. 

 

Our reasons for joining the C.C.F. were essentially the same. I joined the C.C.F. as a protest against 

human suffering and human privation. In retiring from public life, the Provincial Treasurer and myself 

realize that the struggle against human privation and suffering has not yet been won; but there are many 

ways in which we can serve the movement other than as an elected member. I feel satisfied that, in the 

years that lie ahead for myself and the Provincial Treasurer, we will continue to serve this movement to 

the best of our ability, although it will possibly be in another category than before. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I may deviate for a moment from the budget proper, I would like to make reference to 

one or two other matters. The first one I would like to refer to is the Clerk of our Assembly, who has 

been with us during the entire time of my term in the Legislatures and who, I believe, is considering 

retiring at the end of this Session. I would be remiss in my duties if I did not make mention of my 

appreciation for the work and help he has given to me as an individual and as a member of this House, 

and the assistance he has given to all the members of this House. 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

 

24 

I would also like to make passing reference to another individual, and that is our Sergeant-at-Arms. 

While he has not been here during the whole term of my office, nevertheless, during the time he has 

been with us, (and that is a good number of years) he has brought dignity and decorum in his capacity to 

the Legislature, and I certainly, as an individual, want to express my deep regard for him, and the hope 

that he will remain in this Legislature and also remain in good health. 

 

If I may just deviate possibly even a little bit further from budget itself for just another moment. What I 

am going to say, Mr. Speaker, I am not saying in a critical voice, and I certainly am not attempting to 

lecture. I have sat in this Legislature for some 16 years as a private member, and I appreciate having had 

that opportunity; and I feel that I have come to respect, and possibly even to love, the parliamentary 

procedures that have been built up over the years, and am proud to appreciate the value of those 

parliamentary procedures. I am as jealous of the rights and privileges of the private member, as anyone 

in the House. I think and I feel that it is through a proper understanding and a proper appreciation of 

these procedures that we, and those who follow us as private members, can make our greatest 

contribution to the proceedings of this House, and the deliberations of this House. 

 

Parliamentary procedures are something which we must cherish, and at the same time, realize that we 

should not be afraid, when it becomes necessary, to set a precedent. We have had them in this 

Legislature, Mr. Speaker. We 

established a precedent when we established a Crown Corporations Committee, which has been accepted 

as a normal part of parliamentary procedure in many of the Commonwealth nations. I want further to 

suggest to those private members, whether they are on the Opposition side or whether they sit on the 

Government benches, that under no circumstances should they allow themselves to be dominated by 

those who may sit on the treasury benches of that day. There is a way and there is a means, and it is up to 

us to understand the ways and means in which we can make our impact properly felt upon those who sit 

on the treasury benches. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, turning back to the Budget Speech. I wish to refer to some of the remarks made by 

the member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) in making his criticism of this budget. I was impressed not 

by what he said, but rather with what he failed to speak about. He failed to realize and appreciate the true 

contents of the budget as presented here last Friday. He did say, however, that he noted increase in 

school grants, but he tried to 

point out that this will not remove the inequalities in our present tax structure. I agree that it does not do 

that entirely, but it does a great deal more towards it than did the policies on this province prior to the 

C.C.F. 

 

The C.C.F. Government inaugurated the principle of equalized grants throughout the whole province. In 

some parts of the province we find 75 per cent of school costs being borne by the Provincial 

Government. I think it is a right and proper principle, and it is contributing to equalization of the tax 

structure all across the province. I agree with him that it does not do 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

25 
 

 entirely, but every time in the part of the budget for education, that principle has been followed. If we 

continue to follow that principle, we will reach the day when we have eliminated inequalities in our tax 

structure; and I do agree that with all the contribution this Government has made toward education, all 

inequalities have not been removed. 

 

As far as the educational system itself is concerned, it is not possible to have the same high class of 

education in some parts of this province as they have in other parts of the province; but through the only 

media through which it can be done. It is being done and that is through a media of equalizing our 

financial contributions towards education, both in operating costs and capital costs for the building of 

schools. 

 

From the school grants he went on to discuss the Continuing Committee. He said that the Continuing 

Committee had not given us any information and he referred to the Progress Report tabled in this House, 

one year ago, as having no information in it. Well, I suggest to him that he undertake to read this and to 

read it carefully, and he will appreciate what this Committee has done. It has done a considerable 

amount of work up to the time it prepared this report, and when the interim report or the final report of 

this committee is placed before us, I am satisfied that the report will indicate that they have undertaken 

their task with zeal and energy and have done a considerable amount of work even up until 1959, when 

that was laid on our desks. 

 

From there he went on to the question of the municipal water and sewage program, and suggested that 

the amount of money to be voted in the budget would do little toward assistance of our smaller urban 

centres in obtaining municipal water and sewage programs. But it starts the program, Mr. Speaker. 

Certainly, in one year, we are not going to undertake to bring water and sewers to all the urban centres in 

this province, but it is nice to know where you are going, and I suggest that some time, sooner or later, 

you have to start. Here is a program which, in the final analysis, could unquestionably assist many 

smaller urban centres to get this necessary water and sewer supplied. 

 

This is not the first step to be taken in assisting municipalities as far as water is concerned. They have 

already given some of them a considerable amount of assistance through the medium of buying up their 

debentures, taking them off the financial markets on the one hand, and thus making it possible for many 

municipalities to obtain a lower rate of interest than they would otherwise have had to pay. The 

combination of this policy along that, will do much towards assisting the municipalities. 

 

The same is true in respect to the farm program to which my hon. friend referred. I think he referred to it 

as a plan for political spread and pooh-poohed the idea that it was going to have only some $300,000 in 

grants this year, and approximately $200,000 for the salaries of those engaged in promoting and 

undertaking this work. There was only going to be some suggested 1,500 farms (which he read from a 

press report) for 1960, which would come into 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

 

26 

the category for grants for water and sewer programs. You have got to get a program started. When we 

undertake a program like this, we do not expect to accomplish it all in one year; but rather, it must be a 

program spread over a number of years — somewhat in the same category as the rural electrification 

program was, with the Power Corporation. I expect and I hope and trust that whoever brings down the 

budget in 1961, they will have an item in here for a considerably larger amount than this, so that this 

program can be expanded, as we were able to expand the rural electrification program when it was 

started. 

 

We started the rural electrification program in this province in 1949. By 1959 we had power in the 

position where it could be available to well over 90 per cent of the farmers of this province. That was 

done in 10 years. Starting off with a modest 1,500 farms in 1960, it is not beyond my comprehension 

that, by 1970, we will be in the same position with water and sewer on farms throughout the province, as 

we were with power by 1959. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Brown: — He went on to The Farm Implement Act. I could not quite get the connection between 

The Farm Implement Act and the Budget, but I suppose there was some relationship there. From there he 

went on to try and prove to this House that there had not been the type of economic growth that we were 

entitled to see. Well, Mr. Speaker, we have seen a lot of economic development in the last 16 years. We 

have seen this province change from one of 5 per cent non-agriculture, to a point now where non-

agriculture represents 50 per cent of our production in this province — an indication that there has been 

economic growth in the non-agricultural segment of our economy. 

 

He made reference and tried to prove his point, by saying that the Premier had indicated there was less 

than 49 per cent of the farmers and workers in the province of Saskatchewan who do not pay income tax. 

That is true, Mr. Speaker. It is true, in spite of the fact that we had this industrial development and 

economic growth in a non-agricultural economy, and agriculture is still the largest single industry in this 

province, and the Premier had forecast, some time ago, that you could have a depressed agricultural 

industry in the midst of an industrial growth, and that is exactly what has happened. That is the reason 

why there are 49 per cent of our workers and our farmers who do not pay income tax, and that again in a 

depressed condition. Whose fault is that? That certainly cannot be laid at the feet of Government. This 

must be placed at the feet of the people who are responsible and that is the Federal Governments, as a 

result of their marketing and 

their policies for agricultural products. 

 

He went on then to substantiate his argument by saying there was a reduction in exploration of oil in this 

province. Certainly, there has been a reduction in oil exploration in this province as compared with 

previous years; but we have a right to expect that oil explorations will come back and be developed, 

because it has been proved beyond the shadow of a doubt that no policy of this Government has had any 

effect on reducing 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

27 
 

exploration work in this province. It not the policy of this Government, but once again, rather it was the 

question of markets for these products for which this oil was produced. 

 

He went on to point out that this $29 million which he referred to in this budget, which would be 

received from mineral resources, as compared with $30 million the year before, and suggested that in 

comparison to the overall revenues, that was a proportionately small amount of money, that the $29 

million, the bulk of our budget, was coming from other sources. Certainly that is true, Mr. Speaker. 

What was the case back in 1945? What did they obtain from these same sources then in relation to the 

budget at that time? Well, we have the estimates for 1955. It is all under natural resources. In it they 

have lands, they have forests, water, permits for grazing, and they have fisheries and game licences, 

making a total of $1,246,000; but referring back to the same items that now make up the $29 million in 

our budget. We must only take into consideration mines, minerals and coal mines — that was the 

mineral production in those days — and adding these two figures together we get somewhat less than 

$200,000 out of a total budget of $34 million. So I would suggest that, in relationship to our overall 

budget, to say we are not getting a proper share from these mineral resources is a statement of absolute 

nonsense. 

 

If it were possible to increase this, I would certainly like to see it done, because the mineral resources 

belong to the people of Saskatchewan. It has been a cardinal rule with this Government that when 

resources are developed (as has been done), they will be developed in the interest of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan who own them. I hope and trust that, in the future, they will continue to 

maintain that policy even if it does mean that you might not get quite the same development as you 

would in some other form. I do not want to see this Government reach the day when they will sell the 

people of Saskatchewan short. 

 

He went on from there to suggest that it was time for a change. The people in the province of 

Saskatchewan back in 1944 set the political trend for this province for a long time to come. They made 

the decision as to the type of economy and the type of society they would undertake to defend, and I am 

convinced that the people are of that same political opinion as they were at that particular time, and will 

continue to march along the path set out in the last few years. 

 

From there he went on to make reference to the fact that our debt has increased in this province and he 

uses the term 'gross debt'. Yet the Provincial Treasurer in this House has tried to explain to him, on more 

than one occasion, the difference between the gross and net debt. He went on to say that we had all the 

resources of the province behind this gross debt. Well, possibly that is true. Mr. Speaker, but we have 

with the $388 million increased the production capacity of this province and increased the assets of this 

province to something considerably greater than what he indicated was our gross debt. Certainly the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan will have to pay off this debt. They may have to pay it off 

through taxes, as he 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

 

28 

referred to, as a net debt, or else through the payments they make to the utilities. If we had not borrowed 

this $388 million for the purpose of investing in such utilities as Power and Telephones, if we hadn't 

done that, someone else might have done it. The National Light and Power might have done it, or the 

Dominion Electric might have done it, and they would have had to borrow the money, and the same 

people would have to retire their debt just as we have to retire our debt here. So to suggest that putting 

that kind of a debt on the province is putting a millstone around our necks is simply ridiculous. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the outset I suggested that the remarks of the member for Maple Creek were more 

remarkable for what he failed to say than for what he did say. There are many other programs in this 

budget speech to which he could have made reference, to indicate and bring out constructive criticism 

against our proposals, which he failed to do. There is, for example, the medical-care program which he 

could have referred to, but didn't. I don't want to spend too much time on it as much has been said 

outside this House, and I expect much more will be said in and outside the House in respect to the 

medical-care program for the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

In the final analysis, it is not a question of whether we do or do not have a medical-care program, but 

rather what type of medical-care program we will have, whether it will be compulsory or voluntary, 

whether it will be under public control and supervision, or whether it will be under some other type of 

supervision and control. I am going to suggest that any medical-care program to be effective, must be 

compulsory. There are some very fine medical schemes being operated in the province under which there 

is no compulsion for the people to join, but when you give to me the right to refuse to join a scheme, 

then you must also give the operators of the scheme the right to refuse to accept me. In other words, if 

you want a universal scheme and you want a scheme that will accept everyone, the only way is to make 

it universal and make it compulsory. The present scheme would deny me that right. Therefore, I say, it 

must accept all the people of the province of Saskatchewan and, therefore, it can be nothing else but 

compulsory. 

 

Secondly, it must be under public control. It is a cardinal rule democracy that we, the people, must have 

the right to control and formulate our own destiny, and I suggest that that principle, if it can be applied to 

allocation, should be applied to health, and we will simply be extending that principle a little further. We 

as people should have the right to form our own destiny in the field of health and assure to ourselves that 

we give not only the cheapest or at least the lowest cost of help and care to people, but we give the best 

care for our people. I feel that some form of public control is the only way it can be obtained. 

 

Turning for a moment to one other item that was mentioned in the Budget Speech . . . 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

29 
 

Mr. Foley: — Did I understand him to say a moment ago, that there would be some choice on the part of 

the people whether or not would be compulsory? Then a few moments later I understood you in your 

opinion it must be compulsory. 

 

Mr. Brown: — No, I said the decision we will be asked to make is not whether we will have a medical-

care program, because I think the people of Saskatchewan are in favour of a medical-care program, but 

what type of medical-care program. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, turning to another item that was mentioned in the Budget. There is a vote in the 

budget to make provision for expenditure with respect to crop insurance. This question of crop insurance 

has been an issue in the agricultural field for a number of years, The Royal Commission, you will recall, 

issued a report with respect to crop insurance. The national Government passed the crop insurance 

payment. It had no resemblance to the recommendations of the Royal Commission on Agriculture and 

Rural Life with relation to crop insurance. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Hamilton says it is borrowed from that book. 

 

Mr. Brown: — Their scheme is directly opposite to what was advocated here by the Royal Commission. 

Some time ago, maybe three or four years ago, we members of this Legislature endorsed in a Resolution, 

the program developed by the Royal Commission on Agriculture and Rural Life with relation to crop 

insurance, and it was a Resolution that received the unanimous support of the members of this 

Legislature. The plan in which we are being asked to co-operate is just the reverse to what was suggested 

here, for their plan is enabling legislation to allow the province to set up a plan which would then enable 

the Federal Government to participate in it. The Royal Commission advocates the reverse; that it shall be 

a national crop insurance scheme with provincial participation in it. The net result is that you have an 

item in here — I think it is some $200,000; a net expenditure for the province over and above the 

administration costs. There is, however, a liability takes place on this problem which could, in a crop 

insurance scheme, expand it to the extent (if it was desirable to have that expansion) that could very well 

wreck the entire economy not only here, but in the other provinces as well. 

 

I suggest that while we are going to make some progress toward attainment of providing this industry 

with a more adequate type of insurance than presently, we must realize that we cannot forgo in the 

program the proposals which are laid out in this report which we, in this Legislature, have endorsed. We 

must continue to press the Federal Government for a more adequate type of crop insurance in which they 

themselves, and the country as a whole will bear the liability incurred in that crop insurance scheme. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't wish to weary the House too long. In closing I would like to say, as I said at the 

outset, I have seen 16 budgets brought down in this House, and I suggested that this budget brought 

down by our Provincial Treasurer is the best budget in the whole period and the best that 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

 

30 

has been brought down in this House. I can support this budget because I am satisfied with the programs 

outlined and proposed in it, so that future generations can look forward to a better society and a better 

way of life than we have had here in Saskatchewan in the past. What we have started and what we have 

done in the past 16 years, this is not the end; it is not the beginning of the end. It is not even the end of 

the beginning for the type of society which many of us visualized, including the Provincial Treasurer and 

myself, 25 years ago. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I have great pleasure in supporting the budget. 

 

Mr. C.G. Willis (Minister of Public Works): — I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The House resumed at 7:30 o'clock p.m., in Committee of the Whole on several Bills. 

 

The following Bill was reported without amendment: 

 

Bill No. 16 — An Act to amend The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Fines: 

 

That Bill No, 16 be now read the third time. 

 

The question being put on the said motion, it was agreed to, on the following recorded divisions: 

 

YEAS — 32 

 

 Williams McDonald 

Douglas (Weyburn) Erb Batten (Mrs.) 

Brown (Bengough) Johnson McCarthy 

Bentley Thurston Coderre 

Brockelbank Stone Barrie 

Fines Willis (Elrose) Korchinski 

Walker Davies Gardiner 

Lloyd Meakes McFarlane 

Nollet Wood Foley 

Cooper (Mrs.) Thorson Nicholson 

Gibson Harrop   

Douglas (Rosetown)   

NAYS — Nil. 

 

The said Bill No. 16 was then passed. 



 

February 29, 1960 
 

31 
 

SECOND READING 

 

Bill No. 39 — An Act respecting Dental Technicians. 

 

Mr. M.J. Willis (Elrose): — I move second reading of this Bill, and that it be referred to the Select 

Standing Committee on Law Amendments and Delegated Powers. 

 

The question being put on the said motion, it was agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o'clock p.m., without question put. 


