



















































Hansard: February 18, 1960


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Thirteenth Legislature 

6th Day 

 

Thursday, February 18, 1960. 

 

The House met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE SALE OF BONDS 

 

Hon. C.M. Fines (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded 

with, I wish to announce the sale of certain provincial bonds worth $7,500,000. Bids for the bonds were 

received Monday. The highest tender came from the Nesbitt-Thompson syndicate of Montreal, which 

offered a price of $98.68. The nominal interest rate on the debentures is six percent, with a money cost 

of 6.12 per cent. They are repayable over 20 years in Canadian funds. 

 

This money will be used for the capital program of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. With a similar 

issue two weeks ago, the province of Ontario received — price of $96.73, so that I think Saskatchewan 

did very well. 

 

THRONE SPEECH DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate from Wednesday, February 17th, 1960, on the proposed 

motion of Mr. Thorson (Souris-Estevan): 

 

Mr. L.N. Nicholson: — Mr. Speaker, in adjourning the debate yesterday, I congratulated those who 

have spoken before me. I think that each of them has done his best to try to give us something to think 

about, and this afternoon, although I don‟t believe in destructive criticism, I want to attempt, because of 

certain things that have happened in this House, to go back a way to show why I think that certain things 

that should have happened have not happened. 

 

The Speech from the Throne mentions that progress was made in the field of industry and capital 

investment, and it states that it was at a very high level. Mr. Speaker, I wish I could honestly believe 

that. I think that we got a little, yes; I know in my own mind we haven‟t got our share, and I‟m going to 

go back a way to try to explain some of the reasons why I think we haven‟t our share. 

 

I remember last winter in this Assembly asking the Provincial Treasurer if there was any change of 

getting highway tax-free gasoline for farm trucks. His reply to me was: “Yes, when we have a 310 

million dollar budget like Alberta we can give them highway tax-free 



 

February 18, 1960 

 

 

2 

gas too. Another comment that I have heard from across the floor is, “Oh, well, Alberta has oil.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wonder if oil or industrial development just happens, or whether there is a reason for 

these things happening. I believe your hon. friends on your right would be the first to agree that oil just 

didn‟t come to Saskatchewan; when it did start to come it came through a program that they had 

advanced in order to get oil exploration in this province. 

 

Now, in the dirty thirties when the Social Credit government took office in Alberta everyone knows the 

conditions, you could plan all you like but you couldn‟t get speculative money to drill for oil, or seek 

minerals, or industry of any kind. The same applied in the years immediately following because our 

country went from a condition of depression into a condition of preparing for war, and then, war. Now 

in those years, no provincial government could do very much towards inviting the development of their 

country, but they could plan, and I‟m going to give the Liberals credit for just a moment because I do 

say that during those years the Liberal Government of Saskatchewan had no chance to develop our 

natural resources, but I‟m going to go a little further and say that they were asleep at the switch for many 

years before. I believe there was a piece read in this Legislature from the Swift Current paper stating that 

gas and oil had been discovered in Medicine Hat and that within six months or a year the Maple Creek-

Swift Current area would be a booming gas and oil field. I believe the date of that paper was 1904. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if that is so, someone was asleep at the switch. Now, when the Social Credit 

Government took office in Alberta we all know the condition that they found themselves in. They 

couldn‟t do anything about the development of their natural resources, but they did do one thing. I said 

at the outset that it just didn‟t happen, and I‟m sincere when I say that. They planned for the day when 

they could invite risk capital into the province of Alberta to develop the natural resources. They planned 

it in such a manner they thought it would be fair for the people, fair for the surface-rights holder, and fair 

to the speculator. They tried to get capital in eastern Canada and couldn‟t get a nickel. They even tried to 

get risk capital in England and couldn‟t get a nickel. Eventually, the American people did say: “Yes, we 

will gamble.” Now I was on a tour of the North a year ago last fall and I heard one of the gentlemen 

from the C.C.F. when we were in Uranium City telling a group of fellows: “This is a wonderful thing, 

this uranium industry of ours, but, it is a shame that these people can make so much money.” 

 

I want to try to analyze just for a moment what happens with people who are sticking their necks out and 

spending risk capital. They will take four or five propositions, they‟ll say possibly four won‟t pay off, 

but if the fifth pays off sufficiently to cover up for the others then we‟re breaking even, and that is the 

basis they go on; it is just 



 
February 18, 1960 

 
3 

good business sense they use and all kinds of our exploratory work we all know is a pure waste of 

money because the results are disappointing. 

 

Anyway, during those years the Social Credit Government of Alberta planned for that day and right after 

the war they were able to get activity started, and I think that a lot of it was due to good business 

administration. In other words, I believe they wanted to be a good business government, and I also 

believe that at the inception of the C.C.F. they wanted to be a good government in business. I believe 

that was the difference in the two parties. Well, oil and gas were found. Alberta started to roll. I think 

that they actually got help from Saskatchewan. I believe that if the government of Saskatchewan had 

done nothing except sit and catch the overflow we would be far ahead of where we are today. 

 

The reason I say that is because of certain statements that have been made by responsible people and 

before I quote these statements I want to mention that the Mover of the Address-in-Reply to the Speech 

from the Throne said the other day that industry has nothing to fear from the Government of 

Saskatchewan. I hope that is a true statement, but about three weeks ago the C.C.F. member in my 

constituency, speaking in Choiceland, stated and emphasized that the C.C.F. are the same today as they 

were in 1933, when the Manifesto was printed. Now, one of them must be wrong. So just when Alberta 

was wanting risk capital I believe that the people of Saskatchewan helped them. No one was in a better 

position than the government of the day. I have here a statement made by Premier Douglas, in the 

Session of 1945 in this Legislature, and I want to quote it and let the people decide whether or not that is 

the same meaning as they have today, and I quote: “Let not those who sit in high places lull themselves 

into security. This government is pledged to eradicate capitalism in this province and to establish the 

Co-operative Commonwealth, and will do so first or perish in the attempt.” 

 

Previous to the 1948 election I heard a radio campaign speech by a man who was at that time a member 

of this Government, and I distinctly remember him saying that we — now if these words are not exactly 

correct the intent is exactly the same — we will let private enterprise explore the oil wells and dig the 

mines, and when the proper time comes we‟ll expropriate. Now, Mr. Speaker, . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is surely not going to attribute that to anyone 

without quoting his source and naming the person. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Joe Phelps — you Minister of Natural Resources. 

 

Premier Douglas: — What is the source of that statement? 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — A radio address previous to the 1940 election, which I heard myself. I haven‟t the 

statement now: I haven‟t it with me, but anyway . . . 



 

February 18, 1960 

 

 

4 

Mr. Speaker: — Did the hon. member state who was making the radio address? 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — Yes, I did. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I‟m sorry, I didn‟t catch it. 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — My point, Mr. Speaker, is this, that while we should have been trying to get our 

share of that money it was being pushed away from Saskatchewan. 

 

I honestly believe that this government have tried since that time to woo some of that money back into 

this province and I‟ll tell you, when you consider guaranteeing bank loans for stable industry I‟ll go 

along with you, I‟ll do anything I can to assist in the development of this province because we are 

lagging behind. We have some oil development now, certainly, but we have no sale for it. We have quite 

a bit of oil development, and we just simply sat here and let the gravy train go by, but I think now that 

regardless of politics we should all work together and attempt to get that money into this province, and, 

as I said before, the Alberta Government attempted to be a good business government. I think the 

position of the Government should be to legislate so as to be fair to all concerned and when those natural 

resources are brought to the surface to be there with both hands out to get a fair share for the people. I 

believe that is common sense. 

 

Now I quoted yesterday from the magazine of the amount of drilling in Saskatchewan as of November 

5th. This is taken from Oil of Canada and everybody knows this report. On November 5th, 1959, 

Alberta had 145 rigs in the field and 7 preparing to drill. Saskatchewan had 24, and none preparing to 

drill. This is as of November 5th; there is a later edition but I don‟t happen to have it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m not going to condemn anyone for that situation but I do think that somewhere down 

the line our government has been missing the boat. Just at this very time there are something over 100 

families from Regina being moved to the city of Edmonton by the Imperial Oil company. I wish that our 

situation, that our programs, had been such that they would be moving people from Edmonton to here. I 

think it possibly could have been had we had a government during those years that would have gone out 

and tried hard and promoted the exploration of our province. 

 

I think one of the reasons, is high taxes. One of the reasons why we have a deterrent to this type of 

investment is high taxes. Now, during the 1956 provincial election, our friends across the way were 

trying to feed the public the idea that taxes were higher in Alberta than they were in Saskatchewan. I‟m 

glad you said that because I want to give you a very fair comparison. I have a friend in Edmonton who 

owns a home for which he has refused $22,000. That home has gas, paved streets, off-street paved 

parking, every service that you can want, and it‟s not a home in the older area of the city where the 

debentures will have been paid out. His 



 
February 18, 1960 

 
5 

total taxes were $228.00 last year. I have a friend in Saskatoon who has a very similar home, I think 

possibly of not quite as much value but fairly close. His taxes last year were $426.00. I have another 

friend in the city of Regina who has a very similar home, I would say within a thousand dollars one way 

or another, and his taxes last year were $480.00. Now, when industry is considering locating in a 

province I think, surely, that that must have some bearing on whether or not they will decide to come to 

Saskatchewan. With that in mind, I want to make just one point on what is happening in Edmonton, 

Alberta, and I think if we could do the same thing, and, in fact, I know if we could do the same thing 

here that we could reduce the taxes for our people of Regina an awful lot. 

 

The budget for the City of Edmonton for 1958 was $46 million. The Government of the Province of 

Alberta gave them $19 million in grants, over 50 percent. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — What is their debt? 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — Whose? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Edmonton‟s. 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — I expect it would be great because of the expansion, but our expansion here has been 

peanuts in comparison with our debt and our taxes which are one hundred odd mills. Certainly, do you 

feel that if you lived in a small town in Alberta you should pay for the sewer and water in Edmonton? 

Don‟t be ridiculous. They are getting ahead and they are paying less taxes by many dollars. Now I want 

to follow through . . .I was just supposed to have fifteen minutes, Mr. Speaker, and that seems to have 

gone. I‟m going to touch on one other topic before I give up anyway because I am robbing the time from 

my pal, here, the hon. member for Rosthern. 

 

I want to speak for just a moment on the Squaw Rapids Dam. We are very pleased in our area to get that 

dam. I know it‟s not because it is in Nipawin constituency and they like to be good to me. It‟s there 

because that‟s where it belongs. However, since about the first of the year a lot of confusion has been 

created, and I want to mention it because I want to see it straightened out. It is regarding the purchase of 

land from people who reside in the basin area. I had an experience: I‟ve been affiliated with real estate 

for years, and through the real estate office I sold a half section of land in November, and the highway to 

the dam site goes across one-quarter. It takes approximately forty acres off one-quarter, the low side of 

the highway because it will be in the buffer zone area. I went to Mr. Buchanan who was the man there 

looking after this, and told him of the transfer. I knew that very likely the government would have to 

search titles; that title wasn‟t clear when I sold this land and I had personally cleared it; so I went to him 

and informed him who the new owner was and 



 

February 18, 1960 

 

 

6 

in our few minutes of discussion I asked him, on the basis of forty acres, how much would this man get. 

His reply after figuring purchase price of land plus severance pay, or forcible separation — call it what 

you may, was $29.25. I forgot to mention that there was a dug-out on the low side that was being lost 

and later that was determined to be $175.00. 

 

His quote to me, counting the dug-out, $3100.00. I went to the land-owner and I said: “Now look, take 

your new title and go down to this gentleman and have a talk with him. I think you are going to be 

treated fairly.” He went down and talked to the same man within a week and with the dug-out the 

highest figure he quoted the actual land-owner was $2500.00: $600.00 difference in the figure he gave 

me. 

 

Now, I don‟t know why that should be, but I do know that there is confusion galore in that area. 

Apparently they make a trip out, (I‟m not condemning the men; I think they have a tough job to do), but 

they make a trip out and they say: “Well, would you be satisfied with $16000.00 or something,” and the 

fellow says, “No.” Well I don‟t care how we put it, Mr. Speaker, in dollars and cents, but I do maintain 

that it is the responsibility of this Government or whatever Government might be in power that those 

people will get enough money to relocate themselves and be no worse off; if anything, a little the other 

way. I think that is only common sense. 

 

Now there are quite a number of big homes in the area and if you know the lay-out of the country you 

know there is only a reasonably small area between the Carrot River and the Saskatchewan. Now those 

homes cannot be moved over those rivers. I would very much like the Government to go to those people 

as individuals and say: “Look, we have some abandoned leased land east of Carrot River.” I know one 

man, for instance, he has a quarter of land purchased through V.L.A. It‟s not paid for. He rents a quarter 

and leases a quarter. Now, if he is given a good price, with the balance owing to V.L.A. deducted, with 

luck, he could get a ticket on another quarter. However, he can‟t tie himself down with two rented 

quarters to help use his machinery. Actually, some of those men, unless we attempt to do something, 

will possibly be put out without enough cash to relocate themselves. 

 

Now, to me this is serious; the only statement I have ever made on it is that they must receive enough to 

relocate themselves and be definitely no worse off. We must consider twenty-five years of their lives in 

some cases; it isn‟t just a case of a man wanting to sell and move. 

 

Therefore, in closing, I want to ask the hon. Minister of Agriculture to give serious consideration to 

making some of the land east of Carrot River available. Where people have their holdings in the flood 

area with obligations against it, we‟ll say such as the Farm loan, try to transfer them to those other 

properties and transfer their obligation. If we can 



 
February 18, 1960 

 
7 

do that, Mr. Speaker, I am satisfied that we are going to have a lot less trouble in satisfying the people of 

that area and in doing justice by them. Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the motion. 

 

Mr. Isaak Elias (Rosthern): — In rising to take part in this debate I, too, would like to congratulate 

those who have spoken before, especially those two gentlemen who spoke so well on Monday in 

opening this debate. I am sure we are all happy to see the Provincial Treasurer back in his seat so that he 

can resume his duties. Also, I would like to inform this House that I spoke to Mr. Weber on Monday and 

he is up about fifteen minutes every hour. The doctor say that he might be able to be back here on the 1st 

March, so then we might have a full House. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in view of the circumstances I may make history here; this could very well be the 

shortest talk that has ever been given in this House. I will try to stay very close to my notes, therefore, so 

that we can get the most out of it. I was going to speak on three topics, one of which I term 

Saskatchewan‟s greatest need. I would also like to make a few remarks about my home constituency, 

Rosthern, and then I was going to speak a little about the tax structure. Pardon me, if I stay close to my 

notes, therefore. 

 

What I think is Saskatchewan‟s greatest need, as this report also states, is a clearly announced 

declaration of policy. When studying and analyzing a program, one should be able to detect definite 

underlying principles that give content and structure to it. Yet, Mr. Speaker, had I not known that it was 

a program presented by the C.C.F. in the Throne Speech, I could very easily have been persuaded that it 

was presented by a Liberal Government. Therefore, both mover and seconder could make little reference 

to underlying principles, and the Leader of the Opposition certainly laboured very heavily in his 

criticisms. 

 

The C.C.F., with their Regina Manifesto neatly tucked away, are desperately trying to put on a new look 

to woo the lost confidence of private enterprise, but this masquerading is quickly rendered ineffective 

when other C.C.F.ers, claim that although rewritten and rephrased their principles have not been 

changed. Even in the short time that this debate has proceeded the Liberals, too, have taken a stand 

diametrically opposed to what they did some time ago, and now, with their new Leader, the Liberal 

group will certainly wander to and fro. And so, what Saskatchewan needs, Mr. Speaker, more than 

anything else . . . 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Mostly to. 

 

Mr. Elias: — . . .is a clear declaration of policy. That to me is the most important lesson we can learn 

from this Report. It says at page 336: “A clear statement of policy regarding the position of 



 

February 18, 1960 

 

 

8 

the Government, the I.D.O. and the I.B.F. in assisting new industries to establish, or existing in tries to 

expand, would undoubtedly stimulate interest in Saskatchewan.” So it is calling for a clear declaration of 

policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must admit that my greatest disappointment in this short experience in the House has 

been this lack of an absolute and definite declaration of principles and policies. At the same time, 

though, my greatest satisfaction is that we as Social Crediters have always openly declared ourselves as 

being a truly free enterprise party. Not only do we believe in these principles but the application of these 

principles is bringing results to the people of B.C. and Alberta, and, after all, that is the prime function 

of a Government. 

 

You see, Social Credit believes in the freedom of the individual for self-development, and not in the 

regimentation of the individual for state development. We believe the prime function of a government is 

to bring to people the results that the people want from the management of their affairs, and not the 

results that the government wants for the people. We believe that all people should be entitled to a 

measure of freedom with security. 

 

Social Credit is dedicated to the correction of the flaws in our economic system so that we, as 

Canadians, will be able to enjoy the essence of a real democracy. This, Mr. Speaker, would put a stop to 

the three cancerous growths which are plaguing the whole free world, and ruining it internally, playing 

right into the hands of Communism. These three cancers are: debt, taxes, and a loss of individual 

freedom. I had hoped I could say a few words about taxes; however, I am sure I can‟t today. 

 

I would like to say a few things about my Rosthern constituency. I am very proud of my people and I am 

very, very happy to have the honour to represent them in this House. As previously mentioned, they 

have contributed greatly to social services: I have mentioned previously the old folks homes — we have 

two, the Mennonite youth farm with the invalid home, the orphans‟ home, the crippled childrens‟ home, 

and a home for the mentally ill. They have contributed greatly to the education of Saskatchewan. We 

have two Bible schools, we have the privately-supported Rosthern Junior College, we have six recently-

built modern schools, and several are being planned right now. My people have contributed greatly to 

the health of this Province. My own hometown of Rosthern has just recently installed water and sewer. 

The little town of Langham is also working with plans so that they will be able to have this modern 

facility. We have at the Rosthern youth farm the most modern pasteurization plant in the province. They 

have won the provincial award for cleanliness and high standards two or three times. 

 

They have contributed greatly to the economic development of this province. They are certainly 

encouraging the diversification of agriculture. 



 
February 18, 1960 

 
9 

We have a creamery in Rosthern; we have a cheese factory in Waldheim; we have one of the first potato 

processing plants in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

As for cultural activities, they certainly have done a great deal, too. The Rosthern Junior College 

Chorale is again invited to make a tour through the States, Alberta, and other provinces in Canada to 

render programs. I think we have one of the finest bands in the little town of Dalmeny; it would pay one 

to come out and listen to that band in Dalmeny. 

 

These are the people, that I represent, and it is on their behalf that I want to express appreciation for the 

rebuilding of the No. 11 highway; for the promise of the bridge at Petrofka, and these people, through 

me, are also appealing to this Government for immediate consideration to provide this area with natural 

gas. We feel their appeal is fully justified for a number of reasons. One, my area is one of the most 

densely populated areas in the province. The number of domestic users per mile is the greatest, I think, 

in any part of the province. Two, because of the goodly number of public and industrial customers, 

volume is assured. We have hospitals, schools, the Mennonite farm, the cheese factory, the potato 

processing plant, the pasteurization plant — all these are customers that would give volume to that 

service. Three, the ease with which this area could be served, due to its favourable location. It is between 

the two cities — Saskatoon and Prince Albert. Four, the required number of sign-up applications has 

been met. We were told that 600 would be required, but 725 have signed applications. So we feel these 

are strong enough arguments, and I am appealing to you on behalf of my people to give this very serious 

consideration. 

 

It was with some unhappiness, though, that I read in our local paper that when the Choiceland 

development takes place, two areas have been promised that a pipeline will be built. The delegation that 

came right there to see the Minister concerned were promised that, if that development should take 

place, the line would be built from Saskatoon through this area through to Prince Albert. But the same 

day they came home, we read in the „Star-Phoenix‟ that the town of Govan had a delegation in here, and 

that Board of Trade was promised by the same Minister that, if the Choiceland iron ore development 

was developed, the line would be built there. So we are somewhat confused. Are there going to be two 

lines built that way to serve one area? Or is it simply a pre-election publicity earmark? Or what is it? Are 

we going to have the line go from Saskatoon to Prince Albert, or is it going to go through this Town of 

Govan? The irony of the thing to me is that the Minister who gave these two promises happens to 

represent the constituency which includes Govan. We don‟t quite understand this attitude. 

 

For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the motion. 



 

February 18, 1960 

 

 

10 

Mr. Arthur T. Stone (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to congratulate those who have taken 

part in this debate, especially the member from Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) whom I thought made a really 

good job of his start in this Legislature. I am going to take issue with the statement made by the Leader 

of the Opposition at the end of his address the other day, when he was referring to the Commission on 

freight rates and then went off on a tangent, stating there was inefficiency on the railroads. 

 

As one who has put in 46 years service on the railroad, I will agree with him that there is inefficiency, 

but when he singles out the employees and labour unions as the greatest factor of that inefficiency, then 

I must take issue with him. I am sure that the railway employees will not be too pleased to be labelled as 

practising „feather-bedding,‟ as he remarked. Had he taken the trouble to find out the facts, he would 

find out that no other major industry in Canada, with the exception perhaps of the coal-mining industry, 

has suffered such a cut in its ranks and its employees for the last two years, and even now men have 

been periodically laid off from the railroad. They are not only cut to the bone; the bone has been 

removed, and I am in a position to know because while I have been relatively happy in the employ of the 

railroad, in the last few years, I was very happy to part company with them last June. 

 

The facts are, Mr. Speaker, that in the United States of America, the facts have proven that in 1956 there 

was a third less in railway employees than there were in 1946, in spite of the increased amount of 

passenger service and freight haul, and it is believed that the same figures are true in Canada. If we were 

to take his argument and follow through that there was „feather-bedding‟, then surely we would have 

more employees instead of less. 

 

I don‟t know where the member for Nipawin (Mr. Nicholson) got his figures — I notice the gentleman 

isn‟t in the House at the present time, and neither is the Leader of the Opposition — his comparative 

figures between the cities in Alberta and those in Saskatchewan. I think he mentioned they were twice 

the cost in Alberta than in Saskatchewan — pardon me, the other way around. But I have here the report 

of the Wood, Gundy Company issue of January, 1960, of the Canadian Government and Municipal 

Financial Statistics, and I think all members will agree that this is a fairly accurate statement. I turn to 

the back page, and have the comparative municipal financial statistics. I find the current tax levy per 

capita for Alberta (Edmonton), $88.22. For the city of Saskatoon it is $73.90. The net debenture debt per 

capita in Edmonton is $235.88, and for Saskatoon $117.24. 

 

As a member representing a large urban centre, I have to point out that we do have some increasing 

problems facing our larger cities. I was extremely interested in the winning candidates at the last 

municipal election. When they appeared on TV, everyone from the Mayor down to the aldermen 

expressed enthusiasm and optimism for the year to come — 1960, 



 
February 18, 1960 

 
11 

feeling that we were heading towards our 100,000 population, and towards building a fine metropolis. 

The fact is that our construction permits last year came to over $34 million, exceeding by some $5 

million the record set in 1958, and slightly over half of this, some $17½ million, went to the building of 

1503 homes, which were capable of housing some 5,000 people. This compares to some 15 million in 

1958, for 1281 homes. 

 

We have also had a number of apartment blocks built in Saskatoon. I think the investment of the Hudson 

Bay Company of over $3 million in a new departmental store in Saskatoon is a good indication of their 

faith in the economic status of this province, and the City of Saskatoon. One-half has already been 

opened, the old store has been demolished, and the second half is well on to completion. I might 

mention that the Goodyear Rubber Tire Company, which was purported by the Leader of the Liberal 

Party not to want to do business — they couldn‟t do business with the socialist government — also built 

a half a million dollar warehouse in the City of Saskatoon. 

 

Of course the Provincial Government Building program has helped considerably in the building boom in 

Saskatoon. Last year the Queen Elizabeth plant was opened by Her Majesty, the Queen. We have the 

Power Corporation office and the new Government Insurance Office also open. There is a tremendous 

amount of construction going on at the University campus, which has helped considerably in providing a 

large wage bill for the City of Saskatoon. 

 

The Federal Government has also completed the new Armouries, and is starting on a new Post Office. 

When you have this kind of huge construction development, it also creates tremendous capital 

investment for providing services for this construction program There are sewer and water, storm 

sewers, miles and miles of sidewalks, roads, miles of power lines. Now the cities are realizing that the 

services that have been in use for many years require re-building, or else they have to face the 

consequences of a major break-down. This is not just applicable to the cities of Saskatchewan, because 

if one follows the convention of Mayors and their briefs to the Federal Government, it will be noticed 

that every city in the Dominion is pretty well in the same situation as are the cities of Saskatchewan. The 

policies of the Federal Government have made this problem almost insurmountable, as far as cities are 

concerned. 

 

I believe people in the urban centres — the great majority of them, anyway, understand the problems 

facing us in this large and sparely populated province of ours; some of the people in our rural areas, and 

if I may be allowed to say it, they are our poor relations — are people who are not able, because of these 

sparsely populated areas, to provide for themselves the things they must have and need. So I think we 

have, in the urban centres, been rather impatient, though at time I will admit we have been rather critical 

when we have not been able to get all the things we have asked for, but we do believe these people are 

in need and should have these services. 



 

February 18, 1960 

 

 

12 

I want to say last year we were very thankful for the very large grant to our school board. The grants 

meant to us a savings of five mills, and actually it meant that we were able to maintain the same tax rate 

in 1959 that we had in 1958. I am sure the Minister had stacks of letters from the taxpayers, thanking 

him for this large grant. If not, I want to take this opportunity of saying how we appreciated it. 

 

It is also nice to notice in the Speech from the Throne that the Government proposes a significant 

increase in the funds allotted to school programs. We have a great problem in school construction. Last 

year we spent 3.6 millions of dollars in school classrooms. We have had a great problem with our 

elementary schools, and still do not have enough classrooms to meet the elementary situation. Last year 

some 4,500 people moved into the City of Saskatoon. We are now meeting the bulge in our high school 

population. More boys and girls are going to high school; more boys and girls are staying longer in high 

school, a trend which I am sure we all agree with. 

 

There are also other non-profit institutions which are finding their problems difficult because of the 

federal fiscal program. I refer to the St. Paul Hospital, the pioneer hospital of Saskatoon, which about 

three years ago, just before the first Federal election found it necessary to have more beds and especially 

better laboratory facilities than they have at the present day. It was found impossible to add to the plant 

they had; it was obsolete; and entirely new hospital was required. They came to this Government and 

this Government did agree, because of the circumstances and conditions surrounding them, that they 

would give them grants equal to hospitals outside of the city. They went away, I think, fairly happy at 

getting over $800,000.00 from the Provincial Government, and the same matching grants by the Federal 

Government, making a total of $1,600,000.00 for the construction of a new hospital. 

 

Now, today, after almost three years of Conservative Government, with their fiscal policies, these people 

find that it is beyond their power to go out on the market and borrow the necessary money to put up the 

hospital which they need. I understand that the Minister of Health has been in touch with the Minister of 

Health of the Federal Government. I hope has some good news to tell us. I do feel that the Federal 

Government is responsible for the tight money situation and should accept some of the burden they have 

placed on these non-profit organizations. 

 

Another item I am interested in in the Throne Speech is the establishment of the Municipal Industrial 

Development Corporation. We, in Saskatoon, I think, have the best facilities for the development of 

industry, with the possible freight rate deterrent. There have been many harsh and critical statements 

made in the past because of the disappointment of not being able to attract industry to Saskatoon, but I 

think this has been because of frustration, not knowing how or when to approach the problem and to 

have someone who has the time to do a good job of salesmanship to bring industry to the City of 

Saskatoon. I am satisfied that there are some good businessmen in the City of Saskatoon who have made 

considerable wealth in the City 



 
February 18, 1960 

 
13 

of Saskatoon and the area around, who will be willing to chip in a little money to help industrial 

development, to bring industrial development to the community which has been so good to them. At 

least, I think this is the best thing that has come up so far and I believe it should be given a trial. 

 

One of the biggest problems which is going to face the City of Saskatoon is one to which we can‟t close 

our eyes, too much longer: that is the problem of traffic control. Our bridges are being used to capacity, 

and the plans already on blueprints will soon have to be acted upon to have more access across the river 

and better means of crossing through the downtown area. 

 

We are much concerned (I think the Minister of Highways has been approached by Boards of Trade) to 

have the stretch of No. 5 Highway from Watson to the junction of No. 2, rebuilt and hardtopped. I am 

glad to see the member for Humboldt agrees with me. The area in the northeast part of the province, we 

consider, uses the City of Saskatoon as a trading centre. We are very much concerned that because of the 

improvement being made on No. 6 many of the people who were coming into Saskatoon will now go the 

extra miles to Regina and be lost to our trading area. We hope very much that this will be started on in 

the 1960 program. 

 

We are also very desirous of having some good access roads to the Saskatchewan River Dam. We feel 

that we can have a large amount of business with that project and we want to have good access and a 

short route to the dam. 

 

I think it is about time that we quit talking about a Trans-Canada Highway through the north central part 

of the province and make a start on it. I say this because we in the north-west area have suffered too long 

in the matter of discriminatory freight rates. It is not justifiable and it is ridiculous to think that one can 

ship from Ontario to Edmonton and back again to Saskatoon at a cheaper rate than one can ship direct 

from Ontario to Saskatchewan. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Stone: — The only way we can possibly convince the railways that this is unfair is to have a good 

highway where they could have some competition from the trucks. 

 

We are very glad to know at last that the Petrofka bridge is about to be built. I think that the people on 

that side of the River have waited long enough and we are glad to know it is coming, and it will be of 

great benefit to the area and the City of Saskatoon. 

 

Last year the Assistant to the Premier and myself attended the opening of the Mount Royal Lodge in 

Saskatoon, a hostel opened for the benefit of 94 single guests. This completes a very fine memorial to 

the efforts of the community in Saskatoon. We have now 134 single family units housing 2 aged people 

in each unit and we have the 94 single guests 



 

February 18, 1960 

 

 

14 

in the hostel. I know practically every member in this House, if they wished to, could get up and talk 

about these housing units for the aged. 

 

I also want to take a few minutes to congratulate the Minister and his department, in the development of 

the Pike Lake Provincial Park, and to assure him that this will be filled to capacity, as we have no place 

around Saskatoon — our nearest place is Waskesiu which is a little too far to go in one day. This will be 

a needed recreation area away from the tension and the gasoline fumes of the city and will be 

appreciated by many people in the surrounding area and the City of Saskatoon. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I should say that we have many things on the other side of the ledger which we 

appreciate in the City of Saskatoon. We now enjoy the benefits of natural gas, for the seventh winter, 

and I suggest that it has been a real saving to the users of natural gas. I would say that it has cut a third 

off their fuel bill. I can conservatively say that. 

 

I believe the Hospital Plan has meant a great saving. In one respect it has been a saving to the taxpayer 

who hasn‟t had to pay the large deficit on operating costs. It has also, of course, been a saving for those 

who have been unfortunate enough to go to hospital, a saving of hundreds of dollars in their hospital 

bills. 

 

A big saving has been made in the medical care of the Old Age and related groups, given by this 

government. Otherwise the cost would have to be borne by the municipality. 

 

I think the Government Insurance Office has saved our people hundreds of dollars in low premiums for 

fire and automobile insurance. Of course, I could say a lot in respect to minimum wages, holidays with 

pay, hours of work and the Workmen‟s Compensation, as they are very much appreciated by the 

workers of Saskatoon. 

 

And so, from these few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I think you will realize that I am going to support the 

Motion. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, first of all I would like to congratulate the 

Mover (Mr. Thorson) and the Seconder (Mr. Thibault) of the Motion. I am sure that we all enjoyed the 

presentation, as it was one of the most worthwhile ever given in this House. 

 

Before I proceed with what I have in mind concerning my constituency, I would like to reply to the hon. 

Leader of the Opposition (Mr. McDonald) on certain matters he mentioned in the House. I think he 

mentioned that the policy of Government in collecting the mineral tax of three cents an acre was a 

detriment to the people of Saskatchewan. Apparently this policy was initiated and brought into being 

about 1946. In any event, it has been in force for over 10 years and, of course, he admitted that much of 

these lands are owned by the C.P.R., the Hudson‟s Bay and other companies who obtained these mineral 

rights under the Crown from the Dominion Government many years ago. While it is true that many 

farmers who have oil on their property pay the tax, a small tax, at the same time there are many farmers 

throughout Saskatchewan who have mineral rights and who have leased 



 
February 18, 1960 

 
15 

these rights to oil companies and to people interested in the resources below the ground. When you add 

these all together I doubt if there are very many people left who hold the mineral rights just for the sake 

of holding them. Yet the Leader of the Opposition has suggested to this House that we, this Government, 

forgo $860,000 a year to the treasury of this Province, just to satisfy a few of his political friends and 

corporations. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege: there is no suggestion that the Provincial 

Government should forgo the $800,000. The suggestion was that the tax should be taken off bona fide 

lands and bona fide farmers. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, may I say that that statement is ridiculous, in my opinion, because 

you cannot make laws for one class of people . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — They do it every day! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — If the suggestion is that it should be taken off only bona fide farmers, then I 

wonder what the others would do in the law courts of this country. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Pay it! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Of course, the Liberals always have a habit of promising anything, to giving away 

the resources of this province. I remember, years ago, the lands here in Saskatchewan that contain oil, 

millions of acres of them, were leased to the Imperial Oil Company for a dollar. I remember how the 

issue was raised by Mrs. Neilson in Ottawa. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You gave 14 million away for a quarter of a cent! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Of course, they don‟t like what I have to say! The other point I would like to 

mention in what was said by the Leader of the Opposition, is the per capita tax. I would like to use a few 

comparisons of how you can arrive at a per capita tax and how unjust it would be to use that calculation 

to judge whether a province is wealthy or is not. Take for example, in our province we have a number of 

communities whose assessment is based on the same formula, yet when you look into the Annual Report 

of the Department of Municipal Affairs, page 116, and page 117, here is a comparison. In my own 

community of Meath Park, which is assessed on the same basis as Smeaton, not very far away, the 

school rates are the same, the municipal rate is about the same, yet the Meath Park per capita tax is $64 

per head, according to the record. Then you go to Smeaton, and for some reason or other it is only $35 

per head. You can go to Lebret, and find that it is only $16 per head, and yet the tax is based on the same 

formula of assessment. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Give up. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — How then can the Leader of the Opposition suggest that we are less wealthy and 

are taxed more just because in 



 

February 18, 1960 

 

 

16 

Quebec, where they have large families, the per capita tax is less than it is in Saskatchewan? 

 

I would also like to mention one of the statements made by the hon. member from Nipawin (Mr. 

Nicholson). He mentioned in his speech that the Social Credit got into “flower” in Alberta and, of 

course, he told us the whole history of the Social Credit, as if it has been something done there because 

of that political party in power. The fact remains, as mentioned by him, that the government got into 

power in 1935, and it was not until 1939 or 1940, that you had oil development there. In other words, it 

took the Social Credit government four to five years to get a program of industrialization and discovery 

of oil in Alberta on the way. They did have oil, of course, in the Turner Valley under the Liberals, as 

many of the hon. members may remember, many years before that. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Let‟s say 12 years. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Twelve years? And yet it only took the C.C.F. one or two years to get going in 

Saskatchewan to develop the resources found underground in this province. 

 

Mr. Korchinsky: — Why don‟t you go ahead? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — The hon. member appears to think that oil is put by the Lord all over this country, 

and all you have to do is get enough capital and drill for it anywhere, and there it is. If he knows 

anything about geology, he must understand that, in the province of Saskatchewan, what has been done 

up to the present time in this province is that only the surface structure, or upper sediments, has been 

prospected for oil. There have been only a few oil wells drilled in the deep strata. Some drilling is being 

done now, and if we are fortunate and there is oil in the depths of this province (and I hope we do find 

it), then when we get it in the deeper strata we may do even better than Alberta has done. 

 

These resources and their development are not decided by governments, whether they are Liberal, 

Conservative or C.C.F. It is by search that we find whether the oil, which took millions of years to 

deposit, is there. Having said these things, I would also like to point out that you can‟t get development 

in the Choiceland area where we have tremendous deposits of iron (and I agree that they are tremendous 

deposits of iron) unless you have the right kind of economic conditions. It isn‟t just a matter of finding 

$50 million and “you have a mine,” as the hon. member for Nipawin suggests. You first of all have to 

have the proper economics. I have said on different occasions that similar iron ore to what we have at 

Choiceland, is today being purchased in the United States for $8.50 per ton, (50 per cent magnetite). On 

top of that I presume that the freight rate may cost about ten or twelve dollars per ton from the mine to 

the foundries; but here we have a situation which is entirely different. We do not have the ore near the 

surface. First of all the ore is at a depth of 2,000 feet at least, and it may cost $20 or $30 million to dig 

one or more shafts to get into the ore. Secondly, you have a tremendous freight rate cost which, I think, 

runs up to over $20 per ton. It is going to cost much more to get ore from deep in the bowels of the earth 

to the surface. It is going to cost more to pay for the transportation from the Choiceland area, or any part 

of Saskatchewan, to the steel foundries. And the only way that a mill could be built economically in this 

province is to have a foundry here in Saskatchewan. But here is the sticker, Mr. Speaker. If a mine went 



 
February 18, 1960 

 
17 

into production and the figures I have placed before you are true, then this mine could only operate 

maybe a month — four or five weeks a year. Does anyone suggest that there is a corporation, company 

or firm that would be willing to throw in $50 million to develop a mine which would be only open four 

months. That is the problem. There is also a problem of markets and until these problems are solved I 

haven‟t too much hope that we can see production ahead. We have, fortunately, other iron deposits such 

as those north of Buffalo Narrows which are on the surface. In the meantime, the Choiceland 

development can get going or we can find some way whereby it would be profitable to mine it, it may be 

more desirable to open up pits north of Buffalo Narrows. 

 

I am certainly proud of the Speech from the Throne because it has indicated in this House the positive 

policies this government has in mind. I am proud of the C.C.F., with whom I am associated, I am proud 

of the fact that during the years I have been in the House and been associated with the movement, it has 

been the purpose of this government to carry out positive policies and programs. It seems to me in 

listening to the debate of the past few days, that there will be some good arguments. But it seems to me 

that there must be an election in the offing because every so often someone gets up and discusses the 

philosophy of his particular party. I have a philosophy too and I think it is a C.C.F. philosophy under 

which we have been put here by the people who desire to have things done. We are here because we are 

only instruments of human welfare and have a job to do, and our job is first of all to see that the rank and 

file of people of this province and this country are given the kind of consideration that they should have. 

If governments are what I have said they are, instruments of human welfare, then when there is an 

individual or a segment of society suffering, then I feel in the kind of philosophy we have, it is our job to 

either legislate or do something that will alleviate the suffering, or on the other hand improve the way of 

life of those particular persons or particular segment of society. 

 

Take a look at the philosophies of some of the others, stated today, or declarations of what they would 

do. I will not go into these. I am interested in my people here in Saskatchewan, and in the things that I 

have to do. I do have to refer to the tragic situation that has occurred as far as our crops are concerned. I 

commend this government for the timely and sympathetic action it took in co-operating with the federal 

Government. There was no choice, we were advised to do otherwise, yet this government took the 

initiative and had the courage to go ahead and at least help to the extent that help could be obtained and 

to participate. We know that the provinces of Manitoba and Alberta came in later and I think they too 

had no choice. What I want to point out in this also: I want to lay the responsibility on the proper 

government, for failure in assisting those who were so unfortunate. I remember last fall when I was 

contemplating taking my crop off, listening to the radio and reading the press report that the Wheat 

Board agency of the federal government told us not to touch the crop because if we did the grain would 

not be accepted at the delivery points of this province. As a result of that advice from Ottawa, myself 

and other farmers in my area, and I am sure all across Saskatchewan, waited for the weather to clear up 

so we would be able to take off a dry crop. Yet, after waiting for dry weather, our crops had become 

damaged because of the directions from the Wheat Board and officials at Ottawa, and after the snow 

came it was impossible to take these crops off. (It will be lost, or most of it will be lost by spring). 



 

February 18, 1960 

 

 

18 

 

When it came to taking over the responsibility to do something about the situation to help the people 

who had suffered, what happened? The federal government said in negotiation with the provincial 

governments of Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta, it was prepared to give relief of 50 per cent of up 

to $3.00 per acre, a maximum of 200 acres. 

 

I want to say here: that, Mr. Speaker, is a different philosophy, the philosophy of the Ottawa government 

was not to go ahead and try to be an instrument of human welfare, they treated us as they should not 

have treated us. At this time, I would like to make some comparisons: Many people say that there should 

be no subsidies, there should be no subsidies for farmers; there should be no subsidies for those who are 

in need. Yet, on the other hand, let us look at the practice that exists in this country. I have here figures 

which indicate what is happening in the uranium industry, I think I can remember the figures. We have 

in this country the production of uranium and let‟s take a look at the picture of what has happened in 

uranium. In the same way as wheat is stockpiled, so is uranium stockpiled. The government of Canada 

has guaranteed the various uranium companies a certain price . . .no, not a price below the cost of 

production . . .but a cost that gives the companies a considerable profit. Take, for example, one 

company, the Gunnar Mine in northern Saskatchewan (and I am not criticising the government for what 

they have done, they wanted production and they got it. Let‟s take a look and see what is being done. 

The price the Dominion Government does give to this company for the stockpile of uranium has made it 

possible for this company to make a net income, according to the banking figures I obtained from the 

library, of over $40 million in three years. The Eldorado company during the same period of time, 

though a Crown Corporation, (the money of course stayed with the government) made a net profit of 

$13 million. 

 

When it comes to giving assistance to people who work day in and day out trying to make a living, the 

people who are the real chain of strength in this country, the government cannot find the money. Mr. 

Speaker, when it comes down to the vested interests, such as the financial houses, the government of 

Canada can find 50, 80, 90 million dollars for interest on bonds, whatever the sum may be. When it 

comes down to stockpiling uranium they can make a profit for the various companies, but they have 

failed the people of Canada by not giving the farmers, who have lived in a depressed condition for many 

years now, the few million dollars in deficiency payments that would save this country and the farmers 

from bankruptcy. 

 

At this time I would like to point out that the Honourable Leader of the Opposition, in my opinion, just 

awoke to the situation that farmers are hard up. During the years that I have been in this House, I have 

brought these matters to the attention of the House for the simple reason that in my country where we 

have marginal farming, our people suffered the cost-price squeeze before they did in any other parts of 

Saskatchewan. Yet they could not see it on the other side until their government was defeated in Ottawa 

and now they are prepared to join with the C.C.F. and tell Ottawa of the conditions in this province. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 



 
February 18, 1960 

 
19 

Mr. McDonald: — They‟ve been sleeping ever since they‟ve been in. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I took a clipping out of the „Commonwealth‟, it is a C.C.F. publication and I think 

the figures are correct . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — It‟s not out of the „Commonwealth‟, it couldn‟t be. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — . . .which shows what has been happening in Canada. We are often told there is 

inflation, Ottawa can‟t find the money, we have to tighten up, they say, yet with that slogan, defence 

expenditures from 1946 to 1958 when the Liberals were in power (of course the Conservatives were in 

power too) the government spent $21,400,000,000. What would we have done during that time for the 

people of Canada with those 21 billion dollars, not millions, but billions. We could have built 1,288,000 

houses; we could have built schools to the amount of $11,814,000,000; we could have paid for the 

medical, dental, and hospital care from 1946 to 1948, which is estimated at $6,544,000 without any cost 

to the people of Canada. And then we say that we live in a democracy and we are smart. They tell us 

there is too much inflation in this country. But what is inflation? Inflation, Sir, is just that! It‟s too much 

money, but instead of the government of Canada taxing the people of this country who should be taxed, 

they let the economy run wild. Today, what do you find in our country? On the one hand if you want to 

buy something for the farm, a combine for example, it has gone up from $3,000.00 to $8,000.00, but if 

you want to sell a pound of pork you have to sell it at 18 cents a pound and you have no guarantee, as 

the honourable Leader of the Opposition mentioned, you are going to get any deficiency back. Eggs are 

being sold in my community for eight cents and ten cents and less, per dozen. 

 

Government Member: — There‟s a lot of deficiency. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — That‟s true, a lot of deficiency, but not payments. 

 

Having said those things, I would like to say that my purpose here in this House is to speak for the 

constituency that I represent, the constituency of Cumberland. At this time I would like to speak to the 

Minister of Agriculture, Sir, if you will permit me, and suggest to him that as our people are, in the 

main, quarter-section and half-section farmers and in need of land, I think his department should extend 

the excellent programs that have been carried out in the past. I am suggesting that they could expand the 

clearing and breaking program to take in everybody who has, say, less than two or three hundred acres. I 

suggest that there is an area along this corridor, north and south of Shipman, Foxford and Smeaton on 

both sides that could be taken in and developed as forage and pasture areas. Some excellent land is there 

to the south a mile or a mile-and-a-half wide. When you take this long strip or corridor, I am sure it will 

help the farmers in that vicinity if it were broken and improved. Similar land of that nature can also be 

found on the north side. 

 

There is in the Nipawin constituency (and I have yet to hear from the member for Nipawin to speak up 

for his constituency either for roads 



 

February 18, 1960 

 

 

20 

or other programs, he always talks about big business, I think that is all he is interested in), but in his 

constituency there is a very large area, Mr. Speaker, around Harper Lake, of excellent land for forage 

and for pasture and I hope your department will take the suggestion into consideration. 

 

I recognize that the South Saskatchewan Dam is a good thing for Saskatchewan, but I do hope that the 

programs of the Department of Agriculture which have been carried out in the past have been good for 

my constituency, I do hope these suggestions will be carried out in the future. 

 

I want to suggest to the Minister of Mineral Resources (Hon. J.H. Brockelbank) that he carry on the 

excellent programs that have been carried out in his department. I mean the programs of prospectors‟ 

assistance plans, geophysical survey and geological survey, because I know, having been poking around 

in the North myself that there are some very excellent areas that we don‟t know too much about yet. 

There are indications every so often in these areas of base metals and, of course, of gold. I recommend 

that the programs be continued and if possible expanded. I think that the prospectors and mining people 

particularly like the programs that are carried out in the ground — the geological surveys. 

 

Of course I am happy, as far as my people are concerned, with the announcement that there will be a 

program for the installation of sewage and water. Some of us will have to wait a long time till conditions 

improve so that we can put up houses and so forth, as . . . 

 

Opposition Members: — Gas? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I am not ashamed to say that because the honourable members know, Mr. Speaker, 

that it is not the province of Saskatchewan that is responsible for these conditions. I do not need to 

repeat that. The hon. members opposite should be ashamed to have been associated with a Liberal party 

that brought about conditions of that nature here in the province. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — When the time comes, and there are now some who would be willing to benefit, I 

am sure that all will appreciate this particular program. 

 

In the North we have adopted some new policies and we now have a Northern Administrator who has a 

tremendous amount of responsibility as far as the different work is concerned. 

 

Mr. B.L. Korchinsky (Redberry): — Who‟s that? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I would suggest to the Minister of National Resources that it may be desirable, in 

my opinion at least, that the Northern Administrator, I can name him — Mr. Gus McDonald — who is 

doing an excellent job, be given more authority. I find that as I go from one place to another, there is just 

a little too much “red tape”. In order to solve many problems you have to go to the various departments 

and it takes time and effort, and I think 



 
February 18, 1960 

 
21 

we could have more co-ordination, the Administrator would have an easier job and we would get ahead 

much faster. I don‟t want to condemn any of the civil servants, we have some excellent civil servants 

that do work inside and outside my constituency and around the province, but some of them are not 

properly trained to deal with human relations. I like the idea of the department carrying out a school for 

the instruction of these men who may be excellent administrators in the field, but who are not the best 

administrators when it comes down to dealing with people, so give them a course in public relations and 

related subjects. 

 

I am particularly pleased to have learned recently, that this government is intending to carry out a 

program of vocational training, for the young people of the North. You will know, Mr. Speaker, that our 

young people (they couldn‟t do it under the Liberals, of course) now have a chance to get an academic 

training and many of them are in high schools, and the difficulty is that when they get into the 

settlements of this province, or any part of Canada, they find they cannot compete with those of higher 

learning in the more settled areas. I think this idea of starting out, say next fall, and training 30 students 

from out of the North and paying their way, giving them vocational training, having them go out as 

apprentices and trainees and eventually getting their qualification papers or certificates, is a very 

commendable step, and I only look forward in a year or so from now to seeing that we take not 30, but 

one or two hundred each year. In that way, Mr. Speaker, we will be on the way to solving the problem of 

integration and it is an excellent step. I certainly commend the government for having undertaken that 

responsibility. Above all, I should say this: having urged for many years now for the granting of civil 

rights to the Indians, I am glad to see in the Throne Speech that our native people will now have a vote 

and equal rights to the extent that we can give it to them under our jurisdiction. Actually, when one 

thinks about it, we are giving them nothing, we are only removing at this time the last vestige of 

discrimination. I am very happy about it, because I consider the native people of this country are just as 

qualified, just as smart, as any of us here who are made up of other ethnic origins. I look forward to the 

day in the near future when the young people (because there is not much hope for the older ones and 

they will probably stay in the North) will be able to integrate with the South into a modern society and 

be able to live a decent and a good life. I hope, of course, that they don‟t adopt some of our bad habits, 

though I think probably they will, and the only thing we can do is to bring in a program of education and 

try to show them that our ways aren‟t always the best. 

 

At this time, I would like to mention I have, as many others in this House have, road problems. I want to 

mention it today because I think they are of a general nature. One road problem that I have is the road to 

Cumberland House from Squaw Rapids. 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — It is not in my constituency, but it concerns the people in my constituency and 

certainly it would be of benefit to all people of Saskatchewan. As I said before, the honourable member 

for Nipawin never gets up to speak for his constituency so I take the liberty of speaking for him. 



 

February 18, 1960 

 

 

22 

This road is not an expensive road to build. It is a level grade along the south bank of the Saskatchewan 

River. The bridges had already been built by the Department of Natural Resources personnel some years 

ago (two years ago, I think) and it is just a matter of building up a grade. I am not suggesting to the 

government at this time that they should go ahead and spend tremendous sums of money to build, say, a 

first-grade road similar to a grid road or highway. All I am suggesting is that the road be bulldozed out 

this year if possible, and probably in another year that it be graded up. When the time comes that 

conditions warrant, I am sure that it could be gravelled, but as I said, it doesn‟t have to be a highway or a 

first-grade road until such time as some of that area can be settled on some excellent land along the 

North Saskatchewan River on the south side, and I look forward to the day when we will have another 

half a million acres of good agricultural land to farm. It might also help to resolve some of the problems 

we have in the area such as over-population and lack of integration. 

 

I could mention that this road will be an advantage to sportsmen because there is some excellent country 

for moose hunting. I remember at one time not so long ago I flew over the area and the pilot counted 41 

and I counted 42 moose. We saw 83 in a distance of about 40 miles. One can imagine the sort of moose 

country it is up there, and certainly it will give hunters a chance to go out and have some sport. 

 

It is also an excellent duck and goose hunting country. For that reason, I think we would be justified in 

doing something about a road into that area. One of the other roads that I have a considerable problem 

with is a road out of Prince Albert. I think every member in this House is now acquainted with it. The 

Liberals started it, and it has since been improved somewhat, but it is still not a good road and is very 

heavily travelled. There are eight miles between the airport and the settlement, and it is a road between 

Prince Albert and the Choiceland iron deposits. I look forward to the day when Prince Albert can be 

joined to the iron deposits and I think we should undertake that road immediately. It would be what we 

would call an extension of the highway from the mines to the Shellbrook highway, a matter of just a few 

more miles. I would be very happy to see about 8 miles built there this year, and as we progress in the 

development at Fort a la Corne it could be extended right down to the potential mine. 

 

One other suggestion I have, and I promised my constituents that I would take it up — it just doesn‟t 

come from my people, it comes also from the people of Athabaska constituency, and I think it would be 

beneficial to all concerned — is that the road, Highway No. 2 be diverted past the National Park, going 

straight on from Christopher Lake to Montreal Lake. The reason for this is, firstly, it would save about 

30 miles of highway and secondly — and something more important, it would take off the heavy load of 

the park road. There are a number of accidents every year, people getting killed, and one of the reasons 

is the heavy traffic coming in from the north, logging trucks, and others, meeting with those out on 

holidays. 



 
February 18, 1960 

 
23 

While on the subject of roads, of course, I cannot pass up a request that the Government consider giving 

some direct assistance to the municipalities for gravelling other than grid roads. I do not disagree at all 

with the suggestion that is mentioned in the Throne Speech, but I will say this, in my part of the country 

there are roads that were built in 1956 that are in fairly good condition. I think the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs knows that. If these roads are in good condition then these municipalities would not be entitled 

to get a grant to put some more gravel on them. At the same time we have other roads, such as bus 

routes and others, which are beyond the financial ability of the municipality to improve, and if the 

money is available then I would suggest there be some flexibility in making these grants, certainly 

where it is required on the grid roads. But if the municipality has a good grid road and the gravel is not 

required, then I would suggest that it could probably be diverted to a school bus route, or some other 

important road. 

 

One thing I notice in the Stanford Research Report, and something that I have brought to the attention of 

the staff for a number of years — page 337, Section 7. It says: 

 

“The Government could consider the problem of truckload limits currently enforced in the province, so 

that IDO can appraise the effects these limits have on the trucking industry, industries utilizing trucks, 

and service businesses associated with trucking.” 

 

Now, I am not an engineer, but I live in the area, and I can see the damage that is being done to 

highways (if there is any damage) and there is some, always, of course. But we have tremendous traffic, 

Mr. Minister, over a number of years, hauling in loads by the thousands — heavy loads; there were no 

limits, and that remarkable little road with no base on it, the No. 2 Highway north of Prince Albert did 

not suffer too much. As you know very little has been done on this road, except for re-oiling. But in the 

last two or three years restrictions have been put on and I have had a number of people who have been 

brought into court for overweight loads. The complaints come to me, and I am sure to yourself, and I 

was wondering whether we couldn‟t relieve those truckers who have to haul poles 150 miles or more by 

the people trucking north of Prince Albert during the mid-winter season when the ground is frozen solid. 

 

I would like the Minister to go and see this road. There has been more damage done this year by the 

cracks as a result of the wet weather last year, than by all the years of heavy trucking. It is very, very 

obvious. You can see it, and I think that is the cause of the deterioration of the highway, and not so 

much the damage from trucking. It makes me very sad when I hear of people who cannot pay these 

fines; fines are quite stiff at times — in some cases $200 or $200. I have a letter here at the moment, 

where a man went bankrupt. Of course I feel very badly about it. I think probably it is his own fault, but 

at the same time he was fined on a couple of occasions, and it all helped to put him out of business. 



 

February 18, 1960 

 

 

24 

I have a suggestion to the Minister of Telephones. He mentioned in the Throne Speech that he was going 

to help the various telephone companies to expand, and to improve the facilities. I would like to point 

out, as I have on previous occasions, that I live in an area which is sub-marginal, with people in 

settlements far removed from roads and telephones brought to those people. Maybe there is some other 

kind of system that could be installed, such as a radio system or radio-telephone, because I am afraid to 

look forward to the days when they may have some urgency, and there may be death as a result of lack 

of communication. 

 

I have said quite a bit. I notice the time is proceeding. I may have more to say at another time, but when 

one looks over the Throne Speech, and when one looks at the record of the Government and the 

consistency of the promises, one cannot but feel proud of what is being done. We are not perfect, as I 

have indicated today, but we are doing a good job and we will go to greater things in the future. 

 

I certainly will support the Throne Speech. 

 

Mr. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, I too wish to congratulate everyone who has so far 

taken part in this debate, with a special congratulation to the Leader of the Opposition, for a marvellous 

job, well delivered and in taking good care of the election manifesto which we have. I have quite a few 

notes here, but I do hope I won‟t give you too much of a dose of them. 

 

I should like to suggest at this moment that the member for Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky), commenting 

on farm homes, go down to the National Housing and find out why we have no homes under National 

Housing on the farms in Saskatchewan today. Then I would suggest that the next time the Government 

goes into caucus that they make a serious examination of the question of farm homes. They will soon 

find out why no homes have been built under National Housing on Saskatchewan farms. 

 

Another point the hon. member was mentioning was in regard to his philosophy — the C.C.F. 

philosophy. Of course, I don‟t know what it really means. It is just a philosophy; it is just a few words, 

but the Liberal philosophy is one that is based on freedom. I would suggest at this particular time that he 

read an extract from a speech given by the Hon. Lester Pearson, and published in „The Leader Post‟ 

Saturday, October 4, 1958. There is just one point I would like to read briefly, Mr. Speaker: 

 

“Liberalism, standing for personal freedom, for political freedom, for economic freedom, for every 

kind of freedom — that is a Liberal philosophy; one that I firmly and sincerely believe in. But I also 

believe that, wherever you have this philosophy, there is no room for that kind of freedom in a modern 

state, unless it is coupled with some responsibility.” 



 
February 18, 1960 

 
25 

While I am on the question of clippings, I just happened to have here a clipping from „The Winnipeg 

Free Press‟, February 25, 1958. In the background you can see buildings something like the Kremlin, 

and if you remember back in history, Napoleon was going to do something to the Kremlin. We see here 

Napoleon coming back from his defeat in the Kremlin, but on the bottom it says: “To Alberta.” 

Sometimes I wonder just what it actually means. 

 

Government Member: — The Liberals wouldn‟t know, anyway! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — When the Leader of the Opposition was speaking the day before yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker, he mentioned the question of education being entirely a provincial responsibility, I think that 

was one of the planks in the C.C.F. platform when they were elected to office here. I should like to quote 

the Premier in this particular case, when he said March 10, 1943, as reported in „The Commonwealth.‟ 

 

“The first thing that a C.C.F. Government would do would be to recognize education as a 

responsibility of a Provincial Government. There has been a tendency of Provincial Governments to 

pass the buck to the municipalities and local school boards for maintaining our educational facilities.” 

 

Sometimes when I look around, and I speak to municipal men and school boards, I wonder who did pass 

the buck! To continue . . . 

 

“The time has come, when we must recognize that Canada‟s constitution places the responsibility for 

teaching of our children squarely upon the Provincial Government, and it cannot be passed to any other 

body.” 

 

I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that is you ask the municipal man, who has been assuming the 

responsibility, and accepting the responsibility of education, you will find it is the taxpayers throughout 

the province. 

 

There is another article that further substantiates the statement made by the Leader of the Opposition the 

day before yesterday, that the Government was not assuming its responsibility, and has not carried out 

its promise towards education. Again this appears in „The Commonwealth‟, May 17, 1944: 

 

“Plank No. 6 — „Free Textbooks and Supplies‟: The purchase of textbooks and supplies for school 

children is sometimes a heavy burden on the person, or their parents, and the failure to get a full set of 

books is sometimes a handicap to children of financially embarrassed parents.” 



 

February 18, 1960 

 

 

26 

(We all agree with that). 

 

“The C.C.F. will remove this obstacle to equal educational opportunities by providing free textbooks 

and supplies throughout the school system.” 

 

This is what was quoted in „The Commonwealth‟ — that is just the technical, broad sense, but when you 

go on on the hustings you paint it a little better; free school supplies, pencils, scribblers, and so on. As I 

said, Mr. Speaker, I wasn‟t going to take too much of your time, but I thought I should put the record 

straight as to the stand which the C.C.F. Party took, and which they have not carried out, as they 

promised. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — The Premier, speaking yesterday, was quoting the brief presented to Ottawa by the 

Leader of the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan, and he was assessing the conditions as they stood in the 

province at the time of Premier Patterson‟s Government. I believe that Mr. Patterson, in presenting his 

brief to Ottawa, under conditions that existed at that time, presented a realistic and factual appraisal of 

the conditions as they stood at that time. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I hear „Hear! Hear!‟ — and a few remarks from the opposite benches. True to socialist 

propaganda or rattle-trap, we find that oftentimes the economic conditions throughout the world which 

are not caused by any activities or actions of the local government, or of the federal government, are still 

felt on a local level. There was an international situation that had taken place during the 1930‟s, 

producing an economic situation which I am sure the Saskatchewan Government of that day, Mr. 

Speaker, could have done nothing about. Then the brief was presented in 1943, after five years of 

international conflict, when the efforts of the nation were directed to the attempt to establish a fair and 

decent way of life, to the attempt to protect the minority of people from aggression. I believe conditions 

were not generally as favourable as everyone would have liked, but it was beyond the scope of a 

Provincial Government to deal with them. It was a realistic and a factual brief. 

 

Sometimes I doubt whether many of the briefs or presentations of the present Government are as factual 

or as realistic. They seem to have a dreamy quality about them. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Sugar-coated! 



 
February 18, 1960 

 
27 

Mr. Coderre: — Take the Throne Speech — the first or second paragraph: “Our province has enjoyed a 

further year of gratifying economic progress.” Well, I don‟t know — I go to see my neighbour, and 

sometimes he hasn‟t got enough money to work his land in the spring. I go in to see the local 

storekeeper, he opens the cash register, but there doesn‟t seem to be very much in there. We walk the 

streets of Regina and see quite a few people unemployed. I believe, Mr. Speaker, when you tell the 

people that it has been a year of “gratifying economic progress,” that these people are not going to agree 

with you. Other people don‟t seem to agree with the statement, for is it not the case today that 16 oil 

companies have moved out of this province, lock, stock and barrel? I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, why 

did they move out? I think it is probably a case in which the Government requires another examination 

of its conscience. 

 

I find, in reading the Speech from the Throne, there are many wonderful election promises. It is fine and 

dandy to project your thinking into the future through a crystal ball, but before we go into the future, we 

must rectify the ills that here present today, and there are many. 

 

The member for Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) was mentioning a while ago that he was looking 

forward to the future when we would have more oil in Saskatchewan than they have in Alberta. How 

can that be done? How can we find oil in Saskatchewan if, through some suppressions by the 

Government, some adjusted applications of policies, the oil companies are moving out? We hear time 

and time again that the oil is there, but the companies are not there. We find that in 1960 there were only 

22 oil drilling machines working in the province, but there are only two seismic crews operating in the 

province. Do they mean to tell me, Mr. Speaker, that when we are on the brink of great discoveries in 

oil, only two crews can go ahead and try to find this oil? Why? Why have they moved out? 

 

I sometimes wonder whether economic conditions cannot be rectified by the Government projecting 

their thinking into greater development, rather than scaring industries from properly developing in 

Saskatchewan. When you have an economic condition developing, you have the extreme left wing 

socialist elements constantly thinking of how the last cent can be taken out of possible development. It 

creates rumblings among socialist ranks, and when you have that type of rumbling you have people who 

are concerned about investing risk capital. They cannot afford to lose the money that the people invested 

there. There are many people involved in these things; some, are probably in this House, who have 

shares in various developments such as oil, or other developments. Sometimes it is rather risky in an 

unhealthy climate, to go ahead and develop. 

 

I was rather amused at a little clipping I have here. This may not seem to come in at the right place but I 

would like to mention it anyway. 



 

February 18, 1960 

 

 

28 

I have been trying to find a way to put it in the right spot. Anyway, we go on and we find wage-earners 

without jobs, farmers without adequate money, merchants with empty cash registers. Then I come to the 

Treasurer. I find that he finds his coffers pretty empty too, but he goes contrary to the dictates of his 

philosophy (if he has any) and he borrows money at fabulous interest rates. The reason I say contrary to 

his philosophy is because he was addressing the Weekly Newspapers‟ Association in Moose Jaw 

sometime ago, and here is what he said: 

 

“It is making the people realize that there is too much spending, too much charging, and not enough 

pay-as-you-go.” 

 

Is there anyone who has done more spending, more charging, than the present administration? And then 

we have to pay interest to the extent of $20 million a year? I wonder. What does he mean? He borrows 

on one hand, and spends on the other, and then he says, “Oh, no, you can‟t do that.” 

 

The he continues: 

 

“. . .broadening employment opportunities our population has continued to rise.” 

 

I saw a question on the Order Paper asking for figures on the population of Saskatchewan, and it was 

907,000, and tries to show the rise and fall in population. However, I don‟t want to talk about 

population. 

 

I sometimes wonder how broadening is one‟s opportunity in this province. Our Leader of the Opposition 

mentioned a while ago that the Imperial Oil, particularly, had closed their Accounting Division here. 

The duties of a Government should be seriously to consider the situation that exists. I wonder what steps 

(we‟ve heard no comments from the Government), they could take to try to prevent this exodus. It is 

only the beginning. I am afraid of their exuberance about the fact that we have now reached 907,000, but 

on the other hand, through the back door, people are just gradually moving out. They seem to feel that 

now that we have reached the 907,000 mark, they have to put on a big show while it lasts! 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, these socialists were born and bred in the „thirties,‟ and as far as I am concerned 

these economic conditions are being gradually developed. It leaves no doubt in my mind that this is one 

of the reasons the socialist party is creating this atmosphere again, this condition that is deliberately 

chasing out of our province our oil industry. What we need in this province is a Bill of Rights to protect 

the people from the Government. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — We need a Bill of Rights to protect the little governments from this state octopus. I 

was disappointed at no mention 



 
February 18, 1960 

 
29 

in the Throne Speech about a municipal conference. While this Government on occasion is constantly 

clamouring for conferences with Ottawa to study and appraise the fiscal relations, I feel that a 

government that is really concerned about people over whom it has jurisdiction should do something in 

order to see what the problems are. I remember a few years ago we had a municipal Conference, and 

very, very little opportunity was actually given to listening to the ills of the municipal men, or the local 

governments. What they actually heard was a series of speeches by every Minister of the Crown. By a 

municipal conference, Mr. Speaker, I mean a large gathering of a good representation of all forms of 

local government, where the Cabinet is there to listen, not to tell them what to do. I greatly fear if a 

situation should develop, if this Government were re-elected, that you would have a tremendous change 

of boundaries in the province, no doubt without the consultation of the people concerned. 

 

I should take this opportunity of saying that I believe there will be a change of Government. Whether it 

is April or June, there is going to be an election this year, because I feel, Mr. Speaker, this Socialist 

Government looking into its little crystal ball, has also sharpened its ears. I would like to quote what the 

Premier mentioned during some election, that a politician will hear a ballot fall many miles away. 

Somehow or other, in looking into this crystal ball, they are already hearing the ballots fall. So they 

came out with what I call the „Election Manifesto‟. But where election manifestoes are involved, there 

are also other people who have certain philosophies which they like to practise. The Liberal Party has 

one thought in mind in this respect. I feel, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberal party in the province is not 

opposed to a large municipal boundary, but municipal boundaries should only be changed, with the 

approval, expressed by ballot, of the people residing within these boundaries. This is Liberal philosophy 

— freedom of the individual to choose. That is why we need a Bill of Rights to protect the local 

governments. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — If time would only permit I would read many quotes gathered giving evidence about 

this Government, Mr. Speaker. But I believe that we should deal with some of the ills I was mentioning 

which no attempts have been made to cure. Sometime ago, Mr. Speaker, David Lewis, National 

Secretary of the C.C.F. Party, was being interviewed on television, and he was asked the question, 

“Where do the C.C.F. stand insofar as the Regina Manifesto is concerned, as compared to the Winnipeg 

Declaration?” (I presume that Mr. David Lewis is quite a bit of brass in the organization.) He said that 

the C.C.F. still stand firm on the principles laid down by the Regina Manifesto of 1933. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Is there anything wrong with it? 



 

February 18, 1960 

 

 

30 

Mr. Coderre: — If there isn‟t anything wrong with it, then you have deserted your own philosophy. 

The C.C.F. have no basic philosophy today. You will find on Page 344, „Social Party for Canada‟, 

laying down the fundamental principles of socialism, as advocated by the C.C.F. Party. 

 

“In the early stage we shall be fortunate if the profit of socialized industry covers the cost of new 

administration.” 

 

Well, I hope to take the next few minutes, Mr. Speaker, to show you that they certainly haven‟t covered 

the cost of administration. Let us review the socialist attempts away back in 1944 when the Socialists 

had a vision of a great industrial empire in Saskatchewan. Under socialism I would say it was a vision, 

because today I cannot see it as an industrial empire. Many of the supposedly wonderful Crown 

Corporations, which were to form the great socialist empire, many, many of them have failed, at a time 

when the industries of the nation were most prosperous, when they were actually reaping the highest 

revenue from the returns for their investment. Many of the Corporations we have in Saskatchewan have 

failed today. 

 

Of course, I cannot include a couple of the Corporations — one of which is the Power Corporation and 

another the Saskatchewan Government Telephones. It has been an established fact, Mr. Speaker, that 

they have been established to provide services to the people at cost. They have become what is generally 

being accepted as a public utility. I am not going to deal with these two at the moment, but apart from 

that there were 19 Crown Corporations that were established, and they included, housing, shoe factory, 

tannery, woollen mill, and you can go on and on — a box factory, fish marketing services, fish boards, 

retail trading insurance, and so on. Out of these 19 we have a box factory — that‟s gone. The Big River 

Mill — that‟s another one that is gone. Lake Forest Products‟ Division, the Tannery Division, and then 

we have the Big River Mill Division — in fact, they all seem to have gone. Reconstruction, the Fish 

Board — they have all gone, gone under — I suppose they have gone under due to socialist inefficiency, 

and probably red tape. 

 

You know, when I talk of Crown Corporations, it sort of reminds me a little of a situation that took place 

just a few years ago. I remember there was a little town in the south-west part of the province where 

there was a considerable amount of commotion. It was some sort of a challenge. All eyes and ears in the 

province were glued to the radio, expecting a lot of abuses, slams and what have you to be thrown at one 

of the persons who was involved in these discussions, and out of the clear, crisp night we heard, one up, 

one down; two up, two down, dealing with the Corporation, one right after another. Many, many 

stalwarts were let down that night. Their little idol had been smashed. I believe it was somewhat of a 

prelude to what will take place in 1960. I always get great satisfaction when I can get a rise from the 

Government, because it is just like them. 

 

Now, let us deal with Corporations, but it is better not to deal with them in a broad sense: we shall take 

just the individual Corporations, as they come up. You remember February 3rd, I believe, the Premier of 

the 



 
February 18, 1960 

 
31 

Province addressing a gathering at the University of Saskatchewan, was flaunting around a little sheet, 

some booklets, etc., and was saying that they were audited statements. Well, I have similar statements 

that have been used, with somewhat the same figures, that have been presented to us by the Government. 

I sometimes wonder whether there wasn‟t a purpose behind it; I don‟t know, but I just sometimes 

wonder why we have statements made that this is an audited statement, when it isn‟t. I haven‟t seen an 

audited statement. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Don‟t you know an audited statement when you see one? 

 

Mr. Coderre: — An audited statement, as far as I know, usually shows somewhere in the pages 

concerned a certification by the auditors concerned, whether provincial or otherwise. I cannot see, in 

what I call this yellow peril any such thing as an audited statement. It is published by the Government 

Finance Office. 

 

Anyhow, we shall deal with one of these particular ones, the woollen mill. Some of you may have heard 

it, but what is the motive of the Government, or the socialists of the day to decide that they should go 

into woollen mills. Sometimes, you know, when you wake up in the morning and its pretty cold, you 

feel you would like to have something warm to wrap around yourself. I assume the reason they did this 

is that they felt a little cold in the winter, and that we should have a woollen mill in the province. When 

they were finally elected, they established a woollen mill, and it took almost half a million dollars — 

$478,000, and they got it into operation, and it started producing deficit after deficit. I thought it was 

there to produce woollens, but it produced deficits. 

 

After a considerable length of time it produced deficits that amounted to in excess of $344,000. On top 

of that, if you add interest, insurance, taxes — that brings it up to $830,000 odd. That is the information 

we have from the Treasurer. Now what the Treasurer seems to forget at this particular time, when he 

deals with figures, is the interest on the advances. I don‟t know how he does it. He tells us that you can 

go ahead and lend money to these Corporations at no interest, and still he tells us he had to pay 6.12 per 

cent for a large loan today. I feel that when we go ahead and take into consideration the actual losses of 

these Corporations, that we must take into consideration the actual interest involved in them. I believe 

this loss involved, with the actual operating loss, plus all losses, time involved, storage involved for the 

equipment that they had, would certainly run into close to the million dollar mark. 

 

Do you know what a million dollars would do, Mr. Speaker? It would give power at no cost to 2,000 

farmers, or else it would refund the money to 2,000 farmers. 

 

Now, they have a shoe factory — or they had. We have to deal with the history, before we can go to the 

rest. It was another plant which was established, and called the Leader Products Division. I just wonder 



 

February 18, 1960 

 

 

32 

what the motive was there. I believe they were impressed by a little verse — I was trying to find it. It 

seems to me I heard it as a little boy — “The barefoot boy with shoes on” or something to that effect. I 

don‟t know — that must have been the motive that started the shoe factory. Or was it that they were 

talked into buying obsolete equipment by a fast-buck artist? That is why they took their stand against the 

fast-buck artist. They probably got gypped on that deal. Anyhow, after many fruitless attempts to get 

into the business, they found they have been advanced $175,000, and they ended up with an operating 

deficit of $82,000. Of course, you could still add that to the usual interest rate, the insurance, operating 

costs of the finance office, and so on. 

 

Anyway, they were getting into great difficulty, so the great socialist planners got together and started 

scratching their heads, and wondered, “No, what happened? Why are we losing money.” One of them 

got up in the corner somewhere, and said, “Do you know why?” “These big monopolists who have 

control of the leather won‟t give us any. That is why we can‟t get our shoes, so let‟s build a tannery.” So 

away they went, and they established a Leather Products Division. They couldn‟t get the leather, so they 

said, “We‟ll make it.” Well, what did they do? By an Order-in-Council in July, 1946, they established 

the tannery. Orders-in-Council, boy, you should so the numbers that they have on the Books. Anyhow, 

they established the tannery, and I can still see the gleam in their souls! You know, Mr. Speaker, things 

got worse — they thought they had it over those big monopolists holding the leather factories. Do you 

know, sir, things got worse. They lost $73,000 on that and finally they had to close it. 

 

Now I would like to come up to another Corporation, and let us deal now with one of the more 

successful ones, the Bus Lines. As I have said before, I do believe there are certain Corporations that are 

established because they are rendering a service — they are termed as a public utility. Despite the losses 

that have piled up upon the bus-lines, and covered up by the restaurants, and coffee shops, it has 

remained in a reasonably fair state. What has actually happened is this, that many of the bus lines which 

have been operating, where they were rendering a service to the public, they withdrew the service. I feel 

they were remiss in their duties in withdrawing the service from many of these communities. The only 

successful one they have are those operating today — those that have not been successful they have 

done away with, and in one particular case an individual has bought one, and has done a pretty good job 

of it. I believe, Mr. Speaker, in looking at that situation, there is the Government which has a bus line, 

serving a particular part of the province, and is losing money on it constantly, so they do away with it. 

Private enterprise, and individuals pick up the line where they left off and do a very good job rendering a 

good service to the people. 

 

I should like to make it quite clear that under the accepted philosophy or thinking of the people of 

Canada, that public utility and transportation, power, and some such utilities are rendering a service to 

the people and they should be there to render the service, even if the Government has to subsidize them, 

in some cases. 



 
February 18, 1960 

 
33 

I would like to deal with Airways which comes under transportation. Again, it comes under Public 

Utilities, and I think it should be maintained as a service because it is definitely giving a service to the 

isolated areas of the north, and particularly more so now because we are vitally interested in the 

economies of the north, and probably the defence of the country. We have established throughout 

northern areas of this province many settlements and outposts, and they should be serviced. I believe 

that servicing of these remote areas by our airways should be done, providing that similar services are 

not being rendered on a competitive basis. 

 

A Liberal Government would certainly prevent any effort of abuse, or any abuses that have been 

apparent within the present administration. I believe that aircraft of the Crown should not be used as a 

media of joy-riding by the Ministers of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this point I should like to take this opportunity to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 1 — An Act to amend The Credit Union Act. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, these are amendments to the Credit Union Act, 1956, to help to 

implement a program for providing housing in the northern part of the province. In the northern areas, 

the co-operatives are anxious to sponsor co-operative housing and to do this we feel that the best means 

of financing is to enable the co-operative members to borrow the money from their Credit Union, and by 

their timber and other supplies for building their houses. I would take some time to have sufficient 

money to handle a program of any magnitude, and therefore we are making some special provision by 

which the Credit Union can borrow money, presumably from The Co-operative Credit Society, or from 

other co-operatives, so that they can help in financing a housing program in the northern part of the 

province. I think the details of how they propose to work this out can better be discussed when we get 

into Committee of the Whole. 

 

I therefore move Second Reading of the Bill to amend The Credit Union Act. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — I haven‟t read the Bill, sorry I did not. Where is the Credit Union going 

to get their money from — the Department of Finance or the Provincial Treasury? 

 

Premier Douglas: — Under provisions of The Co-operative Guarantee Act, they will get the money 

from The Co-operative Credit Society . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! The hon. member must remember that the rules of debate apply once 

the motion is put. 



 

February 18, 1960 

 

 

34 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, that is certainly one of the principles of the Bill, and it should be 

explained on first reading. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member may quite readily ask a question, but the Minister may not answer it 

until other questions are answered. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I am sorry, Mr. Speaker. We can take any questions, and then answer them 

altogether. 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, if I may, is this applicable only to the Credit Unions or 

the Co-ops in northern Saskatchewan, and if so, why? 

 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington): — What constitute northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, there were two questions asked. The one is where would the Credit 

Unions get the money. The idea is they would borrow the money under the Co-operative Guarantee Act, 

by which they could either get loans from The Co-operative Credit Society which the Government 

guarantees, or a loan direct from the Government, but preferably it would be from the Co-operative 

Credit Society. 

 

The second question which the member for Maple Creek asked me is, why is it confined to the north, 

and the reason is, of course, that other Credit Unions haven‟t asked for it, because they have already 

been borrowing money from The Credit Society, and usually have adequate shares and capital in The 

Credit Society to back their loans. These small Credit Unions in the north haven‟t got that kind of share 

capital on deposit with the Co-operative Credit Society. 

 

Another member asked what do we mean by the north. We mean, of course, the Northern 

Administration District north of Prince Albert, which takes in the unorganized part of the north, south of 

Lac La Ronge and right on up. This is mainly part of the Co-operative program which we are trying to 

carry on among the people of the Northern Administration District, which is a gigantic L.I.D. and it is 

that entire area that this legislation would apply. I may say that the legislation has been discussed with 

the Credit Union League of Saskatchewan, and the Co-operative Credit Society are quite favourable to 

it, and have asked for it. 

 

The motion for second reading of Bill No. 1 — An Act to amend The Credit Union Act, 1956, was then 

agreed to. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 2 — An Act to amend the Municipal Seed Grain and Supply Act 

 

Hon. Mr. McIntosh (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, this Bill is to be found in 

Section 11A. Section 11A 



 
February 18, 1960 

 
35 

Makes provisions for a municipality to make loans to farmers for feed and fodder for livestock, and also 

makes provision for the municipality to loan to the farmer monies for the purpose of purchasing feed 

and fodder for livestock. This suggestion was brought about as a result of the condition which developed 

earlier this fall, and many of the municipalities were of the opinion that possibly the Act was not broad 

enough in its original terms for the municipalities to make advances to the farmer for feed and fodder for 

livestock. 

 

The motion for second reading of this Bill No. 2 — An Act to amend the Municipal Seed Grain and 

Supply Act was then agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:15 o‟clock p.m. 


