



















































Hansard: April 08, 1961


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

42nd Day 

 

Saturday, April 8, 1961. 

 

The House met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

 

At 12:35 o’clock p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor entered the Chamber, took his seat upon the 

Throne, and gave Royal Assent to the Bills presented to him with the exception of Bill No. 56 — An Act 

to provide for the Alteration of Certain Mineral Contracts — which Bill, His Honour reserved for the 

signification of the pleasure of the Governor General of Canada. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor then said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislative Assembly 

 

It is my duty to relieve you of further attendance at the Legislative Assembly. In doing so, I wish to 

thank you and congratulate you upon the work you have done. I wish also to express my confidence that 

the approval of the programs and plans presented to you will continue to provide the services necessary 

to the growth and development of our province. 

 

The provision you have made for additional grants for school purposes, for further teacher and student 

scholarships and for an expanded Student Aid Fund, reflects your concern for continued improvement in 

educational opportunities in Saskatchewan. 

 

The changes in certain Public Assistance programs, which you have approved, constitute a further step 

in developing a comprehensive social security system within the province. 

 

You have approved legislation which will further the security and well being of workers and give further 

protection to the bargaining rights of members of trade unions. 

 

The report of the Local Government Continuing Committee was tabled during this Session. It is 

gratifying 



 

April 8, 1961 

 

2 

 

to note that local government organizations are giving earnest consideration to this report. 

 

The amendments to the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Act passed at this Session will permit the 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Board to make a further investigation of the possibility of introducing a 

scheme to insure crops in some of the rural areas. 

 

I am pleased to note that you took time during this Session to extend suitable honours to the McKee 

Rink — 1961 Canadian Women’s Curling Champions. 

 

I thank you for the provision you have made to meet the further requirements of the public service and 

assure you the sum of money voted will be used economically, prudently and in the public interest. 

 

In taking leave of you, I desire to thank you for the manner in which you have devoted your energies to 

the activities of the Session and wish you the full blessing of Providence as you return again to your 

respective homes. 

 

The Hon. Mr. Brown, Acting Provincial Secretary, then said: 

 

Mr. Speaker and Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is the will and pleasure of His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor that this Legislative Assembly be 

prorogued until it pleases His Honour to summon the same for the dispatch of business, and the 

Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 


