



















































Hansard: March 10, 1961


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

22nd Day 

 

Friday, March 10, 1961. 

 

The House met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. Arthur Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, I take great pleasure in introducing to the House the 

fine group of Grade XII students, sitting in the galleries to your left. They are from the Kinistino School 

Unit, led by their teachers Miss Orton, Mr. Sadalowski, Mr. Payne, Mr. Hurlbert, and I hope that their 

stay here will be a pleasant and an educational one. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to call to the attention of 

the Members, the fact that there is in the gallery a group of students, who constitute the special interest 

class, from Regina Public Schools, under the guidance of their teachers. These students are partaking of 

an enriched curriculum. I hope that this afternoon will contribute to the enrichment, and that the 

afternoon will be both interesting and profitable. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to call attention to the fine group of 

students sitting in the gallery to your right. They have come from the File Hills Indian Agency in my 

Constituency. The children come, I understand from the three schools that are established in the Agency. 

There is as well a point of interest that Mr. J.B. Pinay, who is with the children as well, is the father of 

one of the page boys in the House, and I am sure that that 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

2 

 

fact will be very pleasing to his son and to the other students who are here to see one of the boys that 

attended their school working with us here in the Legislature. 

 

I hope that your stay here this afternoon will be a happy one, that you will learn much from your visit 

with us, and not having had the opportunity of welcoming you personally, as you just arrived, I want to 

welcome you on my own behalf, and also on behalf of all the Members of the Legislature, and hope that 

you have a very enjoyable stay in the Legislature this afternoon. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. Douglas T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to extend a 

welcome to a group from the Assiniboine Indian Reservation just south of Sintaluta. Not having had the 

opportunity of greeting them personally before they came into the gallery, I would appreciate having the 

opportunity later on this afternoon. 

 

I just want to assure them that any remarks they hear from this side of the House this afternoon will be 

most enlightening and most educational. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed from Thursday, March 9, 1961, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 

the Hon. Mr. Lloyd: 

 

That Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair (the house to go into Committee of Supply) 

 

Hon. J. Walter Erb (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, first of all I should like to thank all 

hon. Members who rose in their seats to draw our attention to the fine students in this Legislature this 

afternoon. I am sure that at no other time could they have assembled such a large number of students to 

take advantage of a better augmentation to their education than this afternoon. 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

3 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I adjourned the debate last night, I had congratulated you upon the election to your 

high office, and expressed my wishes as well as those of this Assembly, that your experience will be a 

most rewarding one, in your high office. I extended my congratulations to the newly elected Members of 

this House, and I concluded my remarks with a gentle admonition to my friends opposite to whom I now 

say, Mr. Speaker, Pax Vobiscum, because I shall not indulge in anything else but that which pertains to 

my Department. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You will be very fluent this afternoon . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — As I have suggested on similar occasions in the past, Mr. Speaker, I will refer the 

Members of the House to the major reports of the Department of Public Health which are tabled in the 

House, specifically the Annual Report of the Department, the Report of the Saskatchewan Vital 

Statistics, and the Annual Report of the Hospital Services Plan. 

 

I am sure a careful study of these reports will give the reader a much more comprehensive understanding 

of the departmental programs than I could possibly give in a limited period of time, this afternoon. The 

Department of Public Health has, since its inception, placed its major emphasis on activities which will 

prevent disease. Indeed, a great American public health statesman, the late Dr. C. Winslow has defined 

public health as the science and art of preventing disease, promoting physical and mental health and 

efficiency through organized community efforts. To my mind a superb example of the art and science of 

prevention through organized community action has taken place in this province in the further march 

toward the control of one of the serious infectious diseases namely poliomyelitis. 

 

The hon. Members will have read in the press just last week the reports coming out of the city of Prince 

Albert of a new major research effort of great significance for Saskatchewan and for the nation. I refer, 

of course, to the community-wide demonstration involving the entire population of Prince Albert, and of 

the use of a new oral polio virus vaccine which can be taken by mouth. Saskatchewan has had its share 

of poliomyelitis, that is paralytic poliomyelitis, over the years. Although we have not been the most 

severely 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

4 

 

affected province, nonetheless we have had our outbreaks, which culminated in the epidemics of 1952, 

and 1953, when two-thousand, four-hundred cases and one-hundred and sixty deaths took place in that 

two-year period. At that time the picture looked grim indeed, and all of our health personnel, hospitals 

and air ambulance, rehabilitation services, and other resources, worked around the clock to care for the 

afflicted patients. 

 

Then a major turning point came in 1955 with the successful demonstration in the United States of the 

value of the poliomyelitis vaccine now associated with that outstanding scientist, Dr. Jonas Salk. The 

difficult problems associated with the production of Salk vaccine were solved in Canada by the 

Connaught Laboratories in Toronto, and limited supplies became available here in early 1956. I would 

like to record publicly, Mr. Speaker, my appreciation of the outstanding record and exceptionally high 

standard achieved by the Connaught Laboratories. They have produced a completely safe and effective 

product at a reasonable cost, and a great benefit to the people of Canada. 

 

This Government, Mr. Speaker, was prompt in taking advantage of the new preventive weapon and 

announced in 1956 the policy of using the first limited supply for the free immunization of groups of 

children with the highest risk of paralytic polio. As supplies of Salk vaccine became available in 

increasing quantity, it was possible to reach the objective of making it freely available to every person 

from infancy up to forty years of age. I can report to hon. Members, Mr. Speaker, that by the end of the 

calendar year 1960 approximately 95% of the young people of this province up to the age of sixteen 

years, and 65% of the adults up to forty years, have been given this protection against paralytic 

poliomyelitis. I believe, Mr. Speaker, this is a record of public health activity that is unmatched 

anywhere in Canada, and I wish to record my appreciation to all our public health staffs, especially our 

corps of devoted public health nurses, for their unstinting efforts in achieving this result. 

 

Despite this vigorous activity with Salk immunization, we were still faced each year with a certain 

number of paralytic cases. In 1959 for example we received reports of forty-six paralytic cases and three 

deaths, with a total of fifty-six cases and eight deaths occurring last year. There are at least two 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

5 

 

reasons for the continuation of paralytic disease. First, a proportion of the population, particularly adults, 

have failed to come forward for their injections, despite widespread publicity and ready accessibility. 

Second, it is evident that the Salk vaccine is effective for only 85% of the immunized population. I‘m 

advised that the reasons are not entirely clear why a small proportion of people fail to respond to Salk 

vaccine, and are unable to produce in their blood stream the necessary protective substance. This is the 

reason why one occasionally hears of persons contracting paralytic polio, although they have been 

previously immunized. 

 

I turn now, Mr. Speaker, to the new development which took place last week in the city of Prince Albert. 

The entire population of the city took part in the first community-wide demonstration on trial in Canada. 

This is a trial use of the oral polio virus vaccine which was discovered by Dr. Albert Sabin of the 

University of Cincinnati. My Department, in collaboration with the Connaught Laboratories Research, 

has undertaken this demonstration with the new oral vaccine in order to confirm its effectiveness under 

field conditions, when the population of an entire city is fed the vaccine. This type of vaccine has 

already been fed to almost 90 million persons in many countries throughout the world. However, before 

license is finally granted by the Department of National Health and Welfare for widespread distribution 

and sales in Canada, a number of demonstrations under Canadian conditions are required. I am informed 

by my technical advisers that the Sabin oral vaccine may very well have the capacity to protect those 

persons who fail to respond to Salk vaccine. This possibility exists that the new oral vaccine may 

succeed in approaching total elimination of this disease in a community where the entire population is 

fed the vaccine. 

 

The objective of the vaccine demonstration in Prince Albert was to feed as many of the total population 

as possible, and that within a seven-day period. Moreover, by extensive laboratory studies of about 4% 

of the vaccinated persons, it will be possible to determine how well the vaccine has lived up to 

expectations. Our Provincial Laboratories in Regina, by undertaking a substantial part of the necessary 

laboratory testing have made it possible for this trial to be conducted in Saskatchewan. 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

6 

 

I wish to record, Mr. Speaker, the outstanding co-operation and support, which has been given to our 

regional medical health officer at Prince Albert by numerous organizations and individuals, by the 

mayor and city officials, by the clergy, by the Prince Albert Medical Society, by the press, radio and 

television stations, and many other groups and individual volunteers. I am informed that the people of 

Prince Albert have responded in a most enthusiastic way. According to the most recent report which I 

have received, a total of 23,700 people presented themselves and took the oral vaccine. Of this total 

21,750 were residents of Prince Albert, and this represents 94.5% of the total population. I think this, 

Mr. Speaker, is a splendid record. 

 

To my mind, Mr. Speaker, this is another demonstration of the health consciousness of the people of this 

province, and their readiness to support positive measures for the maintenance of health and the 

prevention of disease. I want to congratulate the people of Prince Albert and the regional medical officer 

for this outstanding response. 

 

I can report to the hon. Members that somewhat smaller trials with oral vaccine are going on in the 

province of Manitoba and Nova Scotia. The result of these demonstrations will be closely evaluated by 

the Department of National Health and Welfare and its national technical advisory committee on oral 

polio vaccine. Whether or not licenses will be granted before midsummer, that is after the polio season 

in Canada has started, is uncertain at the moment. However, the estimates of my Department include an 

amount of $25,000 for the purchase of oral vaccine should it be possible and desirable to begin its 

administration. In the meantime, immunization with Salk vaccine will continue across the province. 

 

Community action for prevention such as I have described Mr. Speaker, with polio vaccine, is made 

possible by well-organized local health units, established for the various regions of the province. 

Following the recommendations of the late Dr. Henry Sigerist in 1944, health regions staffed with full-

time, properly trained public health personnel were gradually established across Saskatchewan. In 

general they have functioned successfully and are a living example of the fact that groups of urban and 

rural municipalities can co-operate and pool their resources for the common good. 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

7 

 

I would say quite emphatically, Mr. Speaker, that the formation of health regions has strengthened local 

government in the health field, and has offered a level of service which individual municipalities could 

not achieve. On January 30th the intention to establish the Saskatoon Health Region No. 8 was 

announced in the ―Gazette‖. Once this health region is established the entire province will then be 

included in an organized system of modern, effective, public health service. I believe, Mr. Speaker, this 

achievement is to the credit of the people of our province who understand that prevention is the keystone 

to health, and expenditures for prevention are a sound investment for health. 

 

In considering the major health problems which lie ahead, our attention is directed more and more to the 

impact of our aging population, Mr. Speaker. The Annual Report of Saskatchewan Vital Statistics, 

which was tabled on February 22nd last, for the first time includes a table on life expectancy in this 

province. This table shows that life expectancy for males reached an all-time high of 69.8 years, and 

74.1 for females. Saskatchewan now has about 9% of its population in the age group 65 or over, which 

is higher than the figure for Canada as a whole. This extension of human survival means that more of 

our people, by reaching advanced years, enter the period when chronic and disabling diseases are more 

prevalent. Everyone who has carefully studied this problem recognizes that the maintenance of health 

among the aged, requires much more than treatment of these diseases. We must seek out measures that 

will discover chronic disease in its early stages – measures that will retard the onset of disability, and 

services that will rehabilitate older persons to independent living in the community. 

 

At the moment there are two activities underway in the province, Mr. Speaker, which can have a very 

important influence on future action in this field. First, the Government has established a broadly 

representative committee on aged and long-term illness. This committee is actively engaged in gathering 

essential facts about the aged and the associated problem of long-term illness in Saskatchewan and 

elsewhere. The committee will carefully examine the resources and services which are presently 

available, and its final report to the Government will recommend the direction we should take in the 

future. 

 

The second activity has to do with the promoting 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

8 

 

of the fullest public discussion of these important questions in all areas across the province. Under the 

guidance of the aged and long-term illness project, a series of regional conferences have been held to 

discuss the needs of the aged, and what might be done in local communities to meet these needs. I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, that this approach will derive considerable results in finding the way to the 

solution of a complex medical, social, and economic problem, which our aged citizens are facing in 

these times of rapid change. 

 

One important and vexing health problem which we currently face has to do with our efforts to prevent 

dental decay. Tooth decay, particularly among our younger population, is a serious and cumulative 

health problem, and sooner or later the public, the profession, and all levels of Government must face up 

to its implications. One of the serious aspects of this growing problem of dental ill-health has to do, of 

course, with the shortage of professional dental personnel, particularly dental practitioners. I am firmly 

of the view, however, that even if we were able to double the number of dentists in Saskatchewan within 

a single year, we would not be able adequately to cope with this problem. 

 

In support of this contention, Mr. Speaker, I would like to refer the House to an important report 

recently tabled in the Ontario Legislature by a special committee of inquiry into the fluoridation of 

municipal water supplies. This was a distinguished committee, and included among its members a 

Justice of the Supreme Court of Ontario, and the President of the University of Western Ontario. This 

committee in its report made this pertinent point, and I wish to quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

―We are convinced that the incidence of dental caries in Ontario is of such magnitude that it must be 

regarded both as a serious and major health problem, and that adequate treatment of dental caries in 

the whole population is beyond the resources of the dental profession.‖ 

 

The committee went on to recommend that Legislation be enacted, empowering municipalities to 

fluoridate their water supplies. This committee fully recognized, Mr. Speaker, that the presence of 

fluoride, either in natural form or added to a communal water supply was a safe and 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

9 

 

highly effective way to reduce dental decay. 

 

In this province, Mr. Speaker, many urban municipalities have undertaken this important step for the 

prevention of dental ill-health. Up until the present seventeen urban centres with a total population of 

almost 164,000 have introduced fluoridation as an effective dental health measure. Other urban 

municipalities are currently considering this matter. I would urge all urban places in the province with 

communal water supplies to take action in this matter and not delay in giving our young people 

protection against the mounting rate of dental diseases. 

 

Last year through the health region, my Department launched a program for the distribution of sodium 

fluoride tablets for children in rural areas, where communal water supplies do not exist. At present 

fluoride tablets are being distributed freely to pre-school children in eleven health regions and seven 

centres in the far north, and valuable protection against dental decay is being built up. In the efforts 

which have been exerted to control and prevent the major infectious diseases in this province, none have 

been more determined, nor indeed more effective against this kind of disease, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another area in which these same kind of efforts have been exerted to control and prevent infection is in 

our struggle against tuberculosis. I have had the occasion to review the most recent Annual Report of the 

director of medical services, of the Anti-Tuberculosis League. He reports continued progress, but at the 

same time he emphasizes that tuberculosis still presents a threat to our population. The fact that 80% of 

the population had never been exposed to tuberculosis means that an open case constitutes a much 

greater hazard than it did thirty years ago. Accordingly the preventive program must never be relaxed, 

and these measures must be directed towards the early discovery of all active cases. I am confident, Mr. 

Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan will continue to give their utmost support to a preventative 

program as they have done in the past. 

 

I wish to pay tribute, Mr. Speaker, to the outstanding and unstinted efforts of the Saskatchewan Anti-

Tuberculosis League, and especially its corps of devoted physicians, nurses, and health workers of all 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

10 

 

kinds in the great work to control this disease. Some days ago I called the attention of this House to the 

occasion of the 50th anniversary of the Anti-Tuberculosis League. I urge all Members to participate in 

the forthcoming events and to assist in the public acknowledgement of the League and its work for 

Saskatchewan, over a half century. Because of the gradual decline in tuberculosis over the past ten 

years, and reduced pressure on the sanatorium, the Government, in collaboration with the Anti-

Tuberculosis League, established a joint committee in 1960 to examine the future needs for institutional 

services. This committee under the chairmanship of Mr. John Knox of Moose Jaw submitted an 

excellent report. One of the main recommendations of this committee called for the closure of one 

sanatorium as a T.B. institution, and its return to the Government for possible alternate use. It is now, of 

course, public knowledge that the Board of Directors of the League reached the decision to close the 

Prince Albert Sanatorium and transfer their patients to the remaining two sanatoria. It was mutually 

agreed that the transfer would be arranged by the League and would be completed by June 30th of this 

year. 

 

After carefully weighing the various alternate uses, Mr. Speaker, which could be made of the Prince 

Albert Institution, the Government has decided to establish a second training school to supplement the 

facilities in Moose Jaw. The opening of this second school which may accommodate as many as 350 

mentally retarded persons, will relieve a certain amount of the pressure on the waiting list for the Moose 

Jaw school. However, it should be understood that the waiting list will probably never be completely 

abolished. I am advised that we have an estimated total of 27,000 retarded persons of various degrees in 

Saskatchewan, and inevitably the majority will be cared for in their own homes. But it is intended to 

transfer patients from the Moose Jaw Training School whose condition is such that will not allow an 

independent living, but who cannot be trained to care for themselves. Priority will be given to families 

living closer to Prince Albert. For the coming fiscal year a sum of $475,000 has been included in the 

estimates from the Department of Public Hpurposes. Prior to September 1960 hospitals‘ capital costs 

were financed on the basis of matching provincial and federal grants of $2,000 per bed. The balance was 

raised by the local community, and at the same time depreciation payment on that portion financed by 

the community was included in the Saskatchewan Hospital Services rates for payment. 

 

It became evident, however, that under this system certain weaknesses appeared. For example, 

depreciation payments were often not properly funded, and were utilized for purposes other than capital 

retirement. Moreover hospitals in non-tax supported areas or in low assessed areas, often have great 

difficulty in raising the necessary funds for construction purposes. Accordingly in September of last year 

the decision was taken to revise the method of financing hospital capital costs. The aim of the 

Government in designing the new policy was essentially three-fold. First, the policy will provide the 

financial resource to undertake necessary hospital construction now and in the future. Second, it will 

provide a means to overcome as far as possible the inequities which previously existed, and therefore, it 

will permit hospitals to retain a high degree of local autonomy and responsibility. 

 

The Members will recall that the new grant formula was changed from a flat $2,000 a bed to a 

percentage of maximum approved costs. For example, base hospitals will receive 70%, regional 

hospitals 60%, community hospitals 40% of these maximum approved costs less the federal construction 

grant. As an incentive to control capital costs, the province will share the savings when the costs are less 

than the maximum approved amount. At the same time, depreciation payments on buildings will be 

discontinued, but principal payments on the outstanding capital investments of hospitals will be met by 

the province as they become due. This will enable hospital districts to pass on a measure of tax relief to 

their respective taxpayers. Current estimates indicate that during the next five years, this new scale of 

provincial grants will provide an estimated $11¾ millions, towards the construction required throughout 

the province. This will be about $8½ million more than would have been provided under the previous 



 

March 10, 1961 

 

11 

 

grant policy, Mr. Speaker. This additional $8½ million in grant funds over the next five-year period will 

relieve the local communities of raising approximately 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

12 

 

$14¾ millions for interest and principal payments over the next twenty years at current interest rates. 

 

These funds, Mr. Speaker, will place the financing of hospital construction much closer, on a pay as you 

go basis policy, which we all will agree, I am sure, is desirable. 

 

During the next fiscal year $1,500,000 has been provided in the estimates for the hospital construction 

grants. It should be noted that the federal construction grants remain at the flat amount of $2,000 per 

bed, which represents 20% of the approved costs of community hospitals, 15% of regional hospitals, and 

only 13% of cost of base hospitals, despite the fact that the more complex regional and base hospitals 

are more costly to construct. It would seem, therefore, that the most appropriate next step would be for 

the Federal Government, Mr. Speaker, to increase its contribution toward capital construction. In view 

of economic trends in the province and elsewhere in Canada as indicated in the budget address, the 

Hospital Services Plan has been directed to keep expenditures in line with the present economic 

situation. The hospital rate board has advised hospitals of the necessity of effecting all possible 

economies in order to keep 1961 expenditures within anticipated income for the year. Consequently all 

hospitals have been requested to review critically all service and educational programs for the year 1961, 

and to examine closely all available methods of controlling 1961 expenditures in order to operate within 

their approved budgets. 

 

Year by year since the inception of the Saskatchewan Hospital Services plan, hospital services and 

hospital costs, have been expanding, and it is doubtful that the available funds for hospitalization for the 

year 1961 will permit expansion at the rate previously experienced. The available funds, however, 

certainly should maintain the present level of hospital services provided throughout the province, and 

the recent letter to all hospitals should not be considered as a cutback in hospital and health facilities 

generally. The instruction from the hospital rate board does not infer that hospitals have been wasting 

money in the past. We consider that hospital administrators should exert special efforts to effect further 

economies which we believe will permit them to sustain their present level of services within the 

approved budget for 1961. 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

13 

 

I can report to all Members that all of the problems associated with the new capital cost policy and 

operational costs under the hospital plan are under continuing joint discussion by the Saskatchewan 

Hospital Association and officers of my Department. We are going through a period, Mr. Speaker, of a 

fairly rapid change which can have profound effects on our system of general hospitals. A rational 

system of hospital services must reflect shifts in our population and improved transportation and 

communications. At the same time we must be able to keep up with scientific and technical advances 

which modern medical care demands. 

 

You will recall the 1951 report of the health survey committee which included a comprehensive study of 

our hospital systems. Recognizing the changes that have occurred over the past decade, the health 

services planning commission recommended that we must undertake a new survey of hospital facilities, 

and future needs in Saskatchewan. Acting upon this recommendation, I have agreed to the establishment 

of a new hospital survey committee, which includes representation from the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons, The Saskatchewan Hospital Association, the Registered Nurses Association, and the 

Department of Public Health. We expect this committee will complete its survey, and submit its report 

by September 1st, 1961. This is work of considerable importance to all of us, and we look forward to the 

recommendations of this committee, as an essential guide, Mr. Speaker, for developments over the next 

decade. 

 

The purpose of the Advisory Planning Committee on Medical Care is to study and make 

recommendations to the Government concerning the extent of public need in the various fields of health 

care, as related to a medical care programme, and the range of specific problems related to the details of 

such a programme. Under the authority of the Health Services Act, the committee was established on 

April 1st, 1960, and twelve members have been appointed, representing the general public, the medical 

profession, the medical school, business, labour, and government. Dr. W.P. Thompson, one of 

Saskatchewan‘s most distinguished citizens, was prevailed upon to leave a short period of retirement as 

President of the University, and take on the heavy responsibility of chairman. 

 

The Government has made quite clear the basic principles which it believes are essential to a medical 

care 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

14 

 

programme, and has asked that these be considered by the Advisory Planning Committee on Medical 

Care in its deliberations. It is hoped that the Thompson committee‘s recommendations, as I remarked 

last year, ―will provide a program which will be effective, efficient and in the best interests of all.‖ In 

view of the far-reaching implications of the work of the committee for the future health care services in 

this province, the committee has been given the widest possible scope of inquiry, Mr. Speaker. I 

understand that the committee has undertaken a broad review of all major health services and insurance 

programs in the province under both public and private auspices, as well as certain specialized plans in 

other parts of Canada and the United States. Some forty-five agencies and individuals have submitted 

their considered views and recommendations to the committee in the form of briefs covering the whole 

spectrum of health care, facilities, and programs. 

 

As hon. Members know the committee has held a series of hearings to examine and clarify the opinions 

and recommendations submitted to the committee. The presentation of such a large body of written and 

verbal submissions to the committee reflects on the part of the health profession, the voluntary health 

agencies, the insurance plans, and other important agencies of the community, a deep interest in the 

current arrangements for the provision of health care. Many of the briefs also express a deep concern 

about the gaps in the present provision of health care. The special needs of persons afflicted with certain 

chronic diseases, and the failure to achieve a rational and satisfactory system for financing medical care 

for all citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

As a part of its studies, the committee has decided to investigate programs of personal health services in 

several foreign countries, including Great Britain, Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Holland, Australia and 

New Zealand. The two study teams now on tour, are made up of both medical and lay members of the 

committee. I might point out, Mr. Speaker, that health care schemes in the countries being visited differ 

in their underlying concepts, the scope of benefits, provisions, arrangement with the medical and other 

health professions, and methods of organization and administration. While these programs reflect, of 

course, the social and professional traditions of each particular country, they incorporate many features 

which deserve serious study, as to their application to 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

15 

 

the Saskatchewan setting, Equally important, these study tours will place the committee as a whole in a 

better position to examine and assess our own health concepts. Moreover, they will be better able to 

appreciate the changing expectations of our own physicians with regard to the scope, adequacy, and 

quality of the health services. The committee should be aware of these changes so that they will be able 

to suggest forms of organization and financing of health care, which take them into account. 

 

Indeed, Mr. Speaker, the hon. Premier stated in his speech before the annual meeting of the Edmonton 

Academy of Medicine, on December 8th, 1960, and I quote: 

 

―The solution of the financial problem of the individual or family does not of itself ensure a high 

quality of care. If we apply ourselves only to a transfer of payments from the individual to the group, 

we will have done little to advance the cause of medicine. We need to re-think our scale of values in 

providing medical care.‖ 

 

In this context, I might add Mr. Speaker, that this Government has been most interested to learn of the 

Federal Government‘s decision to set up a Royal Commission on the subject of health care. It is to be 

noted that this decision followed a request from the Canadian Medical Association which had urged 

the Federal Government to assess the health needs and resources of Canada with a view to 

recommending methods of ensuring the highest standards of health care for Canadians. This statement 

from the Canadian Medical Association emphasizes the need to examine the whole question of 

developing some form of health plan based on the highest possible quality of services, and 

substantially supports our Government‘s position in this matter. Indeed the appointment of the Royal 

Commission will assist all Provincial Governments in accelerating their present planning to implement 

comprehensive medical care. 

 

Saskatchewan has a long history of leadership in the development of comprehensive health programs, 

at both local and provincial levels. Such examples as the Swift Current Medical Care Program and the 

Municipal Doctor Program, the Anti-Tuberculosis League, the cancer and mental health care – all 

these come to mind, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan has led the country by some eleven 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

16 

 

years in the implementation of hospital insurance, and this announcement from Ottawa, again 

emphasizes the vision and foresight of the people and the Government of the province in recognizing 

the need to provide a suitable system of medical care at the earliest possible moment. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — Should the work of the proposed federal Royal Commission lead to 

recommendations involving federal participation in a medical care plan, I have no doubt whatever, that 

arrangements can be made between the Province of Saskatchewan, and the Federal Government to share 

in the costs of such a program. 

 

The provinces‘ constitutional responsibilities in the field of health would require joint federal-provincial 

co-operation in the development of a national plan. I hope that the Federal Government will, as in the 

case of hospital insurance, be able to learn much from the experience of Saskatchewan. The Government 

and the people of Saskatchewan will be most anxious to offer their fullest co-operation to the Royal 

Commission, Mr. Speaker. I would say, however, that it is to be hoped that the terms of reference of the 

committee, which I have not yet seen, will provide clear and specific instructions as to the goals and 

major purposes of their study. It would be unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, if the commission were directed in 

such a way as to leave any doubt in the minds of Canadians concerning its essential functions. Indeed, it 

would be difficult to justify to the people of Canada, any nation-wide examination of health services, 

which was not specifically directed towards the introduction of a comprehensive program of health 

insurance. Perhaps, nowhere in the world, with the exception of the United States, has a country 

collected so much medical, social, economic information concerning its health problems, Mr. Speaker. 

Surely, what is required, is not still a further survey of these problems, stretching over many years. 

There would be no justification for introducing the traditional device of a Royal Commission to forestall 

action here. What we must surely expect is a determined effort by all parties concerned to extend our 

present forms of health insurance. Such an extension should place major emphasis on a more efficient 

use and improvement of our medical 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

17 

 

resources, and a much better distribution of these resources, and on devising a system of spreading the 

costs of modern health care more equitably over the total population. The people of Canada deserve 

nothing less than this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In closing my remarks on medical care, I would add, Mr. Speaker, that this Government looks forward 

to receiving the advice and recommendations of the Thompson committee to guide us in proceeding 

with our announced intention to introduce a universal, comprehensive medical care plan. Having due 

regard to the wide nature of the committee‘s investigation, and the many problems inherent in the 

organization in a program of medical services, the Government and the people of this province hope the 

committee will submit their recommendations as expeditiously as possible. We are indebted to the 

individual members of the committee for the heavy responsibility they have undertaken on our behalf. It 

is recognized that difficulties may be encountered in reconciling different points of view, but these 

problems, I suggest, can be surmounted if approached by all members of the committee with a high 

sense of public purpose, and a desire to achieve for our people improved health services, comprehensive 

in scope, universal in application, and of high scientific quality. The necessary ways and means must not 

be partial or palliative. They must be adopted to our rapidly changing society and the expectations of our 

citizens. They must support and improve the present level of medical services. If such measures can be 

devised, they will deserve the respect and creative participation and support of the medical and allied 

professions, and the people whom they serve. Now Mr. Speaker, it is not my intention to comment on 

the criticisms of the budget offered by my friends in the Opposition. My colleagues on this side of the 

House have already answered eloquently and most effectively the charges, assumptions, and 

misrepresentations made by my friends opposite, and if in these answers, they were not able to make a 

dent on them, Mr. Speaker, no words of mine now, could possibly penetrate beyond the epidermis of 

their comprehension. 

 

Because this budget, Mr. Speaker, like the budgets in the past, has placed human value above the 

material, and although there is a small deficit in this budget, Mr. Speaker, which has in no way 

destroyed the perspective with which this Government is identified, I shall be glad to vote against the 

amendment. I shall support the motion. 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

18 

 

Premier T.C. Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, in common with all Members of the House, I would like to 

extend a welcome to the students who are here today, and to say how pleased we are to have them with 

us. I want to issue a word of special welcome to the students who are here from the Assiniboia Reserve, 

because a number of years ago their elders did me the great honour of making me one of their honorary 

chiefs. They gave me the title, Wamni Nuta which I believe is interpreted as Red Eagle. The colour was 

right; I‘m not sure they got the right bird. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like, along with others, to extend my congratulations to the Provincial Treasurer 

on the very magnificent budget which he has placed before this Legislature. That budget has not only 

demonstrated his financial competence, but what to me is far more important, it has demonstrated the 

deep understanding of the fundamental principles of this Government, which he has brought, in financial 

terms, to the attention of this Legislature. 

 

This budget, along with preceding budgets, has emphasized two main points: In the first place, a major 

emphasis has been placed upon promoting human well-being, and the enrichment of human life. In 

times of financial stringency this budget has kept in mind that any financial curtailment ought not to 

interfere with the education of the young, with the care of the unfortunate, or the looking after of the 

sick. That is why in this budget 57¢ out of every dollar will be going to education, health, and welfare, 

because the human factor must still, and always, be the first consideration of this Government. The 

second thing which is emphasized is that we recognize that economic growth is necessary in order to 

support an expanded health, welfare, and educational program. We‘ve always said in this province that 

we cannot lift ourselves just by pulling at our own boot straps, that we must base our welfare program 

on a sound and expanding economy. That is why great emphasis is being placed upon the development 

of power, and gas, and transportation, and upon industrial development, and on those things that will 

give us an economic foundation for the type of society we‘re seeking to build. 

 

This type of philosophy has paid off over the past sixteen years. The fact is that whereas in Canada the 

gross national product last year increased by only 2½%, in 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

19 

 

this province the net value of commodity and production increased by 15%, and personal income 

increased last year by 14% over the previous year. 

 

Some criticism has been levelled by Members opposite at the previous Provincial Treasurer, because he 

anticipated a greater economic growth than took place in Canada. I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that 

the best economists and the best financiers in Canada one year ago were estimating the growth of the 

gross national product at 6%. The fact that it was only 2½%, and that at least 1½ percentage points of 

that was a change in price, can hardly be blamed upon the economists hired by the Saskatchewan 

Government. They cannot be prophets. All they can do is to project trends. That these trends did not 

materialize is something which has affected the whole country. The trends as forecast now are that this 

economic recession in which Canada finds itself will probably continue throughout this year with 

indication that there will be an upturn at the latter part of the year. 

 

The first point I want to make, Mr. Speaker, is that the fact we are able to maintain and even expand 

essential services in the face of financial stringency is a tribute to the financial policies which this 

Government has pursued during the past sixteen years. 

 

I remember the financial critic in 1948 (it‘s in the records) making a statement. He said this Government 

has built up a standard of education, health, and welfare, that our economy cannot sustain if we reach a 

period of economic recession. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that in a period of economic recession we are 

not only able to maintain the standards as the budget shows, we are substantially increasing them. 

 

Therefore, just let me review what policy the Government has followed over the past few years. The 

Member for Moosomin, the financial critic for the Opposition, said, ―There was $7,000,000 in the 

treasury when the CCF took office.‖ I assumed, therefore he‘s referring to the cash balance. As all hon. 

Members know, of course, the cash balance varies from day to day, and week to week. If you pick a 

particular day when car licenses are coming, or some other particular revenue, such as the end of the 

quarter, when the education and hospital tax receipts are coming in, the 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

20 

 

cash balance will be high. Two or three months later, or two or three weeks later, it may be low. I don‘t 

know where my hon. friend got his information about the $7,000,000, but the Public Accounts show that 

on April 30th, 1944, there was a cash balance of $10,797,000. If this was down to $7,000,000 by July 

the previous Government, in addition to spending the revenues that came in, must have spent a million 

dollars a month. They must have had a happy time for the last three months when they were in office. 

 

The important thing is that the budget presented by the last Liberal Treasurer in this province, budgeted 

for a surplus of only $168,000 in the year 1944-1945. But that‘s only a small part of the story. It is not a 

matter of whether there was $7,000,000 in the cash balance. One has to look at the unpaid debts that 

were left for this Government to assume. Mr. Patterson, who was the Provincial Treasurer at that time, 

in his budget on February 29, 1944, said: ―During the current year, the province has maturities of 

$16,839,000 falling due, but of this amount $3,263,000 is held in sinking funds and trust accounts.‖ In 

other words, Mr. Speaker, there was $13½ million of maturities coming due that year, for which there 

were no funds available. 

 

In addition to this, there was $16,000,000 on seed grain advances for 1938. The Liberal Finance 

Minister at Ottawa, who had accepted treasury bills from the previous Government for the 1936 and 

1937 seed grain advances, refused to accept our treasury bills and insisted on a payment in cash by 

January, 1945. He even went so far as to hold up payments due to the province under the war-time tax 

agreement. 

 

When the financial critic of the Opposition speaks about our having $7 million in the treasury, he might 

also have made mention of the $30 million of unpaid debts that were coming due in that fiscal year. 

 

Even more serious, Mr. Speaker, was the $2.8 million gross debt, which amounted to $260 per capita. 

Of this amount only $51 million was for some liquidating projects, such as the loans to the Wheat Pool, 

and to the Co-op Creamery, and to the Power Commission, and so on. 

 

But, there was a dead weight debt for which 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

21 

 

nothing has been set aside, of $167 million. How was it made up? It was made up of some $33 million 

that had been borrowed to build highways, $23 million that had been borrowed for public buildings, the 

accumulated deficits over a period of years that had been funded amounted to $18 million, other capital 

expenditures for the Cancer Commission, and experimental work on lignite coal had been capitalized at 

$5 million, and there were relief debts amounted to $88 million. The hon. Members will see on page 48 

of the speech of the Provincial Treasurer that this $167 million of dead weight debt has now been 

reduced to some $53 million. In other words, $114 million of this dead weight debt has been removed. 

 

Opposition Member: — Who removed it? 

 

Premier Douglas: — The financial critic of the Opposition said, ―What the Government should have 

been doing over the years was to take the liquor profits and use them, either to pay debts or for capital 

purposes.‖ Mr. Speaker, I wonder where the Member for Moosomin has been the last twelve years that 

he‘s been a Member of this House, because this is precisely what we‘ve been doing. He says that the 

amount of the liquor profits during this period of time under discussion was $163 million. All right, let 

us now look at the capital expenditures which have been financed out of ordinary revenue: highway 

construction, $108 million; public buildings, $60 million; agricultural development projects, $14 

million; natural resources, roads, air fields, water control, parks, $5 million; and housing projects, the 

Metis rehabilitation farms, and so on, $2 million. One-hundred and eighty-nine million worth of capital 

projects, in the past sixteen years, have been financed out of revenues. When you add to that the $114 

million of dead weight debt which has been removed, this is $303 million, which far exceeds, by some 

$140 million, the $163 million, which has come in in the form of liquor profits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this does not include our grants to local governments for capital purposes such as grid 

roads, hospital construction, school construction, or grants to towns and villages for sewer and water, or 

farm water and sewer installations. These have all been paid out of current revenue, and I haven‘t taken 

them into the figures which I have just quoted. 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

22 

 

Mr. Speaker, since 1944, the Government has followed a pay as you go policy, under which highway 

construction, public buildings, court houses, university buildings, the School for the Mentally Retarded, 

the Technical Institute, all of these have been paid out of the current revenue, in addition to removing 

the $114 million, worth of dead weight debt to which I‘ve already referred. The best proof, Mr. Speaker, 

that this pay as you go policy, in dealing with projects of this kind, has been sound financially, is the fact 

that while from 1932-1945, Saskatchewan had not been able to borrow a single dollar on the open 

market, while today this province is able to go on the open market and borrow very large sums of money 

for self-liquidating projects, and to do it at interest rates which are comparable and in many cases better, 

than those which are available to other provinces. 

 

Some mention has been made of a conversation, which the radio or the newspapers had with the 

previous Provincial Treasurer, in which he said that if we had followed the budget system of some other 

provinces, there wouldn‘t be a deficit. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, this is absolutely true. If we did 

what some other provinces do, and Ontario is the best example, and we capitalized highway construction 

expenditures and public buildings instead of paying it out of revenue on a pay as you go basis, and took 

liquor profits into revenue, then we would have a surplus of $16,790,000. If we took the liquor profits 

and applied them on the capital expenditures, we would still have a surplus of $2,790,000. But we 

preferred not to do that. We preferred, insofar as it is possible, to continue a program of pay as you go, 

so that when we build highways, and public buildings, and other institutions, we pay for it out of current 

revenue. This way it‘s paid for now instead of paying interest over a period of twenty years, and leaving 

a debt for posterity. 

 

One of the things which has emerged from this budget debate is the fact that the Liberal Party has now 

gone squarely on record as being opposed to the public ownership of power and gas, in this province. 

They seek to get around this, by saying, ―Oh, we‘re not against it, but we don‘t want you to borrow any 

money for it.‖ The financial critic spent most of his time talking about the great millstone of debt that we 

were hanging around the necks of generations yet unborn. The Minister for Education tried to point out 

in a simple analogy that you 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

23 

 

had to borrow if you‘re going to expand your economy. He said if I‘ve $3,000 and want to build a 

$10,000 house, that I have no choice but to borrow $7,000, take a mortgage on the house, and get the 

house, and then pay off the mortgage. But the Member for Pelly said, ―No, that‘s not the way to do it. If 

you‘ve got $3,000, then you build a $3,000 house, and you live within your means.‖ Now, Mr. Speaker, 

I ask the people of this province to stop and consider, how you would have brought power to 58,000 

farmers, and to every town and village in the province, and how we would have built two large $40 

million power generating stations, if you were only going to spend the money as it came in, and were 

not going to borrow. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition sort of let the cat out of the bag when the Minister of Education was 

speaking. He said, ―My complaint is you won‘t let the private utilities come in.‖ 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I said you wouldn‘t let National Light . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, he made another comment in the Public 

Accounts Committee. He said, our complaint is that you won‘t let the power and gas utilities come into 

the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is what we did prior to 1944. We let the private utilities come in. There were five or 

six of them in operation in this province when this Government took office. What was the situation? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — There was a war on. 

 

Premier Douglas: — The situation was that we had little patchwork quilts all over: one company 

generating and selling power to one area; another company to another area. We had the most costly 

power in Canada. In my own Constituency there were places where they were paying 25¢ a kilowatt 

hour for partial service, and many of the villages had no power at all. Of course, farmers had no power 

at all. The objection of the gentlemen opposite has been, as the Leader of the Opposition just indicated, 

that we shouldn‘t have taken National Light and Power into the power system. 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

24 

 

Surely, Members now know that unless you can build a province-wide integrated power system, you‘re 

always going to have expensive power. Small companies put up power plants that were inefficient 

because they were small. They did this rather than draw their power from large plants that can produce 

power cheaply. Small individual operations, must keep at least 25% of their capacity as stand-by power. 

When you have an integrated system, you can move that surplus power to any area which has a 

breakdown, thereby reducing the amount of stand-by power which must be maintained; thereby reducing 

your overhead; thereby making cheaper power available. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You doubled the rates when you . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, keeps wanting to return to the Liberal 

policies and the Liberal policy of public ownership is simply this. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . give cheaper rates, you gave . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — The Liberal policy is well known. Their policy is public financing of private 

ownership. The people of Canada under a Liberal Government put up all the money for a pipeline, but 

the ownership, and operation, and the profits from the pipeline stays in the hands of private enterprise. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. Premier has the floor, and these interruptions are entirely out of order. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I‘ll get around to them in just a few moments. The Leader of the 

Opposition, keeps wanting to interrupt me. It is rather significant, Mr. Speaker, that he‘s interrupted 

almost every person who has spoken on this side of the House; particularly when the radio is on. After 

the radio is off, he subsides into silence, or leaves the Chamber. But when the radio is on, he doesn‘t just 

ask questions, he wants to get up and argue and contradict. Mr. Speaker, this debate has been going on 

for nearly two weeks. This budget was introduced a week ago last Monday, and if the Leader of the 

Opposition wanted to contradict, he had plenty of 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

25 

 

chance to get into this debate, and put his views before this Legislature, and before the people of the 

province. He hasn‘t done that. As a matter of fact I expected he‘d be up giving his famous speech on the 

Crown Corporations. You know the one – nine down and two to go. But, we haven‘t heard a word from 

him. He‘s been as silent as a clam and as dumb as an oyster – not a word – not a word. Why? Because, 

Mr. Speaker, he knows perfectly well that the kind of misinformation he peddled up and down the 

country wouldn‘t stand up under the scrutiny of public debate in this Chamber. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — What my hon. friend prefers to do is to give his criticisms to the press. He thinks 

this is much better. The press is very friendly and sympathetic to his Party, and so his criticisms appear 

on the front page. Any denials or contradictions, of course, get lost in the classified ads. Then the editor 

of the paper picks up his statement and quotes it again in an editorial, and then on another day quotes it 

again, until it becomes commonly accepted as being a fact. 

 

I‘ll give you an example, Mr. Speaker. In the ―Leader-Post‖ of January 31st, an article appears saying 

―Thatcher forecasts Trouble.‖ 

 

―A warning that the Saskatchewan Government is headed for troubled financial waters was delivered 

Tuesday by Liberal Leader Ross Thatcher. The Liberal Leader said he is not so much concerned with 

the prospect of a small deficit this year as with the Government‘s commitments for the future. He 

thought that the South Saskatchewan River Dam would cost the province an average of $10 million a 

year, and the Squaw Rapids project would cost about half that a year, over a number of years. The 

province will also be faced with a heavy expenditure with the medical care, and the crop insurance 

programs that are underway. He was particularly concerned with the province‘s venture into crop 

insurance which, he said, had nearly bankrupted the State of Montana.‖ 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

26 

 

Let‘s look at these fears which are expressed, about our future commitments. Let me deal with them. 

First, the South Saskatchewan Dam. He said it will cost an average of $10 million a year. What are the 

facts? All hon. Members who have read the agreement between the Dominion of Canada and the 

Province of Saskatchewan will know that the Province of Saskatchewan is committed to pay 25% of the 

cost of the main reservoir up to a maximum of $100 million. The estimate is that it will cost $96 million, 

and so far the estimates have been accurate. But even if it‘s $100 million, we‘re liable for $25 million, 

payable over the construction period, half of it payable in cash, and half of it payable in treasury bills. 

Assuming it takes eight years to complete the project, this is something over $3 million a year, $1½ 

million in cash and $1½ million in treasury bills. Where is this $10 million a year? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‘d also like to know, since when did the Leader of the Opposition begin to throw cold 

water on the construction of the South Saskatchewan Dam. He got elected in 1945 because he accused 

Mr. Gordon Ross, the Liberal Member for Moose Jaw, and the Rt. Hon. James G. Gardiner for not 

having proceeded with the South Saskatchewan Dam. He got re-elected in a couple more elections, by 

standing up, (and I have the clipping here), and saying on the public platform ―that failure of Mr. 

Gardiner to proceed with the South Saskatchewan Dam is a national tragedy, and a national disgrace.‖ 

He sat with the St. Laurent Government, and it will be recalled that Mr. St. Laurent said in the House of 

Commons, and said here in the Exhibition Auditorium in Regina that his Government would not proceed 

with the South Saskatchewan Dam, because he was not convinced that the benefits merited the 

expenditure. 

 

The Liberal Government left office absolutely refusing to proceed with the South Saskatchewan Dam. 

We managed to get an agreement with the present Government at Ottawa. It wasn‘t as generous as we 

had hoped, nor as we would have wanted, but at least it has started the construction of the South 

Saskatchewan Dam which today is on schedule, and which, in my opinion, will be the greatest project in 

terms of benefit to the people of this province, that has ever been undertaken in our history. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

27 

 

Premier Douglas: — The Leader of the Opposition questions the expenditures which are going to be 

made in this regard. Then he said with reference to crop insurance that ―he was concerned about the 

province‘s venture into crop insurance, which nearly bankrupted the State of Montana.‖ 

 

Well, first of all, I would like to ask if the Liberal Party are opposed to crop insurance. Year after year, 

Members in the Opposition have been saying, ―When are you going to get on with crop insurance?‖ – 

―What about the recommendation of the Royal Commission on Agriculture and Rural Life?‖ – ―Why 

aren‘t you going on with crop insurance?‖ Now the Leader of the Opposition says he‘s concerned about 

our venture into crop insurance. Let‘s look at his statement that it nearly bankrupted the State of 

Montana. You know, Mr. Speaker, it is very easy to get a young newspaper man in the office, and toss 

off the phrase ―Why this nearly bankrupted the State of Montana‖. Of course, the young fellow accepts 

this statement. He doesn‘t look into it. The public accepts it, because they take it for granted the Leader 

of the Opposition knows what he‘s talking about. What are the facts? The fact is that there‘s no record 

available of any state-operated crop insurance plan in the State of Montana. As a matter of fact, I don‘t 

wonder that the Leader of the Opposition wants a research director – boy does he need it! 

 

There was a crop insurance plan set up by the United States Federal Government, but the State of 

Montana didn‘t put a single dollar into it, Mr. Speaker. This is the program that bankrupted the State of 

Montana. Even the federal plan, in the State of Montana, in the period from 1948 to 1957, left a surplus 

of $8.3 million. They cut the rates from 16% to 8%, and during the period their premium income was 

$21 million, and their payment out was only $10 million. If the Leader of the Opposition wants to talk 

about the dangers of crop insurance, at least he ought to get all his facts straight. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have no hesitation in saying that there are inherent risks in crop insurance, and we all said 

that very frankly last year when crop insurance legislation was being introduced. That is why we have 

excluded from the operation of the plan areas where the premium rate on an actuarial basis will have to 

exceed 15%. It is also why we have asked, repeatedly (I think 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

28 

 

the Legislature supported us in this) the Federal Government to assist in reassurance for any disaster 

year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fact that there are some dangers in crop insurance, certainly does not justify the kind of 

statement which was made by the Leader of the Opposition. He makes this kind of statement, I suppose, 

in the hope that people don‘t know better. I noticed last night, when the Minister of Mineral Resources 

was saying that resource revenue is down all across Canada for all the Governments, the Leader of the 

Opposition said ―it isn‘t down in Alberta.‖ What are the facts? Alberta brought its budget down a week 

ago today, and the revenue from resources is down $24 million. It is true that it‘s down in this province 

$4 million. I would have thought that the financial critic of the Opposition would at least have read the 

Alberta budget, to know what‘s going on. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — . . . $400,000,000 . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Alberta‘s resource revenues are down $24 million, and they are budgeting for a 

deficit of some $13¼ million in the Province of Alberta. 

 

I am not saying that anybody is to blame that the revenue has gone down $24 million. As the Minister of 

Finance in that province points out, this is because of a lack of oil markets, and because they haven‘t 

discovered any new fields this year. This is understandable. All I object to, is a Member making the 

statement ―of course it didn‘t go down‖ when he ought to know that they went down this last year by 

some $24 million. 

 

The third thing which the Leader of the Opposition said caused him great concern about our future 

commitments was the medical care plan. Well, Mr. Speaker, it is very difficult for me to know where the 

Opposition stand on the question, of a medical care plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Pardon me, you said the Leader of the Opposition, and I don‘t believe the Leader of 

the Opposition has spoken. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I was referring to the Leader of the Opposition‘s statement, Mr. Speaker, that 

appears in the Leader Post of January 31st, 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

29 

 

of this year, in which he said there were three things that gave him concern, the future commitments the 

Government had made on the South Saskatchewan Dam, which they had made on crop insurance, and 

which they were making on a medical care plan. 

 

What is the stand of the party opposite on this medical care plan? The Leader of the Opposition, outside 

the House, said he‘s gravely concerned about the financial implications. In a previous debate in this 

House, he urged the Government, the Leader of the Opposition pleaded with the Government to 

postpone the medical care plan. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, that‘s no point of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I don‘t think the reference is to a former debate. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I can make reference to a former debate providing I don‘t quote 

from the Hansard on it. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — On a point of order, neither the Premier nor anyone else can refer to something that 

is said in a previous debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think that is the ruling. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I will leave it to the judgement of the House, as to whether or not the 

gentleman opposite, didn‘t plead with the Government, not to proceed with a medical care plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Premier Douglas: — If he wants to deny it, let him stand up and do so. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I deny it, I‘d never plead with you to do anything. 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

30 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, there is no use of weaseling out of it. These people on one hand say 

to us, you shouldn‘t proceed with the medical care plan because of the financial implications, because 

we‘re in economic recession, and because there‘s a Royal Commission being set up at Ottawa. Then the 

Member for Pelly and the Member for Humboldt stand up and say, ―Why aren‘t you getting on with the 

medical care plan, what‘s holding it up?‖ Here is an army in which the leader is saying let‘s go back, 

and the ranks are saying let‘s go forward. Well no wonder they‘re in one unholy mess. 

 

The Member for Humboldt wanted to know why it is that we had given these terms of reference to an 

Advisory Committee on Medical Care. Well, Mr. Speaker, can you imagine what would have happened 

if we had brought a Bill in without consulting with the medical profession and the other people 

concerned? We would have been accused of ramming a program down their throats. I want to make it 

abundantly clear in answer to the questions asked by the Member for Pelly and the Member for 

Humboldt, that there has been no change whatsoever, insofar as the Government is concerned, with 

reference to the target dates for the medical care plan. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — In the last Session it is true we said we would bring down enabling Legislation. 

On second thought we decided that if we brought down enabling Legislation, some of the Members 

might criticize it – first, on the grounds that we weren‘t consulting the medical profession, and giving 

the medical care committee time to report – and second, that they had a right to know the details of a 

plan, and I agree with them. Therefore, as I announced in the Legislature last Session, we proposed not 

to bring in enabling Legislation, but to wait until the Advisory Committee on Medical Care had made its 

report. I said last year in this House, and I said it on the public platforms throughout the election 

campaign, that the target date we had set ourselves to receive this report and to bring in the necessary 

Legislation was 1961, and to have the plan in operation in 1962. Mr. Speaker, those target dates still 

stand. I wish the Liberal Party would be honest enough to tell the people where they stand on it. I 

noticed when the Minister of Education was speaking and said that they were opposed to 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

31 

 

the Medical Care Plan, some of them said no, and the Leader of the Opposition said, as I took it down, 

―We are opposed to the socialist medical plan.‖ Well, whatever he chooses to call it, the people of this 

province are in favour of a medical care plan. Liberal speakers including the Leader of the Opposition, 

have been going up and down the length and breadth of this province saying only 41.3% of the people 

voted for the CCF last June . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Less than that after Turtleford. 

 

Premier Douglas: — . . . therefore, 59% of the people voted against the medical care program and the 

Government shouldn‘t proceed with it. On the basis of that argument, Mr. Speaker, if the 59% of the 

people who voted Liberal, Conservative, and Social Credit, are to be represented as 59% of the people 

voting against medical care, then the Liberal Party is now construing itself as having voted against 

medical care in last June‘s election. 

 

I was interested also in seeing the new position being taken by the Party opposite on welfare programs. 

We are already used to the position taken by the Leader of the Opposition, when he was a Member of 

Parliament. He was the only man in the House to stand up and oppose old age security pensions at 

seventy years of age without a means test, and family allowances without a means test. It was left for the 

Member for Rosthern to finally put the cap on it the other day, when he stood up in this House and said, 

―Boy, in this province, social aid is a free gate. – social aid is given to all the people who ask for it.‖ He 

said, that it should be like going to the bank and borrowing money. You should sign a note. Is the 

Liberal Party now on record as saying we must return to the thirties when people signed notes for relief? 

Millions of dollars of relief notes that they were never able to pay hung over their heads like the sword 

of Damocles. Is this the Liberal Party‘s program? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We‘ll let you know . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Of course, they‘ll let us know, Mr. Speaker. The only time the people of this 

province will know is if these gentlemen 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

32 

 

ever get in power, and then they‘ll know. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — That won‘t be long. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, before I leave the matter of the medical care question, may I just 

correct the Member for Arm River who made the statement, and I‘m sure he wasn‘t conscious of the 

fact, although I asked him twice to enunciate it, that there were no farmers on this Advisory Committee 

on Medical Care. I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, the committee is made up, as the Minister of Health 

has already said, of three representatives from the medical profession, one from the College of 

Medicine. There are two farmers on it. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Six from the CCF Party. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mrs. Beatrice Trew, representing the women‘s organization, President of the 

Women‘s Branch, of the Farmer‘s Union, and Mr. Clifford Whiting. There is one representative from 

labour, and one representative from the business interests of the province, and three representatives from 

the Government. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I am quite used to the Member for Arm River. He has proven conclusively, of 

course, that he wouldn‘t know a farmer if he met him in broad daylight. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I just deal with two other things before I sit down? May I make reference to the 

amendment which has been moved? It is amazing that the Members opposite have moved an 

amendment in which they are complaining about the excessive administration costs, and the heavily 

increased taxes and exactions. Yet, there wasn‘t a single one of them, with possibly one or two 

exceptions, (but I think almost everyone that I noted) got up and said to the Government, ―Don‘t forget 

some more roads in my Constituency – I‘ve got some places where I‘d like to get natural gas.‖ I listened 

to the Member for Athabasca yesterday, and took down the things he wanted us to do in his 

Constituency. I was sure that he was not only going to vote against the amendment, but that he was 

going to move another amendment, asking the Government to spend more money than it proposes to 

spend. Almost every one of them was the same, including the financial critic of the Opposition. After he 

had finished deploring this great mountain of debt for public 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

33 

 

utilities, he said, ―Now don‘t forget there are a couple of places on the main line that still haven‘t got 

gas. You put gas into the rest of them, but be sure and put it into these two places this year. Spend more 

money, but don‘t raise the taxes. Carry on more programs but don‘t have as much administration.‖ 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . some suggestions in Public Accounts. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, what are the facts? In 1943-44, the last year in which a Liberal 

Government was administering a budget . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Oh let‘s get up to date . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — . . . the taxes paid by people directly to the Provincial Government were some $14 

million. On the basis of personal income for that year, which was $423 million, the tax burden 

represented 3.3% of total personal income in the province. If you take the amount of money in this 

budget and leave out hospitalization, which was not provided for in their program, you get a figure of 

$43 million compared to $14 million. On the basis of our personal income this last year, which was 

$1,350 million, the burden now represents 3.2% on personal income as compared to 3.3% on personal 

income the year before we took office. This is not a growing burden, Mr. Speaker, this is one-tenth of 

1% less of a tax burden in relation to personal income, than you had sixteen years ago. 

 

I want to point out that the gentlemen opposite seem to live in an ivory tower, they don‘t seem to be 

aware of the fact that every Provincial Government in Canada, must discharge the responsibilities which 

the constitution has placed upon it. The failure of the Federal Government to make more money 

available to the provinces and municipalities out of the three tax deals we occupy jointly doesn‘t help. 

The Federal Government keeps about 80% of the tax revenue and gives the provinces and municipalities 

only 20%. Almost every province has been compelled to increase their taxes. The Province of 

Newfoundland, which has a Liberal Government, has a gasoline tax of 19¢, a diesel tax of 19¢, and a 

sales tax of 5%. Prince Edward Island, has a 16¢ gasoline tax and diesel tax, and a 4% sales tax, plus a 

special tax on tobacco and liquor. Nova Scotia, has a 19¢ gasoline tax and the same for diesel 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

34 

 

tax, and a 5% sales tax. New Brunswick just came down with a budget providing for an 18¢ gasoline 

tax, a 23¢ diesel tax, and a 3% sales tax, plus a special tax on tobacco. The Province of Quebec, has a 

13¢ gasoline tax, a 13¢ tax on diesel fuel, and a sales tax varying from 2% to 5%, plus a special tax on 

tobacco. The Province of Ontario, has just announced a 13¢ gasoline tax, a 13½¢ diesel tax, and a 3% 

retail tax, which it is estimated will bring them in $150 million. The Province of Manitoba so far has 

only an 11¢ gasoline and diesel tax, but I think the common expectation is that Manitoba‘s revenues are 

going to compel the Government at this Session to raise their gasoline tax. Saskatchewan has a 14¢ 

gasoline tax, a 17¢ diesel tax, and a 3% retail tax. The Province of Alberta, has a 12¢ gasoline tax, and a 

14¢ diesel tax. The Province of British Columbia, one of the wealthiest provinces in Canada, has a 13¢ 

gasoline tax, a 15¢ diesel tax, and a 5% sales tax. 

 

I contend, Mr. Speaker, that in the light of the services which are being given to the people of this 

province, the tax burden is not onerous, having due regard to the responsibilities which we have, and to 

the limited fields of taxation which we enjoy. 

 

I‘ll say just one other thing, before I sit down, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to say just a word to the Member 

for Humboldt. I always find this very difficult because she is such a charming person. I always lose all 

my capacity to argue with her, but it seems to me that she is somewhat inconsistent. She always has a 

great capacity for adopting in the House, insofar as the Government is concerned, a holier-than-thou 

attitude, and she chides me with making some jocular remark about the virility of the New Party which I 

made, by the way, not for publication, but to a group of individuals. Some press man may have heard it 

second hand. She felt no inconsistency a few minutes later in making some remark about someone‘s 

statement regarding a red light. She chides me with being very immoderate in my statements about the 

Leader of the Opposition, but she has no pricks of conscience a few minutes later about talking about the 

Government programs being immoral, and despicable, and contemptible, that socialism is rotten, and 

that all of us on this of the House are materialists, and socialists. It seems to me that this is a bit 

inconsistent, 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

35 

 

and I would suggest that since she‘s very fond of parables, that she might read the other parable about 

the Pharisee and the lowly publican. Remember the Pharisee‘s statement ―Lord, I thank thee that I am 

not as other men, even as this poor publican.‖ 

 

The Member for Humboldt regaled us with a story of the Prodigal Son, and I don‘t usually like to get 

into discussion about scripture on the floor of the Legislature, but I have been pondering for some days 

as to just what the key is in this parable of the Prodigal Son. Most of the Members will remember the 

story. It is one of the great, immortal stories of Holy literature. It is the story of a man, who had two 

sons. The younger said to his father, ―Father give me the inheritance that falls due to me.‖ He took his 

inheritance and he went into a far country and there he wasted his substance in riotous living, and with 

certain undesirable companions. I am not sure what period in life of the Leader of the Opposition this 

applies to. I take it for granted this is the twelve years he spent as a CCF Member of Parliament, 

representing the Constituency of Moose Jaw-Lake Centre. I don‘t suppose that the people of that 

Constituency will take particularly kindly to considering that his sojourn with them constituted riotous 

living. 

 

Then you remember when the young man had wasted all his substance in frivolity, he finally wound up 

as a swine herder, feeding the pigs and living in the pigsty. I wasn‘t sure what period this was; I could 

only conclude that it had reference to the period when he supported the St. Laurent Government in 

Ottawa. Then the story said, that finally the young man came to himself. He decided he was broke, and 

that he had wasted all his father‘s money. He thought that he had better see if he couldn‘t better his 

condition. So he decided to go back. When he was still a long way off, his father saw him and ran to 

him, and fell on his neck and kissed him. I wasn‘t sure whether this was the Liberal Party, or the 

Member for Humboldt. But, whichever it was, it is quite a burden to have on your neck . . . 

 

Mrs. Batten: — You‘ll never have to worry about that. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Then the father, you‘ll remember, put a new cloak 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

36 

 

on his shoulders and put a gold ring on his finger. I thought maybe this had to do with the wealth people 

in Regina who put up $50,000 to the Liberal Party, providing they accepted him as their Leader. Then 

the father was so happy that he said, ―Let us kill the fatted calf, and eat, drink, and be merry.‖ I wasn‘t 

just sure who the fatted calf was. Maybe it was the Member for Maple Creek, or the Member for 

Melville. All we know is that the fatted calf was killed and a good time was had by all. 

 

All I would like to say to the Member for Humboldt is that it will take more than a parable out of the 

Holy Writ to explain the political somersaults of the daring young man on the flying trapeze. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this budget represents in dollar terms the basic philosophy of the CCF 

movement for improving the welfare of people, for the education of our young, for the carrying out of 

our programs, and for the economic growth of this province. A good deal has been said in this debate 

about socialism, and the Member for Saltcoats, and the Member for Humboldt have both referred to us 

on this side of the House as being materialistic socialists and Marxian socialists. Of course, Mr. Speaker, 

anyone who is fair knows that that statement is not true. The group with which I am honoured to be 

associated repudiated Marxian socialism a long time ago. If you will take the trouble to read the Regina 

Manifesto you will see that the Regina Manifesto, which was issued in this city in 1933 stated very 

clearly that we sought to build a co-operative commonwealth by means of the ballot. It says that the new 

order at which we aim is not one in which individuality will be crushed out by a system of 

regimentation. It says the social and economic transformation can be brought about by political action, 

through the election of a Government inspired by the ideal of a co-operative commonwealth and 

supported by the majority of the people. 

 

Government Members: Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that on this side of the House we have as much regard 

for things spiritual, and 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

37 

 

for the things of the mind, and for the democratic concept of life, as has any other group in this country. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — The Member for Humboldt said it was very difficult to understand, that while it‘s 

true you had an economic recession in other parts of Canada, how it could get into this socialist paradise. 

Well, we have never claimed that Saskatchewan was a socialist paradise. In the first speech which I 

made in this House, in October, 1944 at the emergency Session which we called to pass some of our 

Legislation, I said from my place here, that we did not anticipate being able to build an island of 

socialism in a sea of capitalism. I said the very best we could hope to do would be to take some of the 

democratic socialist principles and apply them to those fields of activity which lay within provincial 

jurisdiction, and thereby lay the foundation upon which ultimately we could build a co-operative 

commonwealth in Canada. That is what we have done. We‘ve taken some of the principles and applied 

them. We‘ve applied them for instance to the field of public ownership, and we‘ve said that we‘ll try and 

supply our people with power, and with gas, and with telephone service, with certain transportation 

services, and with a certain amount of insurance, and we‘ll try and make those services available to them 

at the lowest possible cost. Moreover we will apply the principle that it shall not just go to those who are 

fortunately situated, but that even marginal communities will be served out of some of the surpluses 

which we make from the more fortunate communities. We said we will apply the principle of pooling 

our resources against the disasters of life, accepting the principle that it is not each man for himself, but 

that we have a collective responsibility for one another. To further the recognition of the principle that I 

am my brother‘s keeper, we sought to set up pooling arrangements to give people a great measure of 

economic and social security. 

 

We set up the automobile insurance plan. We set up the cancer program, the mental health program, and 

the hospital insurance plan, and now we are in the process of preparing the medical care plan. This is the 

application of the principles of a co-operative society within the limits of provincial jurisdiction. We 

have never suggested 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

38 

 

that you can build a socialist society within a province. But what we have said is that some of the 

principles can be applied against the time when you have all the national as well as provincial authority 

to establish a co-operative commonwealth in this country. 

 

I want to say Mr. Speaker, that this budget will continue to expand these programs for sound economic 

growth and for human well-being. To vote for the amendment is to vote to curtail these programs, to 

reduce expenditures, and to make it less possible to expand public utilities. To vote for the main motion 

is to vote for programs which have already been accepted by the people of this province, and which have 

commended themselves to people of other provinces to the extent that a great many of them have been 

copied and emulated in other parts of Canada. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I shall vote against the 

amendment and vote for the motion. 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to join in this debate I feel somewhat at a loss 

following the Premier. I always enjoy his addresses; they remind me very often of the comic program on 

the radio. I enjoy the way in which he can turn off the comedy and turn on the emotion to try to affect 

the minds and hearts of people very quickly. One minute he can be ridiculing someone, and the next 

minute he can be talking about the brotherhood of man and brotherly love. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am quite certain that many of those who have worked in the profession that he did before 

he came into the political field would be totally ashamed of the type of performance that was put on by a 

man who reached the status of Premier of this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — You didn‘t enjoy it very much after all. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — In his remarks this afternoon, the Premier made some reference to the beliefs of those 

individuals who sit opposite. He forgot that there are others in the C.C.F. Party in this country that know 

something about socialism. He forgot that there are other leaders in the C.C.F. Party 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

39 

 

in the Dominion of Canada, who have made statements on what could be done if the C.C.F. Party gained 

control of the Dominion of Canada, and I want to read one of those statements. It was made by Mr. 

Harold Winch, and not so long ago either, and this is what he said when addressing a meeting in 

Calgary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nicholson: — In what year was that? 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — He said that the C.C.F. would scrap the British North America Act, and he went on to 

say a change is coming peacefully or not. 

 

―When we become the Government we will institute socialism immediately, and we will use the power 

of the military forces to force the opposition to obey the law, and those who defy the Government 

would be treated as criminals. If capitalism says no, then we know the answer to that, so did Russia. 

We are going to scrap the B.N.A. Act.‖ 

 

Then we go on, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Is my hon. friend aware that Mr. Winch completely repudiated that statement, that 

was a complete distortion of what he had said. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nicholson: — Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: – Order! Order! Do you have a point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nicholson: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. The hon. Member must give his source. He 

has been asked for the source, would he give the source from which he is reading? 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — The Journals of the House of Commons. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nicholson: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, may I ask the hon. 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

40 

 

Member to give his authority, he is reading something but obviously he hasn‘t told the House what he‘s 

reading from. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — It‘s a political address that was given by Mr. Winch, in the City of Calgary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nicholson: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! If you still have a point of order . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nicholson: — On a point of order. The Member has made a serious charge against a Member 

of the House of Commons. He has refused to give the authority from which he is reading. I think that the 

rule is that a Member must give his authority. 

 

Premier Douglas: — What is the date of the paper? 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Well, I‘m speaking from the address that was made by the Prime Minister of Canada, 

in the House of Commons in which he quoted the remarks of Mr. Harold Winch that were made in the 

City of Calgary. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Give us the page and the date. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Could the hon. Member give additional information? 

 

Premier Douglas: — The other day, Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, the other day you insisted that a 

Member here give the authority before he even quoted, before he even made the quotation. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Sure he made it all right. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — My friend from Moosomin is going to go and get it, and as soon as I have it I will 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

41 

 

present you with the exact date. Now, Mr. Speaker, to go on with regard to the Premier‘s address, and 

the remarks he had to make in regard to socialism. At the present time, the Party across the way is 

deciding to change its name. They aren‘t going to try to create a new party, Mr. Speaker, because 

socialism is about as old as this old world of ours. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — They can‘t take it, the radio is off. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Socialism is something old; it is not something new. So we find that when we 

consider the problems which are facing us at the present time, when certain labor leaders, not the 

workers in this country, are attempting to gain political power through their positions in the unions of 

this country, Mr. Speaker, two men who have been in the political life of this country, who have left it in 

one form or another, either through political defeat or through their own desires, and who today would 

gain further power in this country politically by gaining control of the labor unions in this country. Then 

they would have them support a political party in order to try to gain political power over the people of 

this country. If our friends want to hear some of the things that have been said by labor leaders in the 

country to the south of us, I‘ll read them one or two. The first one is by William Green, who was 

definitely one of the greatest labor leaders of his day, in the country to the south of us: 

 

―The President of the American Federation of Labor, as reported in the ‗Wholesale Groceries News‘ 

—-― 

 

Hon. Mr. Nicholson: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. The hon. Member appears to be reading from 

some document, and I think the Members of the House have a right to know from what he is reading. He 

apparently is to read something from Mr. Green . . . 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Mr. Speaker, I just told him exactly what I was reading from. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nicholson: — On a point of order. The hon. 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

42 

 

Member appears to be reading from some document, and I submit that he must tell the House from what 

he is reading. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Is this the same document you were referring to before? 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — This is my notes, Mr. Speaker, and I am reading a quotation from an address made by 

Mr. William Green, the President of the American Federation of Labor, and I am giving . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nicholson: — Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — . . . I‘m giving them all the information, the days and the date of the speech, in 

October 1943, and this is the statement that was made. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nicholson: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! Are you still explaining what you are reading from? 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — I‘m giving them exactly the data . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! The Member should be allowed to continue to explain what he is 

reading from. Have you finished your explanation? 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Yes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nicholson: — Mr. Speaker, the other day, the Minister of Education was not permitted to 

read without giving his authority. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, to require the Member for Melville to give us 

the authority from which he is reading. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I consider that he has. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nicholson: — No, Mr. Speaker, he has . . . 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

43 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — . . . The ―Wholesale Groceries News‖ of the U.S.A. October issue 1943. Now, 

certainly, Mr. Speaker, that is enough information for my friends. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nicholson: — Why didn‘t you give it in the first place? 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — I was reading that when you interrupted me. If you would be a gentleman and stay in 

your seat for a while . . . This is what Mr. William Green had to say, and I know it is not going to be 

very good for my friends across the way. I don‘t blame them for trying to raise an objection. 

 

―Individual liberty and security are inseparably associated with the vital principle of free enterprise, 

and the ownership of private property. These principles and blessings will remain with us only so long 

as we maintain the sources from which they flow. They will go with the wind and pass beyond our 

reach, and it will be difficult if not impossible to regain them, if ever there is substituted for them any 

form of socialism, communism or government regimentation. Because organized labor understands 

fully that it will suffer if ever the foundation and super-structure of free government is destroyed or 

impaired, it stands firm in its determination to protect and preserve free enterprise, and the private 

ownership of property at any cost.‖ 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, was the statement of the great labor leader, in the country to the south of us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nicholson: — He has been dead how long? 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Now, Mr. Speaker, when we turn to what the Premier wanted to know, and he stated 

that in the Regina Manifesto, that the party didn‘t believe in socialism, as we are terming it over here. 

Well, what is said about Marxian socialism, from anything I have ever read, Mr. Speaker, the only 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

44 

 

thing that is any different from Marxian socialism or any other type, is that under Marxian socialism, 

force was going to be used to put it into effect. 

 

I have already read one statement which shows the intention of the group across the way, or at least 

some of their Members, as to their indication of what they would do if they gained the type of power 

they have to gain – of course they are not going to do it here in Saskatchewan – no Federal Government 

would permit any such thing to happen, and if they ever did try to put their socialism into effect here, 

they would be stopped by a Federal Government. So we all know that the only way that socialism can be 

put into effect, as they say across the way, is by their gaining control of the Government of this country, 

of the army and of the police force, so that they can force their beliefs and their ideas on the people of 

this country. 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — What did they do in Great Britain? What did they do in England? 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Here is a question that was asked in a pamphlet on the position by the C.C.F. Party 

themselves: ―Does this political party consider that this objective so stated, gives to us a mandate to 

bring into operation socialism if elected?‖ The answer that was given was ―yes‖. Then they go on with 

many other questions, but I think that‘s answer enough. 

 

One day my friends across the way are socialists, the next day they aren‘t socialists, and I think it‘s 

about time the Premier across the way who has tried to state that socialism for some reason or other 

stands for the brotherhood of man. Well, Mr. Speaker, I am quite certain that as far as many in this 

country are concerned, the extreme form of socialism that we find in the world today certainly doesn‘t 

believe in the brotherhood of man. 

 

Now, in the remarks of the Premier, and of the Minister of Health, reference was made to questions of 

health, and the question of social welfare, and I think that there should be some explanation in dealing 

with health services. I am going to congratulate the Minister for being a little fairer than he usually is on 

occasions of this type, and even to the Premier himself. I think, after all, some of our addresses in this 

House have begun 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

45 

 

to bear fruit. They realize that the people of Saskatchewan don‘t believe most of the fairy tales that are 

told to them from day to day to this Legislature and around the country by the Premier and members of 

his Government. Most of the people of this province have come to the point where they no longer 

believe their statements, because of statements such as the one that was read into the records of this 

House the other day by the Member for Arm River, the address that Mr. Coldwell made in Unity during 

the last election campaign, in which he made this statement. He covered the history of the health 

services which had been instigated by the C.C.F. in Saskatchewan, such as the Anti-Tuberculosis 

League. No greater lie was ever stated by any man in public life in this province, than to take credit for 

the work of the people that have worked behind the name of the Saskatchewan Anti-Tuberculosis 

League ever since 1911. This year we are celebrating their 50th anniversary, and the Minister of Health 

across the way, and the Premier, last year when it was coming close to an election, got up in this House 

and forgot all about the rest of the people of the province, and took credit for the fact that they had 

instituted tuberculosis care. 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — That is utter nonsense. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — They took credit for the fact that they had instituted free cancer care; took credit for 

the fact that they had instituted hospital insurance. Hospital insurance! It wasn‘t hospital insurance; last 

year it was free hospitalization. Of course, since the last election it‘s not quite as free as it was before. 

Before the last election my family and myself paid $35.00 for it, and this year we paid $48.00. It is not 

quite as free as it was before the election last year. Our friends across the way like to refer to all these 

programs as free, something they are giving to the people for nothing, and that‘s the statements that they 

used, particularly on the budget. They are not quite so free with them in this House, Mr. Speaker, 

because they realize it‘s going to be brought home to them that they are trying to take credit for the 

work. 

 

Then I hear some of my friends across the way talk about co-operation, Mr. Speaker. We have been 

fortunate ever since the formation of the Province of Saskatchewan, and even before then, in having a 

group of people who have worked together to build up the services for the people of 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

46 

 

this province, and I don‘t think it brings any credit to any Government in this province to take the credit 

for the hard work that has had to be put into many of the projects that we have in this province at the 

present time in order to make them possible. But to this Government, nothing is sacred, Mr. Speaker, 

nothing in this province is sacred. They‘ll take the credit for everything that the people have done, if 

they can possibly do it, and that‘s why I say that I want to congratulate the Minister this afternoon for 

the fact that he did indicate that someone besides this Government was providing the money to build the 

hospitals of this province. This is one of the first times he has ever given credit to someone else besides 

this Government, in spite of the fact that it‘s the work of the local people, and the taxes of the local 

people that go towards building the hospitals in this province, and have gone towards that purpose 

before they went into office, and since they came into office. The hard work and co-operation of our 

local people in the last few years, along with the assistance of local, Federal and Provincial 

Governments. It wasn‘t very long ago they used to forget the Federal Government was even contributing 

dollar for dollar. 

 

Now, of course, the Minister states this afternoon that he has a new program. He says that he is going to 

encourage the hospitals through this new program, to go on a pay-as-you-go basis. Now, when I heard 

both him and the Premier speak this afternoon about this pay-as-you-go basis, I thought that they had 

better to go the Minister in charge of the Power Corporation; they seem to have two values. They think 

that the hospitals should work on a pay-as-you-go basis; they think that the Government, or so they state 

should go on a pay-as-you-go basis; but they think the Crown Corporations, or public utilities, should 

work on a different basis. Well, I don‘t know, Mr. Speaker, how you could put together two different 

policies with one Government, and then state that this is planned; this is the type of planning you can 

expect from a socialist government. 

 

As far as I‘m concerned Mr. Speaker, there has been very little planning, put into this budget or into the 

program, that the various Ministers have presented to us here today. I had the Minister in charge of the 

Power Corporation, tell me last night, that he hadn‘t decided on his program until the night before. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, if that‘s government planning, deciding on your 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

47 

 

program the night before you come out with it, even after the budget is written, then come to this 

Legislature and present it, if that‘s socialist planning, I don‘t think the people of this province want to 

see very much more of that type of planning going on. 

 

Surely with all the experts he has in his Department and in his Power Corporation, he could find 

somebody who could draw up a program so that he could tell the people of this province what‘s going to 

happen to them over a period of six months. I have written to the Minister now for a period of six 

months trying to find what his program was going to be, and this is the same kind of answer that I got all 

the time. 

 

People in various communities throughout this province, Mr. Speaker, have to make plans when gas is 

going to be brought into their community. They have to make plans when power is going to be brought 

into their community, and surely with all the planning that we hear about from the other side of the 

House, with regard to the installation of power and gas, surely the Minister can find someone in his 

Department smart enough to draw him up a plan so that he can tell the people six months ahead of time, 

whether they are going to get gas or whether they are going to get power, so that they can prepare for it, 

so that they can put aside the money that they might need to make the changeover to natural gas, and the 

changeover to power, or to get the facilities that will be needed if gas and power were put in, in their 

various communities. 

 

So I say to the Minister that with the Economic Planning and Advisory Board and with all the experts in 

the various branches of Government, I would suggest that another year he have his plans made up six 

months ahead of time, so the people of this province will know what his plan is, and so that they can 

plan also in order that they can all co-operate together to bring about the greatest advantages to the 

people of this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to return just for a moment, to statements that were made by the Minister of 

Health. During the last two or three weeks, I have placed some questions on the Order Paper of the 

House asking for information with regards to resignations of the staff in the Psychiatric Branch of the 

Department of Public Health, located in the City of Yorkton. Every answer has always been 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

48 

 

that there have been no such resignations. Well, Mr. Speaker, there seems to be some difference in view, 

as between the Minister and one of his staff in the City of Yorkton. Three weeks ago speaking in the 

Town of Lemberg an employee of the Psychiatric Branch of the mental health staff for the City of 

Yorkton, stated publicly that five members of the staff, including himself, had tendered their 

resignations to the Minister. He stated that he had agreed to stay on for six weeks until such time I 

suppose, as the Department was able to make other arrangements and other plans. 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. At no time have I received any letter stating the 

resignation. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I believe that is not a point of order, it is an explanation that you could . . . 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — What was the statement of the Minister? 

 

Premier Douglas: — He stated that no such resignations had been received. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Well I would state then, that if his staff are going around the province, and stating 

that they have all resigned, and making statements of that type, that the Minister had better look into it. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Did the hon. Member hear them make this statement or is this second hand? 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — This came from at least four people who attended the meeting, which was a Home 

and School Meeting, and I don‘t think the particular gentleman had any objection to it being used 

publicly or he wouldn‘t be making these statements. So I am going to state here that this more or less 

bears out the story that he told that night, but the Minister has denied that and I will have to accept his 

statements in this House that he didn‘t receive any letter of resignation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there comes from the press in Yorkton and in Regina a statement that Dr. Frederick 

Grumberg, who is in charge of the Psychiatric Branch at 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

49 

 

Yorkton, has resigned because of the policy of the Government in not proceeding with the construction 

of the mental centre in the city of Yorkton, and I believe that he has good reason to resign from his 

position in protest against the actions of the Government. Here in Saskatchewan, where we have a so-

called Saskatchewan plan, we are one of the last provinces in Canada actually to accept and really start 

doing something about this co-called Saskatchewan plan. Even in the statement that was made by Dr. 

Lawson in Yorkton, he indicated that this was the position, and that the Saskatchewan plan was no 

longer that because Saskatchewan had never adopted it, or never really tried to put it into effect. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that when the Minister spoke here this afternoon, with this resignation before him, 

that he should have had some statement to make to the people of this province, with that report in the 

press, as to what the position is in his Department with regard to staff of the Psychiatric Branch of the 

Department of Public Health in the province of Saskatchewan. I don‘t think things are nearly as healthy, 

even as these reports indicate, and I think before long you are going to hear further from employees of 

that branch. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, to clear the request up of my friends across the way as to where the statement came 

from, here is the copy of the Debates of the House of Commons of Canada, Session 1960, Volume 4, the 

statement by Mr. Winch, as read by the present Prime Minister of Canada, and the statement was made, 

if the gentlemen want it, November 10, 1943, by Mr. Winch, in the City of Calgary. This is the 

statement made by Mr. Diefenbaker during a debate in the House of Commons and he wasn‘t called to 

order at that time, before he proceeded to read to the House the statement that had been made by Mr. 

Winch on that occasion. So I hope that that will clear up that particular question for my friends across 

the way. 

 

Premier Douglas: — What‘s the Hansard date? I didn‘t catch it. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — May 30, 1960. It was page 4330. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, to return to the Department of Health, I want to say in closing this part of my 

address, that the hospitals of this province do not quite bear out 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

50 

 

the statement by the Minister of Health that they were properly consulted with regard to his actions on 

September 1st, last, when he put into effect the new grant formula. In fact, I have here the brief that was 

presented to the Cabinet of this province stating that a commitment that had been made to them to seek 

their advice before making a final decision after the first meeting was held and this matter was 

discussed, that the consultation never took place. Of course, I don‘t know whether the Minister is going 

to deny that the Hospital Association are correct in their statements that they weren‘t consulted by the 

board on this particular date. 

 

Then I want to remind the Minister that his actions aren‘t quite as holy as they look on the surface. 

Certainly it would be nice to have more of a capital grant for construction purposes when a hospital is 

being built, but the Minister realizes as well as I do, and he has tried to state it in this House, that we 

have the best hospital accommodations, and I have heard him say it myself, in the Dominion of Canada. 

I am quite certain that many of the hospitals that have been built in the last twenty or twenty-five years 

are not going to be built again. I know that places have been turned down in this province for a hospital 

that would like to have a hospital, because they have been told that there is not a need for a hospital in 

that location. I am going to ask the Minister where all this money is going to be spent, that he is talking 

about at the present time. I don‘t believe that by the time he gets through that program he will spend 

anywhere near the type of money he mentioned here this afternoon to this House, because of the fact 

that the construction definitely will not come about for the next few years. 

 

But this is not the whole story. When it comes down to the question of principal payment, the Minister 

says he has accepted the payment of the principal payments of the debenture debt of the hospitals in this 

province, but at the same time he also states that he has taken away the rights of the hospitals to use the 

depreciation cost as part of their operating costs under the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan, and the 

figures that have been handed down in the last few days by the Minister definitely indicate that if this is 

the case, and the Minister shakes his head that it is, the amount that will be reduced from the hospital 

cost of operation, through taking away their right to use depreciation as a cost of operation, that amount 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

51 

 

will be larger than the total benefit they will receive from the Government taking over the principal 

payments for debenture capital debt of the hospitals in this province. So, in spite of what the Premier 

said out in B.C., when he was out there campaigning in the election last year – he went and saw the 

press out in British Columbia, and he told the press the people of Saskatchewan were going to be 

relieved of their property tax for the purpose of constructing hospitals and operating hospitals in this 

province. Well, Mr. Speaker, I‘m afraid that if conditions are as indicated in the reports that are handed 

down to us, the costs are going to increase, the property taxes are going to increase for the purpose of 

operating and constructing our hospitals in this province, instead of decreasing. 

 

Then we come to the question of Social Welfare. With regard to Social Welfare we have statements here 

from the Premier this afternoon. I think this is another place that he should indicate that there is co-

operation between his Government and others. After all, the Provincial Government in this province is 

only paying 50% of the total cost of social aid. The Federal Government pays 41%, and the balance is 

paid by the municipal people in this province, and yet these people get up and say look at what we are 

paying for social aid. They don‘t give any credit to the Federal Government. They don‘t give any credit 

or very much to the municipalities. But it‘s the C.C.F. Party that‘s doing everything for the people of 

this province in regard to social aid. Some of the Members have even got up in the debate and claimed 

they were responsible for Old Age Pensions. Well, I never heard of the C.C.F. prior to 1933, in fact, 

nobody else did, Mr. Speaker. There wasn‘t a C.C.F. party until 1933, but strange as it may seem, the 

Old Age Pension Act came into effect in 1927. Of course, our friends across the way would like to leave 

the impression that there was one man in Ottawa, one man who was responsible for the Old Age Pension 

Act, because of the fact that somebody showed a little appreciation to him and wrote him a letter and 

thanked him for his assistance. In 1927, when the Old Age Pension Act was passed, the Liberal Party in 

Canada had a clear majority in the House of Commons and they didn‘t need anyone‘s help in order to 

put the Old Age Pension Legislation into effect. 

 

And so I say here, Mr. Speaker, with regard to all our social aid programs, whether they are disabled 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

52 

 

pensions, whether they are blind pensions, whether they are old age pensions, whether it‘s our pension 

for those between the ages of 65 and 70, none of those were inaugurated by the Government that we 

have here in the Province of Saskatchewan today. Not one of them, Mr. Speaker. Not one of the 

auxiliary pensions came into being until the Federal Government in Canada said, ―If you accept part of 

the responsibility for this plan, we will inaugurate it to the Dominion of Canada‖, and so a Federal 

Liberal Government put into effect disability pensions, blind pensions, pensions for those between the 

age of 65 and 70, and they also put in the full pension in 1952, the present Old Age Pension for 

everyone over 70 years of age. This C.C.F. Party can accept no credit for any one of those programs that 

was put into effect in the Dominion of Canada, or in this province. So I say to the Premier, that I hope 

that in the future that if they truly believe – they talk a lot about co-operation – and when they stand up 

and relate these programs to the people of the province, whether it‘s on the hustings, or whether it‘s here 

in the Legislature, that they will show some of that spirit of co-operation, some of that spirit which will 

give credit not only to the people of this province, but to others for the things that they have done for our 

people. 

 

I can read philosophy too, but I am not going to take the time this afternoon, but I could read to you the 

philosophy that I believe in, and I am going to do it before the Session is over. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can assure the Premier of this province, that in relationship to the services of health and 

social welfare, or any of the other policies that have been laid down in this budget debate, there is 

nothing that has been done on any better scale, than was done by Liberal Government prior to 1929, 

when they were in a comparative period of prosperity. If we look at the budget of 1925-26, we find that 

education had 35% of the total budget of that particular date, and if we take the services that the Premier 

spoke about a few moments ago, the three services of Health, Social Welfare, and Education, almost 

exactly the same amount was spent in that year by a Liberal Government on those three services as is 

being spent in this present budget. So when this Government here tries to take credit for the fact that 

they are doing something new or something different, I think they had better look a little bit further back 

than going back to the days of depression and war, in order to find their history of the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

53 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am going to support the amendment, and I will not support the budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must draw to the attention of the House, that the Hon. Minister is about to exercise 

his rights in closing the debate, and anyone who wishes to speak in this debate, must do so at the present 

time. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to make a few concluding remarks to 

the budget debate. I want first of all to thank those who have been good enough to take part in the 

discussion about the budget. This doesn‘t mean of course, as is obvious I think, that I agree with a great 

deal of what has been said from some parts of the House. Nevertheless, I appreciate the fact that people 

have taken part. 

 

I must admit, Mr. Speaker, that I had no idea when, just a few weeks ago, the Premier and I struggled 

with you to get you to accept that Chair, that the Opposition would struggle quite so long and loudly to 

keep you from moving out of it as they have done in this debate. 

 

I want particularly to thank those Members on this side of the Legislature who have taken part and 

assisted in the interpretation of the budget, and in cancelling out remarks which have been made by 

members of the Opposition. I particularly say ‗thank you‘ for those comments, of generous reference to 

myself. 

 

The remarks that have been made from this side of the House have made my position at this moment 

easier and at the same time, more difficult. The remarks have made it easier, because, after all, nearly 

everything that is necessary to have been said, has already been said. The ground was covered 

completely and intensely as well, by the Premier in his remarks earlier this afternoon, and in the remarks 

of other persons during the week. My position is more difficult then, in that it is necessary to say 

something without being repetitious. 

 

I thought it would be useful, Mr. Speaker, if 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

54 

 

we should first of all just take a look at the general tenure of the remarks of the Opposition during the 

debate, and try to establish what I suppose might be called a sort of composite picture of the Opposition 

as indicated by their comments during the debate. Now here are the remarks, I‘ll just draw them together 

a little bit. Part of the picture we get from their remarks was the one which was predictable, and on 

which there has already been comment. They, first of all, are opposed to the Government collecting the 

amount of money which the budget suggests we need to collect this year. They would reduce that 

amount of money considerably, since they are not in favour of the increased sources of revenue which 

are being proposed, and are not in favour of some other existing sources of revenue. So it is safe to say 

that they would decrease the amount of money we have to spend by some $4½ to $5 millions. They are 

also opposed to the province‘s borrowing, so presumably, they would decrease still further, by limiting 

our borrowing, the amount of money that we would have to provide services. At the same time, nearly 

all of them at least, seem willing to add certain expenditures to the Government. Although, there are 

some of them who have indicated that they wouldn‘t want to vote against everything, but would like to 

vote in favor of some parts of the budget. 

 

For example, the Member for Moosomin, I believe, indicated in interchange across the House last 

evening, that he would like to vote for that little part which brings more gas to his Constituency. I 

presume that the Member for Melville would not want to vote against that part that is going to bring 

some gas to his Constituency – commercial gas in this case, Mr. Speaker, and more useful. The Member 

from Pelly, I am sure would want to support that part of the expenditure which takes a system of gas into 

a part of the province from which his Constituency can be served later on. 

 

With regard to highways, I am sure that the Member from Arm River, and the Member from Wilkie, and 

the Member from Estevan, and the Member from Turtleford, and the Member from Maple Creek would 

all want to support that portion of the budget, which brings better highway services to them. I am sure 

that they will all want to support that portion of the budget which extends more power to rural areas 

throughout the province, and that which develops our generating stations to the point that we will be 

able to 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

55 

 

supply with a very steadily, and gratifyingly so, increasing consumption of power throughout the 

province. The Member from Athabasca might even be willing to support that part of the budget, 

announced by the Minister in charge of the Power Corporation last night, which takes a power line into 

the northern part of the province at Beauval and Ile a la Crosse, costing some half a million dollars. 

 

So we have this kind of picture, first of all, by the Opposition saying ―Don‘t use as much money (by 

decreasing taxation, and by borrowing less), but at the same time spend more.‖ This is an old story, as 

has been pointed out previously on many occasions . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . Power Corporation and so on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — . . . and points out the contradiction which is again apparent within the ranks of the 

Liberal Party. So they have a bias it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, first of all, against the Government doing 

those things, which are necessary in order to do some of the things which they suggest ought to be done. 

 

Secondly they have indicated a bias against public ownership. The Premier has already referred to this 

this afternoon, I need only mention it in order to add to my composite picture, against public ownership, 

even of utilities such as power and gas. There have been remarks – interjections of the Leader of the 

Opposition, we had the remarks from the Member from Estevan, who had great praise for the rural 

electrification system in the Province of Alberta, which is of course, under private ownership there. 

 

So it seems fair to assume that in this composite picture, we must realize that not only would such things 

as the Insurance Office, and other Crown enterprises go out the window, but to some extent also, some 

parts of the power and gas utilities. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — That is not our intention when we form the Government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — I‘ll put it this way Mr. Speaker: Based on 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

56 

 

the remarks of the Members of the Opposition, one must assume, that had they been in power in this 

province, then there would not have been the development of power and gas as a public utility which 

there has been. There is no other conclusion which can be arrived at . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — There is development in every province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — . . . if we accept them as being sincere, as being honest with regard to their 

statement about the borrowing of money. They can have it one way or the other – they can attest to 

absolute dishonesty, disbelief in their statements about the amounts of money that should be borrowed, 

or they can accept the fact that if they had been in Government, then there would not have been the 

development, under public ownership, of power and gas – it is one or the other they can accept. 

 

Secondly in the matter of this composite picture, of the Opposition, some at least have certainly 

indicated a bias against the co-operative movement. We have the Member from Rosthern, or perhaps it 

was from Gravelbourg, I think from Rosthern, who suggested that the Department should be abolished – 

Am I wrong? – the Member who suggested that the Department of Co-operatives should be abolished, 

that it could all be handled by the Department of Agriculture, indicating of course, an entire lack of 

appreciation as to the scope and meaning of the co-operative movement. More particularly, we had 

yesterday the words from the Member from Athabasca in which, in describing the fish marketing co-

operative, he had recourse to such words as being ―a subtle and a vicious kind of organization.‖ These 

are rather harsh words, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, to be used to this organization, when you take a look at 

the members of the Board of Directors, and I want to put the names of those members on the records. 

The chairman is the Minister of Co-operatives, the Hon. Mr. Turnbull; Mr. Robson, an employee of 

Federated Co-operatives; Mr. Les Stutt, previously Director of Field Services for the Wheat Pool; Mr. 

Brean Melvin, secretary of Co-operative Life Insurance; Mr. C.H. Whiting, a well known farmer and co-

operative supporter in the Province of Saskatchewan, formerly chairman of the Board of Governors of 

the University; Mr. Preston of the Government Finance Office, a government employee; Mr. Johnson, 

the manager of the Co-operative Credit Society; Mr. Larson, a citizen from 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

57 

 

northern Saskatchewan; Mr. McDonald, an employee of the Provincial Government; and Mr. Kuziak; 

together with some associate directors, Mr. Carrier and Mr. Chatfield, who comes from the ranks of the 

fishermen themselves. These are the people, who in the words of the Member from Athabasca are 

directing an organization, which is subtle, and which is vicious insofar as the fishermen in northern 

Saskatchewan are concerned. I say it is impossible to come to a conclusion, other than the fact, that there 

is a bias against the full-fledged development of the co-operative movement on the part of a number of 

Members. 

 

Fourthly, we have again the indication of the bias against labour organizations. We have the Leader of 

the Opposition interjecting, when the Minister of Public Works was speaking, something with regard to 

Mr. Hoffa. You link this up with the remarks of the Member who has just taken his seat with regard to 

political activity and link it up with the remarks of some others with regard to the proposed New Party 

generally. It is rather interesting to note that Mr. Hoffa is one of the few leaders of large trade union 

organizations who has so strongly advised trade unionists not to take part in the political party. He too 

thinks, they should be political neutralists as my friend the Member for Melville was arguing this 

afternoon. 

 

I submit, we had also from the Member for Gravelbourg, who strongly endorsed the letter which was 

circulated just recently from a Mr. Ilman of Bradwell, suggesting that it should be an unfair labour 

practice if a trade union which was using the check-off should become affiliated in any way with a 

political party. So I submit, we have a bias against the full-fledged development of the trade union party 

by the Members opposite. 

 

Finally, of course, in addition to being against these things, I must conclude also, that they are solidly 

against sin. I do this not because of what the Member from Humboldt said when she was speaking, so 

much as the way in which she delivered her lecture to the Members of the Government. This attitude of 

sort of virginal virtuosity with which she told the Government exactly what we were, in her opinion, and 

exactly what we weren‘t. You know, I don‘t need to go into the story about the Prodigal Son, because 

that has already been done so effectively, this afternoon, but there was one thing missing from the hon. 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

58 

 

Member‘s story. You may recall, Mr. Speaker, that she started off by saying, ―Now, to begin with, I 

didn‘t think very much of the Leader of the Opposition‖, and she went on to say why, and then she 

indicated that she was going to tell us that she had changed, because her conscience was pricked by 

reading about the Prodigal Son. But, she never got around to telling us in the end, just what her position 

had changed to. So we‘re left in the dark, as to whether contrary Mary is still contrary, or whether she is 

just contrite and is now co-operative. It is difficult to tell from what she didn‘t say in that particular part 

of her story. 

 

I submit, Mr. Speaker, that you have there, adding together the parts of the story as it was unfolded by 

successive speakers over there, a picture of the group which sits to your left, in this House. 

 

I want to turn briefly to the opposition which has been expressed, with regard to the increase in tax rates 

proposed in the budget. The increase . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — On a point of order, I wonder if the Minister would permit an interjection. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is this a point of order you have? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Yes. My understanding was that we had a party agreement to vote at 5:00 o‘clock. 

Now has that gone by the board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, if I may speak to the point of order. I think the Standing Orders say 

that the vote must be taken half an hour before the time of ordinary adjournment. The time of ordinary 

adjournment, on Friday night is at 10:00 o‘clock, so that the vote is to be taken half an hour before 

10:00. May I say by that, that I have no intention of speaking till 10:00 o‘clock. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — That is so, but we had a gentleman‘s agreement. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — On a point of order on this subject; I was told that 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

59 

 

I could have half an hour this afternoon, and I stuck by that agreement honestly. I could have continued 

and have said much more than I did, but I stuck by that request of the two whips to carry that out, and I 

spoke my half hour and I sat down. If I had known that this double-cross . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I cannot entertain points of order on whips‘ agreements . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — My hon. friend jumps to conclusions about dishonesty. There ought to be a little 

more restraint in his language. The idea was a vote would be taken prior to 5:30. Under the rules of the 

House a vote does not have to be taken till 9:30. The idea was that if the hon. Member from Melville left 

the Provincial Treasurer time to close the debate, we‘d have the whole thing cleaned up by 5:30, and 

there is nothing to prevent us doing that. The vote will not take long. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, as I read the Standing Orders, either the vote has to be taken now, or it 

cannot be taken till tonight. Well I‘ll read it to you. Half an hour before ordinary closing time . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — The ordinary closing is . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — If the Provincial Treasurer is prepared to . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! My understanding of the matter is that provided the hon. Member closes in 

time, the vote can be taken at anytime before 10:00. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, my understanding of the informal arrangement, was that I was to take 

a half an hour, and I haven‘t nearly approached that yet, and I have no intention of taking longer than 

that, and if so by only a few minutes. If someone will tell me what time I started, I will quit when the 

half hour is up. 

 

May I mention the increase in the gas tax? It was 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

60 

 

pointed out to us by the Member from Humboldt that a good Government would have been reducing 

taxes at this time, and it was pointed out by the Member from Maple Creek that the only need for this 

was because of something that the Provincial Government had done, or had not done, during the 

preceding years. Well it‘s rather interesting in the light of those statements just to remind you again of 

what has taken place in other provinces of Canada, either within the last month, or within very recent 

months at least. The Premier reviewed them – British Columbia, gasoline tax up 3¢; Alberta, gasoline 

tax up 2¢; Ontario, a new 3% sales tax; Nova Scotia, gasoline tax up 2¢ or 3¢ and a sales tax increase of 

2% to a total of 5%; New Brunswick, an increase in gasoline tax of 3¢ a gallon, and an increase in diesel 

to the differential of 5¢ over and above that. These are not CCF Governments. These are not 

Governments in which there should have been, according to the definitions of the hon. Members across 

the way, any particular problems, but all of them have found the same difficulty, and found themselves 

faced with the same necessity of finding new revenues in order to face their problems during this year. I 

want to have reference to what happened in the province of Quebec, within very recent months. The 

province of Quebec is one which retained the right to establish its own taxation on private and corporate 

incomes. On January 1st, 1961, the tax on corporate profits in the province of Quebec went up to 12% 

by 2% more than it was the year previous. That means corporations in Quebec are being taxed 2% on 

their profits higher than they are in Saskatchewan or other provinces under the agreement. Similarly on 

January 1st, 1961, in the province of Quebec, there is a change with regard to the taxable income levels. 

Whereas previously the exemption was $1500 for a single person, and $3000 for a married person, on 

January 1st, 1961, the exemption is $1000 for a single person, and $2000 for a married person, and some 

very small increase in rates as well. 

 

The only reason I make these particular remarks, Mr. Speaker, is to emphasize again the point I made in 

the budget address when I said hon. Members will notice that the present financial problem is due not so 

much to inherent difficulties peculiar to the Saskatchewan economy as to the massive problems of the 

whole Canadian economy. I think it is important that Members of the Opposition as well as Members of 

the Government understand this. I think, furthermore, it is important that the Federal Government 

understand this, as it has been pointed out over and over again to the 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

61 

 

Federal Government that the result of not improving tax sharing agreements, is to force the provinces 

into increases in sales tax and increases in gasoline taxes which are in general more regressive than the 

taxes on income and corporate profits. 

 

I want to take just a very few minutes longer to have reference to some individual statements that were 

made during the debate. When the Member for Moosomin got up to give his major talk on the budget, I 

had just made an announcement with regard to Saskatchewan Savings Bonds. The Member from 

Moosomin welcomed the announcement, but then searching around for something to say which 

wouldn‘t be too nice, he said, ―I only wish you‘d give the same interest rate to Saskatchewan investors 

that you give to the coupon clippers in eastern Canada.‖ Well, of course, he ignores entirely, as must 

have been very evident, the fact that this is a different kind of a loan. It is first of all for a period of ten 

years; secondly, it is guaranteed at par value; and thirdly, it is redeemable at any time a person wants to 

redeem it. On that kind of a basis, obviously, it is a very good deal, interest-wise. I think he might have, 

at the opening of a sales campaign been good enough to have refrained from making comments like that 

over the radio until he had studied it out, and found out what he was actually saying. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I still don‘t agree with you . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — . . . Demonstrating then, of course, that he doesn‘t understand at all the situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I repeat again, the fact that the people of Saskatchewan have responded exceptionally 

well to that loan, the latest information which I have is that applications to date amount to something in 

the neighborhood of $9,900,000, it will probably be something over $10 million. 

 

I want to return to just one of the remarks, because to some extent it was typical of a few of the errors in 

criticizing the budget. This is a remark made by the Member from Athabasca yesterday who, in his zeal 

to search out something bad to say, said, ―Why the amount provided for administration of education in 

northern Saskatchewan is going down.‖ Well it‘s true Mr. Speaker, the amount for 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

62 

 

administration in northern Saskatchewan, in the budget estimates, is some $3,000 less than last year. 

This of course, is just to do with the administration of the Northern Education Office, a fact, Mr. 

Speaker, which I suggest the hon. Member knew full well when he was standing in his place. Now, of 

course, the test of what‘s happening is not what is spent in the office, but the amount that is going to be 

spent in operating the schools. When I check on this, I find that in 1960-61, an amount of $433,000, 

roughly, was expected to be spent, and that in this year some $509,000 is expected to be spent. I think 

that one should be able to expect, particularly from a Member like the one from Athabasca who is 

intimately connected with what is going on in education, that he would have known better when he 

made that statement. That he would have known it was a misleading statement. 

 

May I take just a minute with regard to the total picture of that situation in northern Saskatchewan over a 

period of years. In 1955-56 there were fifty-one teachers in the area, not counting Uranium City, or 

Creighton Village or Town as it is now. In 1961-62, which is six years later, there will be eighty-one 

teachers in that area, an increase of some 60%. In 1955-56, the expenditure was in the neighborhood of 

$206,000; in 1961-62 it will be in the neighborhood of $509,000 – almost twice as much in a period of 

five or six years. 

 

Now the other two remarks that I want to make Mr. Speaker, have to do with one comment of the 

financial critic of the Opposition with regard to the debt of the Province of Saskatchewan. He had 

reference to the funded debt and pointed out that according to a statement of the Dominion Bureau of 

Statistics, the funded debt in Saskatchewan was second high among the Canadian provinces. This of 

course, is correct, insofar as the position is revealed by looking just at the funded debt. But, you know, if 

he had wanted to describe the whole picture, he would have read the rest of the page, because in the 

Table immediately below this, Table No. 2 – Indirect Funded Debt, which are guaranteed bonds, 

guaranteed by the Provincial Government. In fact there is little if any, substantial difference between 

debt which is obtained by direct borrowing, or that which is obtained and which is guaranteed. For 

example, the Ontario Hydro Commission finances much of its capital expenditure by means of a 

guarantee from the Provincial Government. Now there is no difference insofar as the people of Ontario 

are concerned, insofar 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

63 

 

as that debt is concerned, and insofar as the debt on the people of the Province of Saskatchewan by 

money which is fully borrowed. If he had added those two together, then he would have found that 

Ontario had the most debt, Quebec the second, British Columbia, which supposedly is debt-free would 

be third, Saskatchewan would be fourth in the list, and then Manitoba almost as much as Saskatchewan. 

But, even this doesn‘t tell the whole picture, because you will realize that this debt for Saskatchewan 

includes the cost for installing and distributing natural gas. This debt for Manitoba does not include that 

cost. That is a private enterprise debt. As a matter of fact Saskatchewan is the only province of the entire 

group, which has under public ownership, gas, power and telephones, which has all three of them. This, 

of course, is the reason why our funded debt will appear to be somewhat higher. 

 

The other comment I want to make was one made by the Member from Pelly. He had reference to the 

fact that the interest rate paid on Saskatchewan bonds was second highest in all the provinces of Canada. 

Well again the Dominion Bureau of Statistics is, of course, an organization which produces accurate 

information, but it presumes when it produces it that people will read the information accurately before 

they start to use it. The Table to which my hon. friend from Pelly referred was a Table setting out the 

coupon rate on the various borrowings of the particular Provincial Governments, and averaging this out. 

Now the coupon rate, of course, doesn‘t begin to tell the story about the actual interest cost involved at 

all. As one looks over that Table you‘ll find that some provinces have borrowed a considerable amount 

of money at 2% or at 3%. Of course, they did, but what they got when they borrowed this $100 at a 2% 

coupon was not $100, but $75 or $78, $80 or something like that, so that the actual interests rate bears 

really no direct resemblance to the Table from which the hon. Member from Pelly had reference, and by 

which he sought to suggest that Saskatchewan was paying an extraordinarily high interest rate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the time has arrived I think, when the full consequence of those nine little words, that I 

spoke some ten days ago –―Mr. Speaker, I move that you do now leave the Chair‖ – must be fully 

counted. I think it will be assumed that I at least am not going to support the amendment, and that I at 

least, am going to support the motion. I have reasonable confidence that it will be possible to obtain a 

majority who stand with me on that motion. 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

64 

 

The question being put on the amendment, it was negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

Yeas – 13 

 

Messieurs 

 

Thatcher Batten (Mrs.) Barrie 

McDonald Danielson McFarlane 

Gardiner Foley Guy 

Klein Coderre Snedker 

Gallagher   

 

Nays – 31 

 

Messieurs 

 

Douglas Dewhurst Williams 

Brockelbank Lloyd Walker 

Nollet Kuziak Cooper (Mrs.) 

Strum (Mrs.) Davies Willis 

Brown Thurston Blakeney 

Erb Nicholson Turnbull 

Stone Whelan Thibault 

Kramer Johnson Meakes 

Snyder Stevens Kluzak 

Dahlman Perkins Peterson 

Broten   

 

The question being put on the motion, it was agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

Yeas – 31 

 

Messieurs 

 

 

Douglas Dewhurst Williams 

Brockelbank Lloyd Walker 

Nollet Kuziak Cooper (Mrs.) 

Strum (Mrs.) Davies Willis 

Brown Thurston Blakeney 

Erb Nicholson Turnbull 

Stone Whelan Thibault 

Kramer Johnson Meakes 

Snyder Stevens Kluzak 

Dahlman Perkins Peterson 

Broten   

 

  



 

March 10, 1961 

 

65 

 

Nays — 13 

 

Messieurs 

 

Thatcher Batten (Mrs.) Barrie 

McDonald Danielson McFarlane 

Gardiner Foley Guy 

Klein Coderre Snedker 

Gallagher   

 

QUESTION RE HOUSE BUSINESS 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Before you leave the Chair, might I direct a question to the Premier as to what 

business will come up on Monday? 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I think we will move ahead with Legislation first, because it often 

happens that when you get into committee and find something isn‘t satisfactory, the wording should be 

redrafted, and things of that sort. If we deal with Legislation first, that gives us time to re-draft it while 

we are in estimates and have it brought back. I would like to go at Legislation if that‘s agreeable to the 

House, adjourned debates and second readings. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I wonder also if the Premier could indicate, which department of estimates will come 

up first. If not tonight, possibly he could tell us Monday, so we‘d have some idea. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I think we‘ll try to do that, let the Members know if we can each day on 

adjournment, what Departments are coming up. 

 

Mr. Speaker than left the Chair (Committee of Supply). 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:35 o‘clock p.m. 


