



















































Hansard: March 06, 1961


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session – Fourteenth Legislature 

18th Day 

 

Monday, March 6, 1961 

 

The House met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed from Friday, March 3, 1961, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd. 

 

That Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair, (the House to go into Committee of Supply) 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull (Minister of Co-operation and Co-operative Development): 

 

Mr. Speaker, in continuing the remarks that I was making on Friday last, I first of all would like to 

congratulate the Member for Turtleford in being here, and I know it will be with a great deal of 

satisfaction that he finds himself seated, although not on the Government side of the House, at least with 

the Opposition. We had hoped, of course, that Mr. Wooff would have been the successful candidate, but, 

of course, we are quite willing to accept the results as they are. I hope that in the next few years, while I 

am in the House, that our relations may be cordial, even though we have different points of view from 

time to time. 

 

There are some points which I was establishing in my remarks with respect to the motion and 

amendment before you, and I wish to state at the outset that I cannot agree with the amendment, which 

in part refers to excessive administration costs. Certain Members have made suggestions for 

economizing, particularly with respect to the Department of Co-operation. I would like to show you, Mr. 

Speaker, that the role played by the Department of Co-operation cannot 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

2 

 

in any way be thought costly to the public. The Government makes no apology for its role in promoting 

co-operative activity and, if anything, I think we should increase some of our efforts in respect to 

bolstering and assisting co-operatives whenever and wherever they request it. 

 

In considering this amendment and the position the Members of the Opposition are trying to establish 

for themselves, I would like to draw to your attention, Mr. Speaker, the fact that one of their main points 

is, I believe, that we should get back to the philosophy and process of private enterprise, and we should 

do away with what may be construed as economic planning. I humbly submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that 

the economy of Canada never has been a complete private enterprise economy, but has always had 

government assistance, and the Government has, both provincially and federally, been involved to 

various degrees and that is why this type of economy has had the best chance of survival. 

 

I would like to draw to your attention, Mr. Speaker, the fact that in the years the Liberal Party was in 

power, it did nothing in particular to foster private enterprise as such, but continued in fostering the 

development of corporate enterprise. This, I think, is not a charge against them, Mr. Speaker, but rather 

reflects the trend of the times. Economic development is such that it is extremely difficult to maintain 

the position of perfect competition. Private enterprise will not, as is often claimed, bail us out of all our 

problems; and in fact we find ourselves drifting, as I mentioned Friday, more and more to corporate 

enterprise. This, therefore, necessitates the action of government in various ways, by which first of all 

corporate enterprise may be guided or planned or even checked, if need be, and on the other hand 

governments have been involved, both federally and provincially, and the Liberal Government, and now 

the Conservative Government, have been involved federally in the creation and establishment of Crown 

Corporations. 

 

We have heard a good deal about Provincial Crown Corporations, and how if the Members of the 

opposite side came to power, many of these Crown Corporations would be eliminated. I have done a 

little research and I find that in Canada today in the federal field in 1960 we have Crown Corporations 

with 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

3 

 

total assets of $10,579,000,000. This is a substantial investment, Mr. Speaker, and it is invested in three 

main areas; agency types of corporations, such as atomic energy, and commercial corporations, such as 

arsenals related to defence, and others like such as arsenals related to defence, and others like Polymer, 

transportation and cement. I suggest to you that we are moving in this direction. I don‟t think there is 

any chance of moving out of this position, back into private enterprise. I also note that the total income 

of people employed by these Crown Corporations established in the federal field amount to $46 million 

a month. This represents a substantial amount of wages paid by these industries. The reason I want to 

establish this position, if I can, Mr. Speaker, is to point out that this is the world in which we live, and 

any amount of wishful thinking to get back to a particular system, as was expounded by 19th century 

philosophers, I think is by and large a waste of time. There are some areas in which private enterprise, 

private capitalism, still continued to exist, and as I suggested to you on Friday last, these do exist in the 

farming business, and farmers, such as myself, may be termed as private capitalists. Other groups are in 

the small business stores. These types of people are the small business man, but we all know, Mr. 

Speaker, what the position of these people is. The corner grocer has to give very difficult time in 

standing up to corporate capitalism. The corporate capitalistic society is what we now have, and that is 

the problem with which we now must deal. 

 

The question I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, is not whether we can get back to private capitalism. I think 

the question is, how can we best preserve our individual civil liberties; and what alternatives exist to a 

corporate capitalistic society. 

 

There have been many statements made, and I have been amused by them, that during the war, the last 

World War, by some reason or other, mostly by accident, I think the inference was, that the C.C.F. has 

come into power. This is not correct. The C.C.F. is the present political form of a large movement of 

people, that goes back to the very time the province was formed. It goes back to the days of the Non-

Partisan League; it goes back to the days of the Progressive and the Progressive parties worked it out for 

the particular purpose, Mr. Speaker, to 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

4 

 

achieve the particular result that I have been referring to, and that was that the individual finds it 

extremely difficult to stand up to the corporation. The Progressives had one idea and that was that as an 

individual we could help a little, but if we could group together within our various interests then we 

could somehow offer a balance against corporate could somehow offer a balance against corporate 

investment. It is for this reason that we see the development of those early pioneers in the direction of, 

first of all, the Grain Growers, the Saskatchewan Grain Growers Association, which I might say, Mr. 

Speaker, was very closely allied with the Liberal Party of that day. In fact many of the leaders who 

subsequently went into the Liberal Party came out of the Saskatchewan Grain Growers Association, and 

some of them are very well known. 

 

The Grain Growers Association, the Non-Partisan League and finally the Progressive movement, which 

under the leadership of Henry Wisewood of Alberta, finally got established in a certain direction and in 

a certain role. This was to do certain things, in the main it was to break away from the traditional party 

politics and party power; it was to establish group government; it was to transcend, if possible to move 

past cabinet type of decision. This was met with various discussions and various opposition. It was 

branded as being Red; it was branded as being Bolshevist; it was branded as being secessionist, all 

because it presented a direct attack on the status quo of that day. 

 

To some degree the Progressives were successful – they did establish one thing and that was that 

political parties of Western Canada must get back to the individuals who make them up. They 

established the principle that you must have local groups and within these groups, within these locals, 

policy must be made, and finally the executives of the progressive groups would only carry out policy as 

was determined by those individual groups. Originally the Progressive movement did not intend to go 

into politics. The intention was to exert sufficient economic power so that it could influence politics, but 

they found, Mr. Speaker, that they could not stay in this position. They found that ultimately they had to 

give in to political power because they found, as all other groups have found before and since, that 

political power follows economic power. 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

5 

 

What were some of the things these Progressives were interested in? Incidentally, I note in reviewing 

this that many of the Liberals of that day thought that the Progressives were only Liberals in a hurry. 

The Progressives, on the other hand, did not think of themselves as being connected with any particular 

party, and I now notice in our present stage, that there are some Liberals who think that the C.C.F. are 

only Liberals in a hurry. The Conservatives don‟t agree with this, and the Social Credit take it a step 

further. They, I think, brand us all with the same type of philosophy. I have heard some Social Credit 

speakers put all Liberals, C.C.F.ers and Conservatives into one big barrel. Now, this is just straight 

partisan politics, Mr. Speaker. I really do believe that the group that sits on this side of the House is the 

group that is sincerely trying to reach out and preserve the traditions that the Progressive movement 

developed, and whether it be in a small town; whether it be in farm groups; whether it be in cities, 

preserve the idea that finance itself must come from these people that determine power. I think this 

group has finally made all other political groups swing to this point of view, with the result that in the 

last two years we find that all political parties now attempt with carrying degrees of success, to have 

membership sales, have individuals contributing on an individual basis, to have open conventions where 

policy can be discussed, and I want to compliment them for it, Mr. Speaker. This is a step in the right 

direction. 

 

Government Members: - Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: - The idea has come from those early progressive people. They were able to drive 

their stakes in sufficiently hard, so that they made their points stick and when they found that by 

political action alone, they could not get what they wanted, they went into one other type of action, and 

that was into co-operative action. 

 

There have been statements made here by various speakers, that the C.C.F. is trying to take over the co-

operative movement. This is pure nonsense, Mr. Speaker. It is absolutely pure nonsense. It is more 

correct to say that the same 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

6 

 

people involved in the Progressive movement and in the formation of the Wheat Pool, and in the 

formation of the various co-operative enterprises that we now see on the western plains, were basically 

this same type of people who gravitated into the Progressive political party and subsequently into the 

C.C.F. group. 

 

Government Members: - Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - The Progressives now joined the Liberals. 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: - As a farmer, of course, I am interested in what the Opposition has to offer. I 

think, that one is able by listening to their attacks on government policy, which is their responsibility, 

and it is their responsibility to the electorate, that at all times, the policies of Government are held up so 

that they may be scrutinized closely and accurately, but as a farmer, when we look at these policies, we 

get some idea of what is going to be attempted and in the course of another election, what the alternative 

will be to the program of this Government. As a farmer, of course, I am interested in a number of 

statements that have been made. I was interested to notice as stated by Members of some of the 

Opposition, that the Department of Co-operation and Co-operative Development should be reduced, that 

it should become part of the Department of Agriculture, and co-operative movement now is no longer 

confined to the agricultural segment of our economy, Mr. Speaker. It moves into many areas. Originally, 

it is true, it was mostly involved in marketing and processing of agricultural goods, but the largest role 

and segment of the co-operative enterprise is not now in these areas whatsoever, Mr. Speaker, but it is 

more in the urban areas, particularly in credit unions, and the advancement of credit policies. 

 

So I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, in all honesty, that whoever made this suggestion in the Opposition 

should again take a look at the role that is now being played by co-operatives. It has a much broader 

scope than the agricultural connotation, and therefore, to put it back into the Department of Agriculture 

from whence it came, is to admit publicly that the man who made this statement does not really 

understand how broad the co- operative 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

7 

 

movement is, or what it is attempting to do. 

 

In the development of corporate society and corporate capitalism, which we are now doing, the co-

operative movement stands as one group, where the individuals by working together can become a 

balance wheel against this type of development. 

 

Let us see the size and nature of some of these corporations. The present tax structures of our society, 

Mr. Speaker, are admirably suited to the development of corporate society. The tax structures make it 

comparatively easy for a corporation to accumulate capital, and at present I don‟t think anybody here 

can offer any better suggestion for the development of some certain lines of consumer goods, where 

there is an opportunity for profit. Under our present corporate structure there is a chance to reap a quick 

gain, put all your profit back in, take out what the directors decide in the form of profits, and let the rest 

by re-invested in shares and to rapidly accumulate capital. The result of this is quite interesting. 

 

Let‟s take a look at some of the retail outlets which handle farmer‟s goods, for instance, Dominion 

Stores. I find that from 1957 to 1959 their stock prices have risen from $57 to $92.50. This is a 

substantial rise. I notice that their capital stock is $15.2 million. I notice that their net profit, after taxes, 

has gone up from $5.7 million in 1957 to $6.7 million in 1959. This is a pretty handsome increase. It is 

better than I can do farming, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let‟s take a look at another one – Simpson‟s. Oh, incidentally, there are few subsidiaries connected with 

some of these corporations. In this one, there are three. This is another feature, of course, of our 

corporate structure. As a farmer, I am interested in the cost of goods I must buy, particularly farm 

machinery. Farm machinery, as we all know, has been going up very substantially. The Steel Company 

of Canada is one corporation which will presumably turn out steel that will be used by the manufacturers 

of farm machinery, and I find here, since 1957 the prices of their stock has risen from $73.25 to $90.25 – 

a substantial increase. Here is 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

8 

 

something interesting – their capital stock stands at $48 million; net profit after taxes was $32.8 million. 

In other words, they just made three-quarters of their capital stock in profit every year, which is pretty 

good, Mr. Speaker. I cannot do this farming. 

 

Let‟s take a look at another one – foodstuff. Foodstuff with George Weston & Co. Ltd. This is an 

interesting one. George Weston & Co. capitalized at $24 million has net profit after taxes of 7.3 million. 

Stocks have risen from 27 ¾ in 1957 to 44 ½ in 1959, and we have 14 subsidiaries connected with them; 

Weston Bakeries, MacCormick‟s Limited, Dr. Jackson‟s food, Paulin Chambers, Western Grocers, 

William Neilson, Perrin Western Biscuits, American Superior Biscuits, Southern Biscuits, Willard‟s 

Chocolates, Marvin‟s Limited, J.D. Hamilton & Sons, and Sommerville Limited. This is the type of 

structure that we have built in respect to the processing of foodstuffs. 

 

As a farmer I am interested in what I get for my livestock, and I have here a statement from Canada 

Packers. This one is the best of all because on a capital stock of one million four in 1959 they made a net 

profit after taxes of $4 million seven. Four times their capitalization, practically, Mr. Speaker, in one 

year. This is pretty good. Incidentally they have a few subsidiaries, there are eleven of them, but I won‟t 

read then all to you, Mr. Speaker. The point I want to make is this; that as a farmer, as an individual, the 

things I must buy come from corporations, the things I sell go to corporations – only through the co-

operative movement I can have a balance wheel to offset this cost difference. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the hon. Member would permit a question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: - Sure. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - Thank you. Wouldn‟t the hon. Member like some of these companies to come into 

Saskatchewan and establish some branches, employ some men like Canada Packers? 

 

Premier Douglas: - Co-operatives employ people too. 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

9 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: - Mr. Speaker, as a farmer I am interested in seeing companies come in to process 

foods. I am sure our labouring people would like to see companies come in to process food, but I am not 

interested in seeing a private company make a profit of $4.7 million a capitalization of $1.4 million. . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - They did not. 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: - Well, this is taken from. . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - The capitalization is many times more. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: - Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: - Well, Mr. Speaker, as a farmer, of course, I am interested in the opinions of the 

Opposition, and as a farmer I have always been interested in the reputation of Mr. Thatcher‟s bull. 

Someday I hope to get a picture of that bull, because I am a. . . 

 

Government Members: - Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: - In respect to this particular point, it is for this reason, Mr. Speaker, of the types of 

profits that are made on the manufacture of farm goods, and the profits that are made in the handling of 

our farm products, that the people of western Canada have gone farther and farther into co-operatives, 

because if you had a co-operative handling and processing livestock products, this too would employ 

labour, and this too would provide industry to our province. 

 

Now, let‟s take another look at this point. We are talking about having private companies come in and 

develop – I could remind the hon. Member, Mr. Speaker, that we have been through a good deal of this. 

If any one of these hon. gentlemen will take the trouble to trace the history of the establishment of the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, and finally the Canadian Wheat Board, you will find there an indelible 

record speaking on behalf of the farmers, that they were willing and able to do battle against the private 

interests that were handling their commodities and established their own corporations. 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

10 

 

Government Members: - Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: - Now, let‟s take a look at something else. There is a claim made by some of the 

Members opposite that the C.C.F. is now trying to take the co-ops over. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: - This is strictly nonsense, and there is another statement made that while we as a 

party are not interested in taking over any particular group, there is another statement that is a little more 

subtle, and that is that co-ops should not be involved in politics. Now, as far as partisan politics is 

concerned, Mr. Speaker, this is correct, but make no mistake about it, co-operative enterprise is in 

politics to the extent that they are going to attempt to change the direction that society is taking. That is 

exactly why they are in business. 

 

Government Members: - Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: - This is not Liberal politics, this is not C.C.F. politics, this is not Conservative 

politics. The type of politics that this is, is the political economy as a whole and every time I buy a 

gallon of gasoline through my pump at the co-op station, this actually is a political action in terms of 

what Imperial Oil is attempting to do, and would you like to know what they are attempting to do? I 

have here a statement turned out by the President of the Imperial Oil called the “Philosophy of Realism”. 

This is an interesting document. Its main point with respect to co-operatives is: 

 

“What we need is a modernistic and up to date tax policy to put the co-operatives in their place.” 

 

This is straight political action and the point I wish to make, Mr. Speaker, is that private corporations 

have always been in politics, and I see nothing wrong with this. They have so established and 

maintained their position they can‟t leave anything to chance that they can possibly prevent, and I don‟t 

blame them on little bit. But I do blame ourselves, Mr. Speaker, that once we recognize this point, that 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

11 

 

those of us who are not in this corporate position do not have enough good sense to use co-operative 

structure to offset this. 

 

Here is another one from „The Financial Post‟. This is dated March 26, 1960, and it is entitled “What 

Can They Do About Taxing the Big Co-operatives?” The theory is, of course, that the co-operatives 

have an unfair tax position. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, I say this is pure nonsense. These types of cases have been up before the 

courts again and again, and the judgment is approximately this: Any corporation can do exactly the same 

thing as the co-op does, and that is instead of keeping these $4.7 million that Canada Packers made on 

$1.4 million, they can disburse this to their patrons in terms of patronage dividends. 

 

Government Members: - Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: - To further substantiate my point that corporations are in politics, I have here a list 

taken from the „Directory of Directors‟, published by the „The Financial Post‟ in Canada, and I have 

taken twenty top directors. Five of these gentlemen work directly in politics, and two of them were 

indirectly involved in politics. One of them, for instance, is the former Member, Robert Henry Winters, 

a Liberal, first elected to the House of Commons in 1949. This gentleman sits on fifteen companies, with 

a total asset structure of 4 billion, 167 million dollars. Nobody can convince me that while this 

gentleman is fulfilling his political duties that he is not going to keep a weather eye open for Devon 

Palmer Oil, Preston Mines, Rio Algam Mines, and so on. 

 

Let‟s take a look at another one of these gentlemen. This is a man I knew personally, who is now no 

longer living, The Rt. Hon. Clarence Howe, a man of some substance and some character. A man, Mr. 

Speaker, whom I admired. I did not agree with his point of view, but he was a man of tremendous 

capacity and ability. This gentleman served on sixteen companies with a total asset structure of 6 billion, 

394 million dollars. I could read more and more. Mr. Asgelin from the Union Nationale, with ten 

companies, and the other seven – this sort of this – let‟s just thumb through 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

12 

 

them. The Hon. George D. Foster, Progressive Conservative, first elected to Quebec Legislature in 1946. 

This man has a modest list of twenty-eight corporations, with a total capitalization of 4 billion, 198 

million dollars. These are substantial companies, Mr. Speaker, and as a farmer I recognize what these 

men are doing: they are protecting their own interest. The point I am trying to make to you, Mr. Speaker, 

is that as a farmer and an individual operating in the type of economy in which I do, where I must 

compete freely with my neighbours, and try to do a better job in producing than they; my only protection 

against corporate activity is such as the co-operative can offer me. 

 

The hon. Member from Moosomin, and I see that he is not in his seat, nor is the Leader of the 

Opposition, have made some statements from time to time with respect to a modification of the private 

enterprise philosophy to the point that we should have some planning. They have said from time to time 

“We will not sell all the Crown Corporations – we will keep some”, and I am pleased to hear them say 

that, Mr. Speaker, but yet I can‟t quite believe that this is so. If we follow through the history of the 

Liberal Government in Saskatchewan over the years in which it has been in power, once it lost its 

dynamic force, and this was during the time of the famous Lapointe resolution, when the Liberal Party 

split on this World War, the only way they were able to maintain power was to somehow tie in the 

Progressive group, which first held sixty-five seats in the West, and for a while held the balance of 

power. It is they, Mr. Speaker, not the Liberal Party, who were able to devise and support measures such 

as the Crow‟s Nest Pass rates, and have them established as legislation; it was they who pressed for, and 

obtained, the Hudson Bay Railway; it was they who held the balance of power of twenty-eight seats and 

got the initial legislation on Old Age Pensions, and of course, this type of balance of power was 

unstable, and within a very short time there was another election. This was the way; this is the record; 

the way in which we people, we common people, must have a group to speak on their behalf. We dare 

not, and we cannot, trust those groups associated with large commercial interests. They do not speak the 

same language, and they do not have the same point of view. We need a grass-roots type of party, such 

as we have sitting on your right, Mr. Speaker, which is now the government of this 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

13 

 

Province. 

 

Government Members: - Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: - Now then, there is one other point that has to be established, and that is, if you 

could get back to private enterprise, and if you could get back to free competition between the various 

groups; due to one type of advantage or another, you would ultimately get to the same point where you 

would have two or three large groups dominating the industrial fields, dominating the processing fields, 

dominating the transportation fields, and then we would find ourselves in the position, I think, of 

introducing some government measures to stop the process and this has been demonstrated, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I have before me here the „Time Magazine‟ of February 17, 1961, and here is an interesting thing. This 

is an article entitled “Corporations”, and this has to do with something of equal interest to you, Mr. 

Speaker, and the House. There was a case before District Judge I. Cullin Cainy which he terms “a 

shocking incident in a vast section of our economy”. This is the administration of prices between a 

number of corporations involved in the manufacturing and selling of electrical commodities, generators 

and heavy electrical equipment, and the comment of the lawyer defending them is an interesting one, 

and at the same time ironic. He is quoted as saying on behalf of his clients: 

 

“That these men (he pleaded) are not grasping, greedy, cut-throat competitors.” 

 

I find this difficult to reconcile with the philosophy of free competition and private enterprise in the 

world as it exists. 

 

Now, I don‟t blame the corporations for taking whatever economic action they felt they needed to take 

to stabilize their prices, to guarantee their supplies, to level out the swings in the business cycles, to 

bring in research so that anything that was discovered, if at all possible, be developed within its own 

corporate structure. I don‟t blame them for this, but I am suggesting to you, Mr. Speaker, that sooner or 

later you are involved with bringing to bear some type of public planning in that the interests of the 

general public may be best served. 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

14 

 

Government Members: - Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: - Now the Member from Moosomin has said this. He has said there is a difference 

in the type of planning, however, between what the Opposition would plan for us, and what we would 

plan. My suggestion to you, Mr. Speaker, is that the group sitting on this side of the house is the group 

through whom the traditions that have been established by their forerunners in this province in the co-

operative movement, and before that in the Non-Partisan League, and before that in the Progressives, are 

the inheritors of the particular philosophy and of a particular way of life. It is within our own 

jurisdiction, and it is up to us to make sure that all our local and all our individual representations are 

carefully maintained, so that representations are carefully maintained, so that policy can come up from 

the bottom to whatever levels pressure may be brought to bear. This is a democratic process through and 

through, but the Members on the opposite side of the House, Mr. Speaker, interpret it as a diabolical 

political machine, and nothing, once again, is father from the truth. This is the Progressive group, which 

had the idea of group government, the local structure, the individual ideas coming up by resolution 

through annual convention until it is finally made law. 

 

Now, there are just two other points I would like to make, and that has to do with our idea that this 

Government is particularly interested in co-operatives. I have endeavoured to establish the points why. If 

I have not done them with particular skill, I must apologize, Mr. Speaker, as I am not yet acquainted 

with the methods of debate, nor the best way in which to put arguments forth, but I have endeavoured to 

establish these basic points: 

 

1. The type of environment in which we as individuals operate is fundamentally a corporate 

type of structure. 

 

2. Corporations have various devices by which they attempt to control the business cycles. 

 

3. Corporations have been involved in politics in various ways and by various people. 

 

4. Corporations do at all times, endeavour to achieve stability of their own operations and will 

go through any legal extension of methods 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

15 

 

even though they may stretch the law a bit on points until we find ourselves in the situation 

as written up in the „Time Magazine‟ where they are being sued because they established a 

monopoly position in order that they could give themselves absolute stability if it is at all 

possible. 

 

Now I know, Mr. Speaker, they never have been able to establish perfect stability, but they made a 

concerted drive to do it. 

 

Now then, the next point is, as production has risen, we now find ourselves in the position with a great 

abundance of goods, without a sufficient cash market to absorb it all. The next stage, Mr. Speaker, is 

some planned method of finance on behalf of the corporations, and this they have done to an admirable 

degree, and if I had time I would like to read some of the subsidiary companies of some of these major 

manufacturing companies, which in turn are finance companies, in order that they can move their goods. 

If you can‟t pay for them all now, you can pay a dollar down and a dollar a week, and this method has 

worked fairly well and particularly well in some fields of consumer goods, but there are many other 

areas, Mr. Speaker, where it does not work well at all. This is in, what is commonly known as the public 

interest, or what our Premier has referred to as investing in people. 

 

This has to do with education, this has to do with better housing this has to do with better types of roads, 

it has to do with all these types of investments which represent public interests, and it is in this area that 

private capitalism has not moved at all. The reason is obvious. It is the area of investment where no 

single corporation can extract a quick and ready profit. Once again, I say to you that it is in this area as 

well that you are going to need planning by government, programming by government. It may be totally 

within government enterprise in the form of a Crown Corporation. It may be a shared thing between a 

government agency and a number of corporations, but this area exists, and I can assure you, Mr. 

Speaker, that for my part I firmly believe that as we move forward in the future, governments regardless 

of who forms them, are going to move farther and farther in this direction. There is no escaping this, Mr. 

Speaker, and therefore, I suggest to you that any group that may come and suggest, “Let us go back to 

the good old days of perfect competition, let us get back to the days of free enterprise,” must qualify and 

they must qualify 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

16 

 

as to leave these other segments out, because private enterprise cannot fill these gaps. It is in this area 

where government in one form or another must move. There is another area where the co-operative 

society must move. This is to affect a balance wheel between the corporation structure and in the 

manufacturing of consumer goods, in the field of credit, in the field of processing and in the fields of 

manufacturing. 

 

In our province alone, Mr. Speaker, last year the co-operatives disbursed almost $18 million worth of 

dividends. This is money that otherwise would have accrued to private corporations as profit. It is for 

these reasons, Mr. Speaker, that I do not feel that I can support the amendment, and that I can support 

the motion. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - Mr. Speaker, would the hon. Member permit a question? 

 

Government Members: - Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: - Order! Order! The hon. Member has the opportunity to ask a question. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - He said he would permit a question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: - He has not accepted that. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - He would. 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: - Of course I will answer a question. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - The Minister said the Canada Packers – He said – 

 

Premier Douglas: - Mr. Speaker, this is not a question, this is a debate, and the hon. Member has plenty 

of chance to take part in the debate and say anything that he has got to say. He has plenty of chance to 

take part. 

 

Mr. Speaker: - Alright, Order. 

 

Premier Douglas: - This is not a question, Mr. Speaker, and I object. 

 

Mr. Speaker: - Pardon me, Pardon me. If the hon. Member does have a 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

17 

 

point of order, he must state this correctly and come quickly to the point. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - Alright. Does the hon. Minister know that he has exaggerated the profit picture of 

Canada Packers by fifty times, according to this statement that I have on my desk. 

 

Mr. Speaker: - Your question has been put. 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: - Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think I have, but I won‟t go into it further because I don‟t 

want to take time away from my friend, the next speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak (Minister of Natural Resources): - Mr. Speaker, in taking part in this debate, I want 

to congratulate you on your elevation to your high office. You have already over the past few days 

displayed your ability in discharging responsibility with dignity and may I say with fairness to all 

concerned. I want to take this opportunity too, Mr. Speaker, to thank the people of the Canora 

Constituency for the fine support and the confidence they gave me in the June election last year. I want 

to say that I was opposed by two very fine opponents, one a very popular doctor but I was able in the 

June election to come out with a better majority than I did in 1956. 

 

May I take this opportunity, too, Mr. Speaker, of congratulating the Provincial Treasurer. I know that his 

task has been a little more difficult than the task of the Provincial Treasure over the past few years. The 

Canadian economy we know has slowed down. The revenues, I believe, of all Provincial Governments, 

are levelling off while the costs are still rising. I am sure that every Provincial Government in Canada 

has this difficulty and I am going to again refer to the cost-price squeeze or similar to the cost-price 

squeeze which the farmers have been going through over the past twelve years; of the levelling off or 

falling of revenues and the rising costs. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Provincial Treasurer, that you have brought down a budget that I believe is fair to all 

people. You have curtailed some of the expenditures in the budget that we believe will least hurt the 

people of the Province of Saskatchewan, and have further expanded programs where the need is 

greatest. I believe that the most important resource, Mr. Speaker, of the 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

18 

 

country is its „people‟. I am pleased that this budget has been so tailored, as to provide as adequately as 

economically possible, to look after the general welfare of the people of Saskatchewan. For example, 

providing and expanding greater educational opportunities to our young people, and expanding further 

health and welfare programs to safeguard the health and welfare of our people. 

 

The next most important phase I believe of any budget should be to promote and stimulate economic 

growth and development within the Province and within the country. And this I want to say, we have 

been doing in our past number of budgets and are again providing substantially in our ordinary budget 

and very greatly so in our capital budget. I want to say that I believe that this is one of the reasons why, 

today in Saskatchewan, our of the total labour force we have more people gainfully employed in 

Saskatchewan than in any other province of the Dominion of Canada. I have had the opportunity Mr. 

Speaker, of checking the unemployment figures for January of 1961 and the latest figures show that in 

Canada there were some 683,000 people unemployed or approximately 10.8% of the labour force of 

Canada. In the Atlantic provinces we have two Liberal provinces, the provinces of Newfoundland and 

New Brunswick. There, the figure shows that there are 84,000 unemployed or approximately 14.9% of 

the labour force. In the Province of Quebec, another Liberal province, there are some 249,000 people or 

approximately 13.9% of the labour force unemployed, but in Saskatchewan we have 21,000 or 

approximately 7.1% of the labour force unemployed. Mr. Speaker, when the Opposition talks about the 

seriousness of the unemployed, and I agree too that it is serious, but why don‟t they mention that in 

Saskatchewan it is only half as serious as any other Liberal province in the Dominion of Canada. 

Therefore, there must be some credit given to the kind of administration realize that had these figures 

been reversed we would have heard these figures quoted over and over again from the Opposition when 

they talked about the number of people that are unemployed. 

 

The financial critic, Mr. Speaker, the other day, the hon. Member for Moosomin, was very critical of the 

increase in the gas tax and he pointed out that the gas tax had gone up from 7 cents in 1944 to 14 cents 

now, and I agree it had doubled. I do not agree that it is a good thing, but I am going to say this, that we 

also did not agree back in 1946 when the Liberals lifted price control in Ottawa, and therefore allowed 

all costs and prices of all commodities to skyrocket, to double and 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

19 

 

triple, and through the doubling and tripling of commodities and prices they are increasing all taxes 

throughout the whole of the Dominion of Canada and not only in Saskatchewan. Yes, I hear them 

criticizing the increase in gas tax to provide better roads but I have not heard the Opposition criticize 

their friends – monopolistic capitalism – for increasing the automobile prices from $1,100 to $4,000 – 

not double but three or four times the increase. I do not hear the Members of the Opposition criticizing – 

again their private enterprise friends – for increasing the farmers‟ combines from $2,400 in 1944 to 

approximately $7,500 today – a threefold increase, not two. I do not hear them at any time criticize that, 

for example, the road equipment, the caterpillar tractors that must be bought by the Department or by the 

municipalities, that some of these caterpillar tractors have gone up from $5,000 to $16,000 – threefold 

increase. No, they wouldn‟t criticize those boys because they are their friends! It was the Liberal Federal 

Government who gave them the right to skyrocketing prices, of skyrocketing commodities and therefore 

increasing all taxes throughout the Province and throughout the Dominion. Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

point out that British Columbia only a few days ago, increased their gasoline tax not by 2 cents but by 3 

cents. The Province of Alberta, a very rich province from petroleum resources, on Friday brought down 

the budget and they increased their gasoline tax by 2 cents. Now when I look at some of the other 

provinces I see, for example, Newfoundland, a Liberal Province, charges 19 cents per gallon. In fact, if 

we are high at 14 cents what about the Liberal Province in Newfoundland. 

 

The hon. Member for Moosomin referred to the Government Members as „pickpockets‟ the other day. 

Yes, plain thieves. I am just wondering, Mr. Speaker, how low some Members can get in their debates. 

Does this kind of cheap name-calling befit an hon. Member? Is it not actually a reflection upon himself? 

If we are pickpockets, Mr. Speaker, at 14 cents, then what is Smallwood and the Liberal Government of 

Newfoundland at 19 cents? 

 

I was surprised too, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. Member for Moosomin in order to arrive at a figure the 

other day which would be to his advantage, gave some population figures for the first time in this House, 

and he gave it as 836,000 people prior to 1944 and 912,000 now, an increase. For the first time the 

Opposition has admitted that during the C.C.F. period the population of Saskatchewan has increased. 

 

Yes, now I want to go on to the hon. Member for Pelly because followed immediately after an again 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

20 

 

he tried to build up a story that the population was dropping down – contradicting his own financial 

critic! In fact, I‟m going to tell you, Mr. Speaker, no wonder they believe that the duty of the Opposition 

is to oppose everything and propose nothing. They believe – use any means unto an end – use any means 

to oppose even if you have to contradict your own colleague and at times make yourself completely 

ridiculous. 

 

The hon. Member for Pelly was very critical and opposed the borrowing of large sums of money for the 

expansion of power, gas, telephone, therefore, it would seem to me that the hon. Member must be 

against the expansion of power to the farmer, to his own people in the Pelly Constituency. He must be 

opposed to providing an integrated power system, providing sufficient energy which is the basic 

requirement for any individual development with any country and with this Province. They must 

therefore be against cheap fuel in the form of gas to the people of our towns and cities. In fact, I am 

going to tell you Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity of sitting on the same platform with the hon. 

member for Pelly only a year ago, opening up or cutting in the gas in the towns of Canora and Kamsack. 

Yes, and I heard him speak to the people. In fact, I did nudge the chairman and said “My, I wish I could 

have a tape recorder right now”, because he was complimenting the progressive people of each town, 

complimenting them on their new composite schools, new automatic dial telephone exchanges, black 

top highways into each town, sewer and water installations and now the provision of this cheap and 

clean fuel, the gas utility. But in his speech in this House, he is going to oppose the providing of funds to 

bring that cheap natural gas to other cities or I mean, other towns and villages within the Province. Well, 

if he does not do it then he believes that these utilities should be provided for by monopolistic capitalists 

– their friends. He knows, that if monopolistic capitalism was to provide power, gas or telephone, that 

they would one bring it in to areas where it is profitable. 

 

I cannot forget when I was Minister of Telephones, and checked the history of Saskatchewan 

Government Telephones, I found that in 1909 a Liberal Administration, which I believe was far more 

progressive than these boys are, and far more progressive than their Leader, found out, that the private 

companies, who owned a small telephone system in the City of Regina and one in Saskatoon, that they 

could not get them to expand anywhere else. They said it is impossible, it is unprofitable, we cannot go 

out of the city. 

 

The Liberal Government of that day had to socialize 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

21 

 

them and take them over and expand telephones. I want to congratulate the Liberal Party of that 

particular day, but the Liberal Party of today has fallen under the complete domination of their capitalist 

friends. 

 

Government Members: - Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: - Then he went on and talked about fees and cost of power. I would like to read for 

the submission of the Province of Saskatchewan, presented to the special Committee in the House of 

Commons on Re-construction and Re-establishment, on April 19, 1944. This report was given by Mr. 

Patterson, who used to be Premier at that time, and here is what he had to say about rural electrification 

in the Province of Saskatchewan. He stated: 

 

“With the rural population being so widely scattered, it is estimated, that it would cost approximately a 

thousand dollars per customer, to provide electrical service to the far. This could only be done by the 

use of no-interest money for construction and distribution and with the subsidy for the operation.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier of that day, in 1944, stated that if he would bring rural power to the 

farmers of Saskatchewan, it would cost a thousand dollars to the average farmer. If it would cost a 

thousand dollars in 1944, when things were cheap, no doubt today it would cost $2,000 per far, but Mr. 

Speaker, we are only charging the farmers approximately $500 to bring power to the farmers and the 

balance is paid by the Power Corporation. 

 

The hon. Member for Pelly as well as their financial critic, made this statement – “That this Government 

has mortgaged our Province and the future citizens to expand power, gas, and telephones to the interest 

coupon clippers of Canada and the United States.” 

 

I am going to say that to some extent this is true, but let us intelligently look at what alternatives we 

have and I believe we have three alternatives. 

 

First: Not to borrow money and not to build or expand power, gas and telephones. The second one is the 

one we chose. Borrow money over a period of years, build and expand, provide employment, provide 

the basic requirements for industrial expansion and in general develop the province; pay the lowest 

possible interest with the backing of the province; set up 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

22 

 

sinking fund to pay off the loans over a period of 30 years and at the end of 30 years, Mr. Speaker, the 

people of Saskatchewan will own and control the assets and the resources that develop or provide power 

or gas. 

 

The third alternative, I believe is that of the Liberal principle – return everything to monopolistic 

capitalism. . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - Mr. Speaker, we never suggested that. 

 

Mr. Speaker: - Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: - The other day in the debate he made this suggestion, Mr. Speaker, he will have an 

opportunity to speak, just keep your pants on. 

 

Mr. Speaker: - Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: - Mr. Speaker, what does capitalism do? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - Will you ask. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: - Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: - People will borrow money the same way as the Government has borrowed the 

money. People will pay a higher rate of interest to the coupon clipper – these coupon clippers that these 

capitalists will borrow from, they will want more than the interest. Some of these coupon clippers want 

dividends. They will only build and expand in the areas where it is profitable. They will always point out 

it is unprofitable to expand into sparsely settled areas and those bondholders too would be across the 

line. 

 

But what would we have done? We would have turned over to the American bondholder, not only the 

interest over a period of 30 years, but we would have turned over lock, stock and barrel, the whole 

Power Corporation and all its assets, the resources that develop power or provide gas – we would not be 

paying the investment holders only the interest rates over a period of 30 years, but they would be 

clipping dividends for all times and owning and controlling the very life and destiny of our people. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - Will the hon. Member permit a question? 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

23 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: - Just sit down, I told you that before. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - I don‟t believe that. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: - Take your seat! 

 

Mr. Speaker: - Order! Order! 

 

Premier Douglas: - . . .don‟t worry! 

 

Mr. Speaker: - Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: - Mr. Speaker, the same thing applies to the proposed power building in the City of 

Regina. They are opposing it, but may I say at the present time that the Power Corporation is renting 

some twelve different places and paying rent and therefore, due to the fact that their employees are 

scattered over twelve different centres, there must be some inefficiency that is being created by the 

dislocation of staff. 

 

Mr. Speaker: - Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: - We are prepared to borrow money to build a building in the City of Regina, to 

provide more employment, because there is a certain amount of unemployment. I believe that by paying 

the rents that they are paying today to mortgage companies scattered all over the city, that if we pay the 

same rental towards this building, they would pay it off over a period of twenty-six or thirty years, and 

therefore, the people of Saskatchewan would not only control these public utilities, but also would be 

masters of their own destinies. 

 

Now, I want to go on to the example, that the hon. Member for Pelly gave, by quoting a particular 

farmer in Saskatchewan who used 400 KW hours and who paid $12.92 a month for power; that in 

Manitoba the rates are cheaper, and I know that they are cheaper. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - Let‟s go to Moose Haw, it is very nice. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: - He has given these figures year after year in this House. But why doesn‟t he tell 

this House and tell the people of Saskatchewan, that prior to 1944 and before the Saskatchewan Power 

Commission took over the utilities in the Province that rates were many times higher. I can 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

24 

 

give my example of Canora. In Canora, prior to the Saskatchewan Power Commission taking over the 

utilities there, we were paying 18 cents per KW hour and there was one farmer tied into the power and if 

he used 400 KW hours he would have paid $72.00 a month at 18 cents a KW hour straight. Why don‟t 

they tell this to the people? Here is another one Prior to 1944, the Saskatchewan Power Commission 

even under the Liberal Government, took over the utility in Canora. The moment they took over, and it 

is true, the rates dropped. They dropped from the 18 cents that I quoted a while ago to 15 cents 

maximum and 4 cents minimum. But why don‟t they admit that ever since the Liberals operated the 

Saskatchewan Power Commission all costs have risen, but we have reduced the rates from a maximum 

of 15 cents to 8 cents and a minimum of 4 cents to 1 ½ cents. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - You are still way higher than. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: - So why doesn‟t the hon. Member from Pelly say that if this farmer had the power 

under the Liberals in 1944 he would have paid twice as much as he is paying today under the C.C.F. 

 

So I say, that if they criticize that the power rates are high today, they are only half as high as they were 

under the Liberal Administration in 1944. . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - Smile, when you say that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: - Yes. . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - It took the hon. Minister quite a while. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: - The hon. Member for Pelly said that the gas rates were high, but he is not prepared 

to compare the gas rates of Saskatchewan with those of Manitoba. No, he jumps over into another 

direction. He knows full well that the Power rates in Manitoba are cheap. Why? Because the Manitoba 

Government in the early 1920‟s was developing hydro-power in Manitoba, while our Saskatchewan 

Liberal Government was sleeping here. Manitoba developed these utilities when the costs were low. 

Today there they are able to provide cheaper service in Manitoba than we can in Saskatchewan, because 

we have to provide these power utilities when the casts are high. It could have been done, but you boys 

didn‟t do it. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - Smile, I like it! 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

25 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: - Now, going on with gas – natural gas in comparison with Manitoba. For example 

the gas rate in the City of Regina for 1,000 cubic feet, domestic rate 73 cents; in Winnipeg it is 90 cents. 

Why? They were very fortunate. . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - Would you consider. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: - . . .that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation commenced the transmission of gas 

in Saskatchewan. I remember when the pipeline went in to Manitoba and when the private corporation 

there set the rate, it was over $1.00 and the Mayor of the City of Winnipeg then called for a Royal 

Commission to investigate the high cost of power in Winnipeg, when it was so low in Regina. Then, 

when the monopolistic capitalists feared the Royal Commission, they dropped down to the 90 cents. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - I don‟t suppose the Minister would permit a question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: - Sit down! You will have all the time to. . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - I don‟t blame you, I don‟t blame you, it is pretty weak. 

 

Mr. Speaker: - Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: - Now, the hon. Member for Pelly finally ended off with saying well, there is no 

hope for cost going down. I am going to say, Mr. Speaker, he should know the capitalistic policies better 

than I – he knows that the Liberals lifted price controls in 1946 and that the cost has been going up and 

up and up, and even with the change of Government and the re-election of a new private enterprise 

party, they are not going to tackle the big boys either, therefore it looks as if things are going to keep on 

skyrocketing, due to the policies of the Liberal and Conservative Governments. 

 

I am going to go on to the next speaker in the budget debate, the hon. Member for Notukeu-

Willowbunch and here, Mr. Speaker, I just had to laugh. He made this statement, and I quote him: 

 

“Provincial revenues in the 15 years prior to the C.C.F. taking office, amounted to $19 million, 

compared with the average revenues for the 15 years after C.C.F. 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

26 

 

taking office of $88,400,00. This was 4 ½ times what the Liberals had.” 

 

This is true. Then he stated: 

 

“Can any municipality say that they received 4 ½ times now the grants over that of 1944?” 

 

Well, I am going to give him a few facts. I am going to tell him, Mr. Speaker, here, that the big trouble 

with these newly-elected Members is that they have been brainwashed by their old colleagues. 

 

Government Members: - Hear! Hear! What brains? 

 

Mr. Speaker: - Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: - They listen, Mr. Speaker, to such nonsense from their older Members that they 

actually get convinced, that maybe the Liberals really did something for the municipalities in the time 

they were in power. But I would advise the young Members not to pay any attention to their older 

colleagues but to do a little homework, do a little research. Check the figures and then speak, or you 

make a fool of yourself. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - . . .you were doing it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: - Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: - So, Mr. Speaker, I want to give the figures now as to the amounts the 

municipalities of Notukeu-Willowbunch received. These are municipalities wholly or partially within 

the Notukeu-Willowbunch Constituency. I take a 5-year average to see whether we do give more than 4 

½ times. I want to be fair. . . Yes, I do. He was right, when the hon. member for Notukeu-Willowbunch 

stated, that the average of the revenues under their administration compared to ours, our revenue was 4 

½ times greater. Therefore, he though when the Liberals gave a dollar we should now give 4 ½ dollars, 

that would be very fair, but he doubted whether we did it. Well, figures show that the Liberal 

Administration prior to 1944 paid out to all the municipalities of the Notukeu-Willowbunch over 5 

years, the total sum of $10,821.89. Put that down. In the last 5 years of the C.C.F. Administration, we 

gave the municipalities of Notukeu-Willowbunch $552,974.20 – 4 ½ times, Mr. Speaker, no, over 50 

times, what the Liberals gave! 

 

Government Members: - Hear! Hear! 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

27 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: - Therefore, I would advise the Opposition Members, particularly the young ones – 

be careful what you say, because we could make you look ridiculous. 

 

Now we go on to the bridges and here is the statement he made on bridges. “Why”, he said, “under the 

Liberal Administration we paid for all the bridges. You people only pay a certain percentage.” So I went 

ahead in checking of Notukeu-Willowbunch Constituency, and I found out that under the Liberal 

Administration over a period of 5 years, they paid to the municipalities for the total reconstruction of the 

bridge, $26,634.00. You know we came in after 1944 and we agreed that we would only pay the partial 

reconstruction of the bridges and in the next 5 years under the C.C.F. Administration and under partial 

reconstruction, we paid the municipalities of Notukeu-Willowbunch $108,611.00, or four times as 

much. We didn‟t do too badly on bridges. The only thing you have got to laugh at, is that they were 

rebuilding all the bridges at provincial cost. 

 

I‟ll never forget when I was Secretary-Treasurer of the Rural Municipality of Keys at Canora. We had a 

bridge requiring reconstruction. We had delegations go down over 10 or 15 years. The Deputy Minister 

or the Minister would show us a map of Saskatchewan. That map was solidly pinned down with red pins 

and he said “Now look, Mr. Kuziak, it is just impossible. All these pins represent the bridges that should 

be reconstructed. We just can‟t do that.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, they took the responsibility of building the bridges, but they did not provide funds to fulfil 

this responsibility. 

 

Again, if we take a look at aid to schools – we are today contributing 10 or 11 times as much in School 

Grants in Notukeu-Willowbunch and not 4 ½ times. 

 

Then he went on and complained about no gas in his Constituency, but as he was sitting down he said: 

“I am going to vote for the amendment to see that no gas does come to any Constituency!” 

 

Government Members: - Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: - I want to say something here about gas – that there was natural gas in the Province 

of Saskatchewan long before the C.C.F. took power. 

 

Liberal Member: - You were here. 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

28 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: - Yes, and long before the Liberals. In fact, if you read some of the stories about the 

Indians of western Canada, even the Indians used the burning air that they located in western Canada, 

but did the Liberals do it? No! No! They wouldn‟t touch it. They sat on it! 

 

Government Members: - Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: - . . .in their stomach. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: - Although the hon. Member for Notukeu-Willowbunch complained that he did not 

get natural gas in his Constituency, I would like to point out that Pelly has it, the Constituency of 

Yorkton has it, Melville, Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley, Moosomin, Souris-Estevan, Maple creek, even the 

Leader of the Opposition‟s seat is served with gas. I am wondering why they are pressing for an 

amendment not to allow further funds to provide gas for the other parts of the Province. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - We are suggesting. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: - Order! Order! The hon. Member will have an opportunity to make his remarks later on, 

when he has the floor. 

 

An Hon. Member: - It is about time you realized that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: - Last Saturday I had a visit from one of the businessmen from Kamsack. We chatted 

and he referred to the speech of the hon. Member for Pelly about natural gas and he said: “Well, Mr. 

Barrie is complaining about loans. Do you know, Mr. Kuziak, that last winter, after we got gas in, that in 

my business establishment I used to pay $140 a monthly for fuel. With the natural gas coming in, it only 

costs me $70.00.” He said, “I know that this $70.00 includes the maintenance of the pipeline, the paying 

off on the pipelines and the natural gas utility over a period of 30 years and also the interest charges on 

the debt.” But he said “I am only paying half the cost of what it used to cost me in the past.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, before I go on to my Departmental programs, I want to sum up what an hon. 

Member must stand for if he votes for the amendment and refuses to provide capital money for the 

Power Corporation program, for the telephone program and the Industrial Development Office. I believe 

if any Member votes for the amendment, 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

29 

 

which is refusing the granting of capital monies for these Corporations, then he must stand for: 

 

1. The immediate curtailment of the South Saskatchewan River Dam development; 

 

2. He is going to vote for the immediate curtailment and stoppage of the Squaw Rapids hydro power 

development; and 

 

3. He is going to vote for the curtailment and the stoppage of the construction of the head office for 

the Power Corporation; 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: - 

 

4. He is going to vote for the curtailment of further rural electrification in the Province; 

 

5. He is going to vote for the curtailment and stoppage of gas going to other towns of the Province of 

Saskatchewan 

 

6. He is going to vote for the curtailment of the Industrial Development Office in Saskatchewan, by 

refusing industrial development loans and refusing to provide the basic needs for industrial 

development by providing more power and more gas for the development of industry. In fact, 

they want, Mr. Speaker, stagnation in the Province. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: - We have got it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: - 

 

7. They are going to vote for the curtailment of telephone expansions; and 

 

8. They are going to vote for creating more unemployment by curtailing these projects. 

 

In fact, they are asking for more unemployment, more people walking the streets of Regina or Saskatoon 

and of Canada. I suppose they want that so that they could complain and criticize the Government more 

effectively. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to take the opportunity of reviewing some of the important programs of my 

Department, as well as making some references to the 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

30 

 

Crown Corporations under my control. 

 

My Department, Mr. Speaker, is responsible for the management or the wise use of the renewable 

resources of this Province, such as forest, wildlife and fur, fish, recreational land use and tourism. 

 

Under Forest, I would like to report to the House that in 1960-61 4,000 square miles of forest were re-

photographed to bring up to date our inventories for forest resources in the Province. The new forest 

nursery is under construction and will be completed in this coming year. The new forest nursery is going 

to provide far more stock than can the present nursery for the purpose of more reforestation in the north 

and aforestation in the south, mainly in the recreational areas of the southern part of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to point out that under forestry last year we took out approximately 22 million of spruce 

saw timber, removed them from the Squaw Rapid Dam Reservoir, to clean the reservoir out before the 

water comes in. I want to say that in this area we gave free permits to any interested party to take out 

saw timber and approximately 8 million board feet were taken out. I want to say again as I have stated 

before that in 1949-60 we have upped the production of saw timber in order to create more work for the 

people of the Province, due to the crops of the farmers in the fringe area being under the snow. We have 

during this year again continued saw timber production at a high level in order to give more employment 

to our people of Saskatchewan, and I believe, Mr. Speaker, that it is programs like these that have held 

down the percentage of unemployed as low in Saskatchewan as it has been, the lowest in Canada. 

 

I would like here too, to reply to some of the irresponsible statements used by the Opposition: For 

example, one of the statements that I know they have used out on the hustings is that we are only 

producing 10% of the potential timber production. I want to point out Mr. Speaker, that in 1959-60 we 

produced almost 67,000,000 board feet of spruce lumber. If we are only producing 10%, then the experts 

to the left of you, Mr. Speaker, say that we should be producing 670,000,000 board feet a year. But that 

isn‟t all! My hon. friend from Pelly, on the fringe area, says, “Why if we ever take over power in 

Saskatchewan, we will allow permits to the farmers like we used to in the olden days.” Well, if they do, 

they will need approximately 10,000 board feet for each farmer; certainly no farmer is going to go into 

the bush for less than that; and if 5% 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

31 

 

of the some 100,000 farmers take advantage in picking up a permit, we would have to produce a further 

50,000,000 board feet; 50,000,000 and 670,000,000 makes 720,000,000 board feet. Now, here I‟d like to 

read again from the report that has given by the Liberal Premier back in 1944, and I am going to tell you 

he knew a little more about the potential forest resources than my friends know at the present time; and 

here is what he had to report back in 1944. In 1944 he made this statement to the committee in the 

House of Commons in Ottawa and I quote: 

 

“Depletion of the Saskatchewan Forest Resources have been rapid, particularly in the last 10 years and 

it is now estimated that almost 25% of the accessible forest area has been lopped off or burned over in 

the past year. On these areas the residual stand and reproduction of valuable tree species is insufficient 

to provide a future stand of merchantable timber within a reasonable time. If our present rate of 

consumption continues our virgin and mature stand of white spruce suitable for saw timber will be 

exhausted in 10 years.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, they were producing then at the rate of 125,000 board feet a year. Their one time Minister 

of Natural Resources, at that time Premier, stated that if they cut ten times that, the resources would be 

depleted. The hon. Member for Pelly and some of the Opposition say increase your cut from 10% to 

100% and cut almost as much in one year as would deplete the complete timber resources of 

Saskatchewan. This, Mr. Speaker, I say, when the Opposition makes such speeches on the hustings, I 

say they are completely ignorant of the potential forest resources, or they are deliberately misleading the 

public for cheap political advantage. 

 

Continuing on, Mr. Speaker, with forest programs – during 1960-61, tree planting programs were carried 

out by our Big River Nursery. During the year, we transplanted some 400,000 trees; approximately 

300,000 of these were transplanted into the forest areas of the north, and approximately 100,000 into the 

southern Provincial Parks. Some were supplied for farm woodlot and some for Christmas tree planting 

on the fringe area. 

 

I want to report too, Mr. Speaker, that we, pretty well in common with the other areas of Canada, 

experienced a fairly severe forest fire season in 1960. We has some 236 fires, most of those in the 

remote areas of the Province. I want to say that we were very fortunate 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

32 

 

when two years ago we went into the program of engaging a helicopter, or leasing a helicopter to be use 

particularly during the high hazard season. With the helicopter and the new water bombing program that 

we have had over the past few years, the smokejumpers and with the natives too, that we have trained 

over the past nine years, natives throughout the north in firefighting, I want to say that we kept our fires 

down to a minimum and our damage to one of the smallest in the Dominion of Canada. I want to give 

credit here to my employees and the staff, and particularly the natives of northern Saskatchewan for the 

co-operation that they gave us on these fires. During 1961-62, or in this coming year, very similar 

programs will be carried out. We are expecting to carry out again reforestation in the north and 

afforestation in some of the areas of southern Saskatchewan. We are going to commence for the first 

time this year, picnic and the camping sites of the southern part of Saskatchewan. In the Squaw Rapids 

area, again we are going to keep timber production up to the maximum and will allow free permits to the 

people of the area, to clear-cut the area. 

 

Now in the Wildlife and Fur Management branch I want to report to the House, Mr. Speaker, that we 

have had a very successful water fowl and big game season in the Province. I want to say that the 

interest and demand on our wildlife resources for recreational purposes by the citizens of Saskatchewan 

is still increasing. I want to point out too, that revenues from game showed a very considerable increase 

over that of 1959-60. In connection with the Wildlife Insurance scheme I want to report that 264 farmers 

participated in this scheme. We paid out in 1959-60 some $135,000 in claims to the farmers of the 

Province. 

 

I would like to report too, that even during this year, we have had a considerable amount of damage, 

particularly by game birds. The greatest damage to crops in the southern part of Saskatchewan, was done 

along the Long Lade, where Sandhill Cranes are doing considerable depredation of the crops. Sandhill 

Cranes, may I report, Mr. Speaker, are protected under the terms of the Migratory Birds Convention Act, 

which is an International Treaty between our Dominion Government and the United States of America. 

They have insisted since 1917 in completely and totally protecting the Sandhill Cranes. They give us the 

reason, and I believe they have a good reason too, that particularly, the rare Whooping Crane follows the 

same migration route through Saskatchewan on to the south and therefore, there is danger in killing 

some of these birds. But I want to say that I have sent some of my people to the Wildlife Conferences at 

both Ottawa and even in Washington, to impress upon the officials in Canada and 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

33 

 

and in Washington the depredation damage that these birds have created and we have been successful in 

having the Canadian and American Governments agree to open the season in Texas and Mexico, where 

the Sandhill Cranes feed, and where the Whooping Crane is not present in that particular area. I want to 

say that my Wildlife Branch also has been very active in planning and pressing for the re-establishment 

of an International Waterfowl Commission. The function of such an organization, Mr. Speaker, would 

be to channel funds across the international boundary to areas where we feed the birds and they have the 

opportunity of shooting them when the birds are migrating down to the south. I believe that the time is 

coming when there will be a contribution made to providing game bird habitat in areas where they feed 

and therefore giving some protection to the farmer who has heavy losses when these birds come in. 

 

I want to report too, that last year under the compensation for livestock, we paid out some $5,556 for 

livestock shot by hunters during the hunting season, to the farmers of the Province, and I see that this 

year, the estimate is going to run a little higher, somewhere in the vicinity of eight and one-half thousand 

dollars. 

 

I want to say something about the fur program in the north. Fur production in northern Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, reached an all-time high during 1956. I want to say that through good management, good 

field organization and close co-operation with the trappers, those in the northern conservation crop areas 

alone, and in the northern areas received last year $1,300,000 for their wild fur pelts. I want to say that 

our staff has been working with the trappers, for example, in the Cumberland House area, where they 

have organized the trappers, these trappers are now taking over the Hudson Bay lease, to some extent 

subsidized by the Government, paying for all the buildings and assts that the Hudson Bay Company had 

upon that land, and from now on, they are going to operate the whole lease themselves. I want to say 

that this again is another encouragement in making a livelihood for themselves. 

 

Under Fisheries, I want to say that the research divisions of the Fisheries Branch again has been 

assessing lakes and so on, particularly assessing quantity and quality of the fish in many of the lakes in 

Saskatchewan. This must be done in order to set lake limits on the commercial lakes and then again, 

investigating southern lakes for stocking of fish fry and fingerling. 

 

If anyone takes the opportunity of looking over the Annual Report, the production and the market value 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

34 

 

of our commercial fisheries, you will find our production as well as market value has been increasing 

very steadily, slowly upwards, instead of the ups and downs that I know have been experienced in some 

of the other provinces of Canada. We have stood very closely by the sustained yield and therefore have 

brought about stability in the commercial fisheries. I want to say that the hatchery at Fort Qu‟Appelle 

was operated to full capacity the last year. Many more streams of southern Saskatchewan were stocked 

with fry and fingerlings, bringing more lakes in southern Saskatchewan, where the people have 

experienced, may I say, excellent angling. In the 1961 season, we are expecting to stock approximately 

50 million pickerel, in 50 different waters of Saskatchewan. We are going to stock 3,000,000 jackfish in 

12 water areas of Saskatchewan; some half million lake trout in White Swan Lake; 100,000 brook trout 

in the springs of the Hudson Bay region; 750,000 rainbow trout in the springs and the reservoirs of 

southern Saskatchewan, and we are going to bring a new species of fish called the Kokanee. It is a land 

rock salmon species, and 200,000 of these will be stocked into Madge Lake in the Pelly Constituency. 

 

Now I want to report on the parks and recreational program or the Outdoor Recreational Development 

program. I would like to report, Mr. Speaker, that the projects I announced in the 1960 budget debate are 

mostly completed and the balance of then will be completed by the end of the fiscal year. The major 

parks that we carried development out in the past year were Pike Lake, Madge Lake, Kenosee Lake, 

Jackfish Lake, Rowan‟s Ravine, and the Cypress Hills Provincial Parks. 

 

The following are some of the capital development projects that will be carried out in this coming year: 

For example, we are going to have $240,000 for the acquisition of recreational lands in the Province. In 

other words purchase of more recreational areas to add to the established provincial parks, and may I say 

that of this $240,000, $100,000 of it will be spent on the acquisition of recreational land around the 

South Saskatchewan Dam and Development Area. Some of this money will be spent on acquiring 

campsites and picnic sites along the Trans-Canada Highway, under the Federal-Provincial recreational 

campsite scheme along the No. 1 highway. Further roadside picnic site areas will be purchased on some 

of the other highways of the Province. 

 

Now, recreational construction, I have broken this up into regions: For example, in the Prince Albert 

region, we intend n the coming year, to build another camp and trailer site at Murray Point, in the Emma 

Lake-Christopher chain of lakes. This will provide for approximately 12 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

35 

 

trailers and some 24 campsites. We are sure that upon completion of the pumping system in the Emma-

Christopher Lake area, that there will be greater pressure upon that recreational area in the coming year. 

We are also going to provide a public camp site on Christopher Lake. In the Hudson Bay area, in the 

Greenwater Provincial Park, we are going to provide a public toilet, a new flush toilet, in the congested 

area of the park development, and we are going to build a dam to keep up the water level of Greenwater 

lake. In the Meadow Lake area, we are planning to build two bath houses and the one for Howe‟s Lake 

Provincial Park. In addition further improvements in the Meadow Lake Provincial Park will be made to 

docks, to picnic sites, and providing facilities such as camp kitchens, tables and so on. 

 

In the southern region, Moose Mountain Provincial Park, last year we provided the main access road 

into the area and may I here point out the importance of Moose Mountain Provincial Park. I am sure that 

this will be a surprise to some of the Members in the Legislature. We had a traffic count in most of the 

provincial parks last year and we had one on the entrance to Waskesiu, and may I report that at Kenosee 

last year, in the 2-month period during the summer, we had some 69,500 automobiles come into the 

Park. Now, how does that compare with Waskesiu, supposed to be our greatest National Park, the Prince 

Albert National Park? In the Prince Albert National Park last year we found out that there were only 

43,000 automobiles; in other words, the provincial parks in the southeast area of the Province draw 

considerably more people and more automobiles than does the National Park in the North. In 1961 a 

new parking lot will be created to accommodate some 400 automobiles. I am sure that this will 

considerably relieve the confusion and congestion, particularly in the heavy utilized beach area of that 

Park. In addition, the main resort area is going to be levelled; there is going to be some top soil brought 

in, and the whole area re-grassed to provide better facilities for the picnickers. 

 

Adjacent to the main beach, the cottagers of Sandy Bay division were in not too long ago to see the 

Premier and myself and they had at that time pretty well consented to remove some of the boathouses, 

particularly on the beach area. We intend in the next year to remove these, improve the beach area and 

actually expand the beach area to practically double its present capacity. At the same time, we have 

provided funds for the fencing off of the cottage area in order to keep people off the 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

36 

 

cottage lots and therefore co-operates to some extent with the cottage owners of that area. 

 

Further west, in Moose Mountain Provincial Park on Arcola Bay, the camping and picnic site recently 

established will be further elaborated, in order to relieve the pressure of the main area. Toilets, water 

facilities will be provided and further brush cutting and clearing of the area. At this point too, we intend 

to establish a boat marina or a dock or a pier to tie the boats to, and particularly try and keep the boats 

off the main resort area, where so many people go in bathing. 

 

In connection with the water supply we will be building a 50,000 gallon reservoir to be constructed in 

and the coming year, pumping equipment will be purchased and underground lines to provide water to 

service the public facility area of the park. 

 

In Duck Mountain or at Madge Lake Provincial Park, in the Ministik subdivision, a new parking area 

will be further elaborated. In fact, we started that last year and will be competed to accommodate 

approximately 500 automobiles. We will also be installing 4 wells, one in the Kamsack subdivision, the 

Jubilee subdivision, Pickerel Point campgrounds, and one adjacent to the Kamsack subdivision. 

Improvements to the lagoon at Ministik subdivision will be continued to grade off the slope, provide 

gravel on some of the access roads coming in. This lagoon is for the purpose of boat launching and 

mooring of boats. We have last year come up with a mooring program of taking off as many of the 

dilapidated boathouses from the shores in the provincial parks as it is possible to get out, and therefore 

provide other alternatives for the mooring of boats. Improvements to tent and trailer sites will be 

continued at Pickerel Point; tables, fireplaces, and so on, will be provided generally throughout the 

parks. 

 

Going on to Good Spirit Provincial Park, we intend there to build a pier to accommodate some 40 to 50 

boats and again, some provision for a better water supply than they have at the present time. 

 

In Cypress Hills we intend to improve generally the grounds around the Chalet, including grassing and 

levelling; continuing of a water survey for the park area. May I say that we have had extreme difficulty 

in locating a suitable water supply in the Cypress Hills area. 

 

In the new Echo-Pasqua Provincial Park in the 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

37 

 

Qu‟Appelle Valley, we are going to improve a beach area of approximately 5,000 feet in length; we will 

be cleaning up the beach area and providing a veneer of sand wherever it is required; and then again 

elaborate further the picnic grounds, including brushing, providing of tables, fireplaces, and so on. 

 

Engineering studies for a water distribution system will be carried out this year and I want to say that we 

have been very fortunate in this area; last year, we provided a well that was producing at the rate of 600 

gallons per minutes, therefore, the water problem is pretty well solved in this particular area. Boat 

launching sites will be installed and again a parking area for approximately 50 boat trailers will be 

provided in this Provincial Park. Two more campgrounds will be provided to accommodate 

approximately another 50 tent areas. Some 20 acres of this new Provincial Park between the two lakes 

will be levelled off, topsoil brought in, grass and planting of trees and shrubs. A parking lot area to 

provide approximately 1,000 cars will be constructed during the coming year. 

 

Going on to Pike Lake, further installations that will go in are the elaboration of a parking lot designed 

to accommodate some 650 automobiles; modernization of two more toilets on the campground area. The 

ground improvement around the main core area, will include levelling, topsoiling, grassing and the 

installation of a sprinkler system, in order to water the new grass that will be sown during the year. 

There is also a small provision of a road for the Lakeview subdivision in the Pike Lake area. 

 

In the Battleford area, we intend to install two new public comfort stations; the installation of a fenced 

area to accommodate approximately 24 tent areas; the elaboration and improvement of the present picnic 

grounds; to do more brushing and clearing, and the installation of more tables and fireplaces; the 

provision of a water supply for the Battleford Provincial Park, and the construction of a small storage 

building and park office. 

 

On the South Saskatchewan River Dam site, we will further elaborate the picnic grounds that we have 

already provided on the east side of the dam site, and then again on the west side, we will be 

commencing the construction a new picnic area to provide camp kitchens, fireplaces, toilets, and so on. 

 

In the Katepwa Lake area for the Provincial Park, the completion of the flush toilet facilities, the 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

38 

 

installation of a boat launching path, and the completion of a 165-car parking lot areal. 

 

In the Valley Centre we intend to tear down the old clubhouse and rebuild a new one. We also intend to 

elaborate on the Trans-Canada site. We intend in the coming year to build up one of the sites near 

McLean, including a toilet and shower building, a water system, accommodations for approximately 

seventeen tents and a dozen trailers, bring in power, build a small administration building, and provide 

other facilities such as fireplaces, campground area. These are the Trans-Canada sites we are building in 

co-operation with the Federal Government. The second one will be started at Mortlach, and very similar 

provisions will be carried out. In our third area, the Moosomin site, which is going to be built 

approximately one mile north of No. 1 Highway on No. 8 Highway, and the preparation of a plan will go 

forward this year. Further roadside sites will be provided for in the other parts of the Province. 

 

In connection with Historical Sites, we have the master plan now completed for the historic site in 

Touchwood. The installation of the marker will be completed this year, and since this site is near a 

highway, we intend to also make it a picnic and camping ground, and we will be installing a well and 

toilet facilities and tables and so on. We intend during this coming year to provide a marker at Fort 

Carleton Historic site. We are again in this budget providing $40,000 to provide a program in the form 

of grants, under the Recreational Parks Act. 

 

I want to say a word or two on the roads of the Province, on the roads that we are going to construct in 

1961-62. We have in the budget approximately $1 million, under the main northern Road Resource 

program that we have an agreement with the Dominion Government, and in which we participate fifty-

fifty. I believe that the Otosquen Road, from Hudson Bay to The Pas, will be completed in 1961. The 

Hanson Lake road from Smeaton north which follows through the Nipawin Provincial Park and 

Deschambault Bay and on to Flin Flon. We have built approximately 160 miles from the west side, and 

have gravelled 117 miles of that road. From the east end we are also building from Creighton, 

Saskatchewan – we have built approximately 35 miles. This stretch will have to be clayed and gravelled. 

In between the two projects there are still some 35 miles of complete building. I believe that this project 

will be completed finally sometime in 1962. 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

39 

 

I am very pleased to report that this year we have had the Federal Government come in with us on the 

Forest Access Road Program, building short forest roads in the northern areas of the Province, and this 

program is taking up some $418,000 of the Department of Natural Resources‟ budget. The roads that 

will be improved under this budget are going to be the Dore Lake road, some 20 miles; the Candle Lade 

road some 14 miles; the Canoe Lake road some 48 miles. In addition too, we are going to continue the 

building of some of the new forest roads in northern Saskatchewan – a road around the easterly side of 

Christopher Lake some 8 miles will be built in this coming year. We are going to extend further to the 

main road in the Meadow Lake Provincial Park, which will go westward another 10 miles, plus the 

construction of a new bridge across the Waterhen River, just west of Lac des Isles. Another new road 

that we intend to build this year is the Hans Lake road, which is going to come off the Hanson Lake 

road, and we will tap the Deschambault – Pelican Narrows area, and we will give direct access to the 

Churchill River system in the northern part of Saskatchewan on the eastern side. We are going to 

continue the building northward of the La Loche road from Buffalo Narrows, and we will be 

constructing a new bridge across the Cowan River at the south end of the Buffalo Narrows road. In 

addition, some work will be done in providing access to the newly created subdivisions at Kimbel Lake 

which is in the Meadow Lake Provincial Park. In the Parr Hill Lake area, which is in the Porcupine 

Provincial Forest in the Hudson Bay area, street improvement will be made at Ile a la Crosse. In the 

Jumbo Lake subdivision near Loon Lake, access and other small roads will be carried out and improved 

on in the Moose Mountain Provincial Park, the Duck Mountain Provincial Park, the Battlefords 

Provincial Park and the proposed new location of the Echo-Pasqua in the Valley. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I am sure you realize I am going to support the motion and vote against the 

amendment. 

 

Mr. David Boldt (Rosthern): - Mr. Speaker, there has been reference made in this House, on numerous 

occasions in regard to the unemployment in Saskatchewan. The speaker who has just sat down, I believe 

made a statement when he said that there were 21,000 unemployed in Saskatchewan. We have been 

informed on previous occasions that the number of unemployed is 28,000. 

 

Premier Douglas: - At what date? 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

40 

 

Mr. Boldt: - On February 9th. Now, let‟s look at the increase in population of these three prairie 

provinces, which have often been referred to. I have figures from the D.B.S. Weekly Bulletin, of 

February 17th, 1961, that the increase in population in Manitoba as of January 1st, 1960, to January 1st, 

1961, was 14,000. In Alberta for the same period has 41,000, and for Saskatchewan only a 6,000 

increase. This, I believe, is a truer picture of the assessment of unemployed. Our unemployed have 

moved out of the province. Alberta‟s unemployed is about as large as the increase in population for the 

year 1960, but in Saskatchewan our unemployment is five times the amount of the increase in 

population, and this is nothing I believe for this socialist Government to be proud of. The result of this 

increase that we have, as it would appear to me is that this province is fast becoming a state for the old 

aged and the retired, and what is remaining in the province would be the farmers, the social aid patients, 

and if the babies had feet to walk they‟d leave this province too. 

 

Premier Douglas: - There‟s nothing keeping you here. 

 

Mr. Boldt: - For the Premier‟s information I‟m a farmer. Now, Mr. Speaker, reference has been made 

on numerous occasions, come to an agreement as to who they consider is the best government federally. 

We remember that during the signing of the South Saskatchewan River Dam Agreement, mention was 

made that had there been a Liberal Government in Ottawa, the terms with the present Government re the 

dam would have been more favourable to us than under the Conservative Government. The other day, it 

was mentioned in the House here that they thought that the Conservatives would have been a better 

Government than the Liberals and perhaps the increases in taxation wouldn‟t have been as high as the 

Finance Minister of Natural Resources, who has just left the House. Now he has a different appraisal of 

the Tory situation. In Paradise Hill, Mr. Kuziak, is reported as saying in the „Star Phoenix‟, on February 

20th, he inferred that he would pick the present Tory Government at Ottawa if the choice had to be made 

between it and the previous Liberal Administration. We on this side of the House would appreciate very 

much if a decision on the other side would be made as to who they would prefer to have in Ottawa. 

 

Premier Douglas: - Neither. 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

41 

 

Mr. Boldt: - If it is a matter of wooing Conservative votes, they say the Conservatives are better, and if 

there hadn‟t been a Liberal candidate in Turtleford, they perhaps would have been trying to woo the 

Liberal votes, and said that we would have been better off if we had a Liberal Government in Ottawa. 

 

Now, while I have this clipping in my hand, I was amazed at this statement that the Minister made: Mr. 

Kuziak warned the voters of the Turtleford Constituency to send a C.C.F. Member to the Legislature, if 

they wanted the best consideration to be given to any requests for a road improvement, or a similar 

project in their area, for the next four years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we in Rosthern have long realized, that if we had some under the same consideration as in 

C.C.F. held Constituencies, there would be no poverty in the Constituency of Rosthern. It was also 

mentioned by the Minister that we were opposed to bringing in electricity and natural gas. Now, what 

we are opposed to on this side of the House is the expenditures of between $6 and $9 million for the 

head office here in Regina. We are also opposed to the net expenditures of $6 ½ million for natural light 

at Moose Jaw. What about Weyburn? There was $2 ½ million spent there. The gas fields in Alberta, 

another $15 million. We are not opposed to giving areas natural gas, and if this Government is going to 

be defeated in 1964, which I hope it will, and we will prove it, the first area that will receive natural gas 

will be the area from Arma to Duck Lake, in my Constituency. 

 

Premier Douglas: - It‟s a little early to start the promises. 

 

Mr. Boldt: - Mr. Speaker, on November 21st, and at this time again, I would like to refer to my good 

friend Mr. McAskill of Saskatoon. He stated that the four Cabinet Ministers, who are members of the 

committee, attended only a few meetings, and then only in an advisory capacity. On February 16th, the 

„Leader Post‟ reports that the Government Members were not asked to sign the report, and he said that 

they had played a small part in the work of the committee, and had actually attended only a few 

meetings. 

 

Now on February 27th, the question was asked, and it reads this way: 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

42 

 

“How many of the eight full committee meetings, and the thirty-two sub-committee meetings of the 

Local Government Continuing Committee, listed in the Progress Report, of the said committee of 

March 1960, were attended to by each of the following Members, and the said committee; Premier 

Douglas, Hon. W.S. Lloyd, Hon. L.F. McIntosh, and Hon. C.M. Fines.” 

 

The answer: 

 

“Premier Douglas attended twelve meetings; the Hon. W.S. Lloyd attended fifteen meetings; the Hon. 

L.F. McIntosh attended nineteen meetings and the Hon. C.M. Fines attended fourteen meetings.” 

 

And they would let us believe that they do not know what was in the report. 

 

I hope the time has come when Mr. McAskill will stop fooling the people of Saskatchewan. These 

Cabinet Ministers have known right along what has been in the report which the Opposition has been 

trying to tell them. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I believe one of the greatest problems facing this Government today, and the concern 

of all Governments, is the social aid cost. This Government seems to be more concerned about feeding 

the unemployed and the employables, than it is to try and create jobs for them. In many instances social 

aid is absolutely necessary, where the bread earner is unable, due to ill health, to provide for his family, 

or where he has passed on. The state‟s responsibilities are such that they must be provided for. The 

Liberal Party believe that it is the Government‟s first responsibility to create jobs for the employable, 

and secondly, the applicant must have proven beyond a doubt that he was not able to find employment. 

This great province of ours should be able to stand on its own feet, and be able to provide employment 

for men that re able. The municipal governments, welfare societies, and church organizations are 

concerned about the costs of the numbers of families receiving social aid. In many instances they are 

amazed at how easy it is for some to obtain it. 

 

First I would like to congratulate the Department of Social Welfare, for the excellent personnel they 

have obtained in administering social aid. I have visited numerous municipal welfare officials, and 

regional offices, and realized the tremendous task before them. Their job is to administer the Act, and 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

43 

 

I have received valuable information from them, Mr. Speaker, let‟s look at the social record for some of 

our cities. As early as September 26, 1960, the city of Saskatoon estimated social aid costs at nearly $1 

million. On November 14, 1960, the „Saskatoon Star Phoenix‟ reported that social aid rose to a fifteen 

year peak; 2,699 persons were on relief on that date, of which 265 were single men and 261 single 

women. In January 1961, 823 people of North Battleford were on social aid. This represents 7 ½% of the 

total population. There is every reason to believe that before the winter has passed the final figures of 

the cost and the number will both have increased considerably. In the fiscal year ending March 31st, 

1960, the total social aid spent by the Federal and Provincial Governments and the Municipal 

Governments in Saskatchewan, amounted to $4,100,000. This does not include the other welfare 

departments which cost the Government another $10,700,000. I am referring to social aid only. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unemployment insurance was designed to take care of the majority of the seasonal 

unemployed. Today many unemployed are receiving unemployment insurance, plus social aid benefits. 

When we realize the large amount of money spent on direct relief and the number of persons receiving 

it, we cannot help but feel that something is wrong with the Social Aid Act. I am confident that the 

majority of the social aid recipients are entitled to this aid, but there are a number of citizens who have 

taken advantage of the Act, and are making a racket out of it, and it is the responsibility of the 

Government to see that public funds are not being abused. I believe the National Employment Service 

and the Social Welfare Department could have a closer relationship in placing the unemployed. A 

business man in Saskatoon was unable to get domestic help for his family for almost two years, in spite 

of the fact that he had been in contact continually with the unemployment insurance office and the social 

welfare. I have been informed by the social aid officials of what is happening in some areas, and they 

are very concerned about it, but are seemingly unable to prevent applicants from receiving social aid, 

which they believe are not entitled to it. For example, I was told by one welfare official, that a labour 

man having a seasonal job earned $4,500. He squandered his earnings, and when he was laid off, he 

applied for social aid. He had dependents to qualify for the maximum amount of $200.00 per month. He 

is receiving unemployment insurance. The difference between unemployment insurance and the $200.00 

maximum allowance of income is made up by social aid. This man is not asked to sign a note. Next 

spring he will be back 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

44 

 

at his job and earning $4,500. Social aid in Saskatchewan is absolutely free. If you are eligible, you 

come in and apply for it; it‟s free. I think the farmers, the businessmen, the school teachers, would also 

welcome legislation to provide that when money was required to carry out a business or profession they 

would be able to apply for assistance from some Government Agency free of cost, instead of going to a 

loan board or bank and signing a note and giving them first mortgage on the property. 

 

Premier Douglas: - Is that Liberal Policy? 

 

Mr. Boldt: - Not only does he not sign a note, but the Act also states and I quote: 

 

“Where a person owns his home, an allowance shall be paid which is sufficient to cover taxes, when 

they are in arrears for one year, the interest and mortgage, fire insurance and other assessments, 

provided the total allowance for these items is not in excess of the rental allowance for a simpler 

home.” 

 

It does not specify the valuation of the home, so it is possible that a recipient could have his home paid 

off, and also his taxes, through social aid. Social aid will also take care of the following and I quote: 

 

“(a) Allowances shall be provided for instalment payments of essential household equipment, only if 

they have been contracted for before the application was made; 

 

(b) They have been made by another member of the family, who because of a change of circumstances 

is no longer able to continue making payments; 

 

(c) Before making such an allowance an effort is to be made to defer, cancel or reduce such payments; 

 

(d) The municipality is satisfied at the cost of replacement of essential household equipment which 

exceed the cost of the remaining payments, before granting an allowance;” 

 

In other words, the essentials in cities could include gas stoves, fridges, deep freezers and perhaps 

electric washing machines. In the rural areas these might not be classified as essentials. No one knows it 

better than the social aid recipients and, hence we 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

45 

 

have a great migration of social aid recipients, moving into the larger centres, where benefits are more 

generous. Rural and urban municipalities are concerned about the hospital and medical costs for social 

aid recipients. A number of social aid recipients are also aware of the fact that the Saskatchewan 

hospitalization coverage is the responsibility of the municipality. In many cases I have been told by 

municipal secretaries, that social aid recipients were not worried about their hospital cards until they 

were eligible for social aid, and then they demand coverage immediately. Hospitalization cards and 

medical bills cost some municipalities thousands of dollars of taxpayers‟ money. The city of Saskatoon 

estimated medical and hospital levies would be in the neighbourhood of $90,000. 

 

As surely as we recognize the state‟s responsibility to society as an individual, the individual must also 

realize its responsibility to the state. Handouts seem to weaken a nation. If the individuals‟ responsibility 

is recognized, it is his greatest asset. The Government should do everything in its power to safeguard 

that responsibility. An opportunity should be given to an individual to earn more when employed than 

the state is willing to give to him when unemployed. 

 

I think that the words of Abraham Lincoln, would be very fitting in this day and age, when he said: 

 

“You cannot bring prosperity by discouraging thrift; 

You cannot strengthen the weak by weakening the strong; 

You cannot help the wage-earner by pulling down the wage-payer; 

You cannot further the brotherhood of man my encouraging class hatred; 

You cannot help the poor by destroying the rich; 

You cannot establish sound security on borrowed money; 

You cannot keep out of trouble by spending more than you earn; 

You cannot build character and courage by taking away man‟s initiative and independence; 

You cannot help man permanently by doing for them, what they could and should do for themselves;” 

 

Premier Douglas: - Mr. Lincoln didn‟t say it. 

 

Mr. Boldt: - Mr. Speaker, I will support the amendment and not the motion. 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

46 

 

Mr. Hans A. Broten (Watrous): - Mr. Speaker, this is my first opportunity and I would like to 

congratulate you on your appointment to your important post and I think it is indeed a happy one, since 

both sides of the House seem to be pleased with the way you have handled the proceedings. The 

Members have set a high standard and I am sure these standards will continue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I come to this Assembly with a mandate from the good people of the Watrous 

Constituency. At this time, I would like to thank them for the enthusiasm and help at the election time 

and also for their wonderful co-operation since that day. 

 

As I have travelled the Constituency, I realized even more the fine qualities of the gentleman I follow in 

this place of trust, the former Government Member and Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, the Hon. 

Mr. James Darling. I would like to state here and now, that I have found large sections of our population 

belonging to various political persuasions acclaim his integrity and resolute action, which encouraged 

me to accept this place of trust and responsibility, which I have found both in Mr. Darling and the Party 

which he served. May I also add, Mr. Speaker, I am sure we wish him health and happiness in his 

retirement. 

 

I also would like to take this opportunity on behalf of the Watrous Constituency to thank the Executive 

Council and our leader the Premier, for the resolute and humane policies which have been adopted, 

policies which have affected every segment of our population, emphasizing social and economic justice 

for all as far as money and jurisdiction would allow. Also this concept of social and economic justice 

makes demands on our economic structure, that we must progressively move forward. This part, that we 

are discussing, definitely needs a buoyant and expanding economy. 

 

Let us not forget, Mr. Speaker, that this concept of social and economic justice is not new. Most nations 

in the free world today, Great Britain, the Scandinavian countries, France, Belgium, Holland, New 

Zealand, Australia to name a few, have Parties like outs in power or they are the chief opposition party. 

That is what has kept them free and tolerant and able to fight off totalitarian forces. They, by a resolute 

action in the social and economic sphere, bettered the lot of the common man so the forces of atheism 

and dictatorship never got a foothold. 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

47 

 

Now to mention a case in point, Mr. Speaker, all citizens from time to time have tremendous times of 

stress, because of sickness, business failure, unemployment etc. I am proud to belong to a Party that 

realizes that all segments of our population have to have someone to turn to in these times of stress and 

adversity because of sickness, unemployment etc. Hence the program which stress medical facilities for 

all, hospitalization for all etc. This type of thinking is fundamental in building a free and democratic 

society that will stand the tests of adversity. I am proud to say that the people that have led the C.C.F. 

have led in proposing these programs which disperse fear and want because of adversities which are 

common to a great section of a population from time to time. 

 

It is true we have not elected a majority in the federal field, but our success at election time at decisive 

periods have brought about old age pensions, family allowances, unemployment insurance, 

hospitalization and last but not least the tremendous interest in a medical care program. The last one is 

due to our success at the polls last June in spite of the formidable opposition, also the success of the 

New Party in Peterborough. These successes at the polls have Diefenbaker mumbling in his beard about 

medical care and a royal commission, and Mike Pearson at the Liberal National Convention talking 

about a mixed economy with private co-operatives and government segments. I would like our Leader of 

the Opposition to talk on this sincerely one day. 

 

We have heard our Premier talk of this type of a mixed economy dozens of times and mean it. Hence 

our Department of Co-operation, our Crown Corporations and our industrial loans to private enterprise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we all appreciate forthrightness in both word and deed. 

 

I mentioned at the beginning I represented the rural Constituency of Watrous, the heart of our farmland. 

Mr. Speaker, if you fold a map of Saskatchewan down the centre it dissects the Watrous Constituency 

and folds along the international No. 2 Highway. If our Minister of Highways sees fit to improve No. 2 

Highway it will make our friends in the International No. 2 Highway Association jump with glee, since 

this is a necessary link in a road which reaches from the southern states to the northern part of our 

province. 

 

Watrous Constituency is a rural Constituency, Mr. Speaker, with the town of Watrous and the popular 

Manitou Beach area in the south; the aggressive town of 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

48 

 

Cudworth in the north; and the towns of Bruno, Breman, Dana, Meacham, Viscount, Colonsay, Plunkett, 

Zelma, Young, Renown and Venn serving the area in between. 

 

Indications are that Watrous will receive a new industry this summer. Investigations carried out by the 

Fisheries Branch during the past several years indicate brine shrimp exist in Little Manitou Lake in 

sufficient quantity to make harvesting of the resource an economic possibility. Apparently the artemia 

species of brine shrimp are excellent fish food and algae found in the lake are also suitable in the fresh 

frozen form as food for fingerlings. One of the problems is the hatching of artemia eggs and this has 

been given some study by persons interested in the possibility of establishing an industry. It has been 

estimated that an industry of this kind might employ approximately eighteen people during the year and 

possibly an additional twenty-five people during the summer months. Practically all of the employees 

could be drawn from the local community near Little Manitou Lake. Some buildings such as quick 

freezing plants, a hot air drying plant and vacuum packing equipment would probably be required at the 

site. The immediate products of such an industry will consist of brine shrimp eggs, frozen brine shrimp 

and dried shrimp. 

 

A contract has been entered into with Wardley Products to engage in the brine shrimp industry at Little 

Manitou Lake. It is anticipated that the production will begin this summer. Watrous will be happy to 

learn of this. 

 

I would like to add, Mr. Speaker, that I was present when the contract was drawn up and it was a happy 

occasion for both sides. 

 

We are also starting a bid for our park area at Manitou Beach, whereby the Department of Natural 

Resources and the municipalities of Manitou Beach and Watrous town will get assistance from the 

province to do so. I hope the Bruno area and people involved may work out the difficulties and retain the 

plant in that area. Also I would like to say we are working for the enlargement and rebuilding of the 

hospital at Cudworth. 

 

One can see the area is dependent on agriculture except for the tourist trade and the aforementioned 

industries. 

 

Since all this area is dependent on agriculture, as is the rest of Saskatchewan and the prairies as a whole 

to a very large degree, hence the purchasing power of cereal grains and especially wheat, let us look at 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

49 

 

what has happened to the purchasing power of a bushel of wheat in the last decade or so. 

 

(I have some of these pamphlets to pass around, I wonder if a page boy would put one on every desk.) I 

have laid on the Members‟ desks a pamphlet which shows the rise and the fall of a bushel of wheat. This 

pamphlet was put out by the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool in telling their story of the plight of the farmer, 

and was used in their bid for the emergency program by our farm organizations in their request for 

deficiency payments. You will see under the heading “Vanishing Purchasing Power”, what has 

happened since the year 1914. You will notice the purchasing power of the bushel of wheat has been 

lower only three years in the last forty-six years. Those years were 1930-31 and 1932. In 1957 the 

purchasing power was the same as it was in 1933, Mr. Speaker, the depth of the depression years. 

 

Is it any wonder the farmer is asking for consideration and a fair share? One can easily see why, between 

1941 and 1956, the prairies lost 42,484 farm units. Saskatchewan alone lost 35,322. This loss has taken 

place when the rest of the economy has had the best returns in its history. 

 

To understand this picture better, let‟s look at the picture of what happened to the commodities the 

farmer buys to produce this grain and what has happened to the price of what. According the D.B.S. 

figures in the last sixteen years the goods the farmer buys to produce this wheat have gone up 59%, 

while the wheat he sells has gone down 20%. 

 

One can see by these figures that wheat would have to go up about 80% or well over a dollar a bushel to 

compensate for the reduction of 20% in price since 1947 and 59% increase in the cost of the things the 

farmer buys to produce that wheat. 

 

Let us examine, Mr. Speaker, what parity prices would really mean in today‟s context. According to the 

latest D.B.S. release on the farmer‟s cost of production, it now costs prairie farmers $2.56 to buy what 

one dollar would buy in 1935-39. This means, therefore, that the $1.40 initial wheat payment is worth 

only 55 cents in 1935-39 value of money or at the average country elevator price it was worth 

approximately 47.4 cents a bushel. In the United States today the present full parity for wheat means a 

price of $2.90 a bushel. In Canada there is not too much agreement as to what should be suitable base 

period. 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

50 

 

However, the Select Special Committee on Marketing and Farm Income in 1956 used 1945 as a base 

period. Since that time the general index of farm prices has increased in Saskatchewan by 10.7%, while 

at the same time, farm costs in Western Canada have increased by 81.5%, that is from 138.6 to 251.6. 

 

Thus to preserve the same purchasing power per unit of production as existed in 1945, the price of No. 1 

Northern at the Lakehead would have to go up from $1.60 in 1945 to $2.96 today. 

 

With these figures, Mr. Speaker, fresh in mind, you can see why some of us think that what has 

happened on the federal scene today is not being very serious about our serious problem. 

 

Let us look at what has happened, or has taken place on the federal scene. I have here, Mr. Speaker, the 

copy of a clipping from the “Star Phoenix”, from January sometime, which says agriculture gets the 

biggest trimmings. This is from the budget that was $205 million last year this year it was cut down to 

$172 million and some thousand dollars. So you can see, Mr. Speaker, that our present Federal 

Government, the Government that was created when we gave John a chance to help us out, have not 

thought very seriously of our agricultural problems today, and I don‟t think you can have a buoyant 

economy within any country when such a large section of the economy is agricultural, and we find 

agriculture at such a low ebb. 

 

I would like also to mention, Mr. Speaker, I have here a clipping from the Saskatoon “Star Phoenix”, of 

November 10, 1960. Our friend, Mr. Nollet attended the Federal-Provincial Agricultural Conference and 

this is what it says: 

 

“Saskatchewan Agricultural Minister I.C. Nollet re-iterated his Government‟s traditional argument for 

solving the farmers‟ problem by price adjustment, but he stood practically alone.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to emphasize that “stood alone”, and we need more people like Mr. Nollet in 

the C.C.F. in order to solve our problems by co-operative methods and also by price adjustment by 

Governments. Here I would also like to mention what the Labour Paper says on this. I have here the 

“Journal of the Canadian Labour Congress”, and here is what it says regarding the co-operative 

movement. 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

51 

 

“The association between the co-operative movement and the labour movement in Canada has been 

very close. The labour unions encouraged the development of early co-operatives, particularly in the 

Maritimes, as well as the extension of credit unions. As a result of the policy statement and resolution, 

adopted at the convention of the Congress, a national labour co-operative committee was established 

jointly with the Co-operative Union of Canada.” 

 

One can see, Mr. Speaker, that the labour movement has though of two ways, one by political action and 

the other by co-operative action. These are effective ways the labour movement has suggested in order 

to solve our problems. 

 

I would also like to mention, Mr. Speaker, a joint submission of the Interprovincial Farm Union Council 

and the Union Labour Congress to the Government of Canada, which I have here. This was in 1956, and 

this is what I read on the first page: 

 

“We are appearing before you together, because our two organizations think that our problems are 

exactly the same and have a direct bearing on the welfare of both urban and rural citizens.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reason I brought so many of these agricultural problems here before you is perhaps 

that, and I have to repeat, that we cannot have an economy in Canada that would be wide enough to 

provide a good standard of living and look after all the ills of every segment of economy, both in the 

social field and in the economic field, without having all segments of the economy buoyant. 

 

I think we in the C.C.F. and the New Party, when it gets on its way, will find it necessary to have all 

segments of our economy buoyant – that is the economic field and social spheres. 

 

We cannot have an economy in Canada that has such a weak segment in it as agriculture has at the 

present time, because agriculture is such a large part in the total economy, the weakness in this segment 

will affect the whole economy of Canada. 

 

I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that the C.C.F. Government of this province has shown by the social legislation, 

such as hospitalization, on the statute books that we are concerned that all people are protected; and we 

intend to look after the economic segment of our economy as well as the social segment. 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

52 

 

Mr. Speaker, we feel that the activity on the federal scene whereby it will be possible for the agricultural 

people to get just treatment will not receive the proper attention that is needed until the New Party 

comes into power, and thereby institutes a program of both social and economic justice to all segments 

of our economy. I also believe, Mr. Speaker, that this economic justice on the federal scene is necessary 

so that Saskatchewan can receive a fair share of the national income both as Government and as private 

citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with these few words, I will say that I vote against the amendment and support the motion. 

 

The debate was on the motion of the Hon. Mr. Brockelbank, adjourned. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 27 – An Act to amend The School Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: - Mr. Speaker, this is an Act to amend The School Act and it contains very few 

matters of principle. It contains in a number of sections, changes made necessary by the fact that judicial 

districts have been eliminated and judicial centres have been substituted. It makes such small changes as 

permitting school debentures to be signed by facsimile signatures and it makes some small changes in 

the method whereby school hours can be varied. These changes are quite minor and concern detail, and I 

feel, Mr. Speaker, that they could be best discussed in Committee. With that explanation, I would move 

that the Bill be now read a second time. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 28 – An Act to amend The Teacher Tenure Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: - Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill to amend the Teacher Tenure Act and it contains a very 

minor amendment of section 4 of the Act. 

 

Section 4 of the Act, as presently constituted, requires that where a notice of termination is given, 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

53 

 

the notice must set out the reasons for the board‟s action in terminating the employment of the teacher 

and must state that the teacher is not suitable for the teaching service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this amendment is to change in some small measure the nature of the notice 

required, so it will not have to state that the teacher is unsuitable for teaching. Some difficulties have 

arisen with the wording as it is presently constituted. It puts, in some sense, the Board in an 

embarrassing position, to have to say that the teacher is unsuitable for teaching, when in fact the real 

objection is that he is unsuitable for teaching in the position which he holds. This amendment is 

therefore being proposed. With that explanation, Mr. Speaker, I would move that the Bill now be read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Foley: - Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

The debate was on the motion of Mr. Foley, adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 31 – An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly Act 

 

Premier Douglas: - Mr. Speaker, this is an Act to amend the Legislative Assembly Act. As most 

Members know, the Legislative Assembly Act states very categorically that no Member of the 

Legislative Assembly can enter into any contract with the Government or receive any remuneration from 

the Government, except of course his or her indemnity or expenses which may be provided. 

 

From time to time, certain exceptions to this have to be made, in order that Members of the Legislature 

may not be denied the ordinary rights and privileges that every other citizen is permitted. 

 

The purpose of the Act is to see that Members of the Legislative Assembly don‟t enter into business 

connections with the Government, like highway contracts of building contracts or some other special 

privilege. But it was never intended that the Act should prevent some Member from entering into 

ordinary contractual relations with the Government, which every other citizen may do. From time to 

time we ran across the problem as new programs were introduced, and we are therefore 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

54 

 

suggesting some amendments. These provide that a Member of the Legislative Assembly who is a 

farmer will not be prevented, or not be unseated, because he takes Crop Insurance benefits, under the 

Crop Insurance Act. 

 

We are also providing, that a Member of the House who is a teacher in the northern part of 

Saskatchewan and who is hired of the Northern Education Committee, but who is paid by the 

Government, will not thereby be unseated. He cannot only be unseated, but I believe, under the Act he 

can be fined $100 for every day he sat in the House, if someone cares to lay a charge. I think the person, 

laying the charge, also collects $50.00 a day, so it is quite an incentive for somebody to be very active. 

 

It was never intended that a person teaching in Northern Saskatchewan should be excluded from being a 

Member of the Legislative Assembly. I certainly have no desire to see my hon. friend from Athabasca 

either unseated or paying a fine, and so in order to be absolutely sure the law is followed, this 

amendment should be made. 

 

The same is true with reference to the Family Farm Act. A Member who is a farmer may joint a group of 

farms under the family farm improvement plan. That Member who is a farmer of course is entitled to the 

same type of services which are available to everybody else. But as the Act now stands, there will be 

some question about whether or not it is acceptable as to both services and contracts with the 

Government. 

 

There are a number of other things, that have come up, since we drafted this Act and I will introduce 

some suggestions in the Committee of the Whole. Some other things have turned up, as different 

Members have looked at this Act and have brought matters of particular interest to my attention. 

 

Another part of the Act has to do with the Leader of the Opposition. We have never had either a Leader 

of the Opposition Act in our House, as some Legislatures do, or any specific provision for the Leader of 

the Opposition. It has always been provided in the estimates that the Leader of the Opposition would be 

given a certain salary besides his indemnity as a Member. But no other provision exists. As the hon. 

Members know, by agreement last fall, in lieu of giving the Leader of the Opposition a secretary, and to 

take care of his office expenses, so that it would be much clearer for everybody concerned, and save a 

great 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

55 

 

deal of bookkeeping and keeping of records and checking of records, we pay him $3,500 a month, for 

which he could hire such a secretary and from which he could pay such office expenses, as he might 

choose. But the law again raises questions to whether or not he can accept these payments and not being 

in contravention of the Legislative Assembly Act. Therefore, we are suggesting this amendment in the 

Act so that it is stated more clearly, that the Leader of the Opposition is entitled to accept this money, 

without in any way invalidating his right to sit in the House as a Member of this Assembly. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that those brief explanations cover the points raise in the Bill and I am sure that 

any further information and further questions can be discussed more fully when we move into 

Committee of the Whole. I move therefore, that Bill No. 31 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Ross W. Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): - Mr. Speaker, there are one or two points that I 

would like to make concerning this Bill. I may tell the Premier, that I think on the whole all the 

Members will certainly welcome it; I wonder if it would not be wise, to have this Bill be referred to the 

special committee which I understand the Speaker is calling very soon to discuss Members‟ privileges. 

We might have further ideas after that committee has considered the matter. 

 

I have one or two other suggestions, I should like to make at this time. As far as privileges for Members 

go, when the Act was originally brought in, I don‟t suppose, that the Uranium City area was the problem 

that it is today. I wonder if our northern Members should not be given some kind of a pass or 

transportation on the Saskatchewan Government Airlines, so that they can get into the northern areas to 

visit their Constituents. I have in mind perhaps Cumberland Constituency, perhaps Athabasca; I realize 

that there are special grants, but I don‟t think the special grants would permit the kind of travelling, that 

is necessary if these Members are to cover their ridings. 

 

Down in Ottawa this problem was considered a few years ago and I understand as a result that all 

Federal Members are given certain passes on Trans-Canada Airlines. Members in the northern ridings 

are given extra privileges over and above the regular ones. 

  



 

March 6, 1961 

 

56 

 

In order to give further time to consider these things, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

The debate was on motion of Mr. Thatcher, adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o‟clock p.m. 


