



















































Hansard: April 03, 1961


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

37th Day 

 

Monday, April 3, 1961. 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

QUESTION RE INTERPROVINCIAL STEEL 

 

Mr. W. Ross Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): 

 

Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are called, I would like to direct a question to the Provincial 

Treasurer. Has Interprovincial Steel recently laid off the major proportion of its employees? If so, does 

this indicate a lack of orders? If so, what action is the Government taking to protect the investment of 

the taxpayers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, I have no information. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Would the hon. Minister look into the matter and perhaps give me an answer 

tomorrow then? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think that the Minister has given his reply, and he cannot, as I understand it, answer 

the question at this time. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I will ask it again tomorrow then, Mr. Speaker. 

 

HOUSE BUSINESS 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Could the Premier tell us again tomorrow, how we’ll go along? 

 

Premier Douglas: — Well tomorrow being Private Members Day when all the Private Member 

resolutions and public bills and orders will have precedence, when we get through that we’ll likely take 

second readings and probably go into Committee of the Whole, and get some of the legislation moving, 

unless there are any House amendments, and then supply. What you like in supply? 



 

April 3, 1961 

 

2 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — When we finish highways, we’ll have the next major Department, Industry and 

Information. There are a couple of small Departments like the Executive Council that we might pick up 

and go into, but Industry and Information, and Municipal Affairs, will be the next major Departments 

that we will take in supply. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — What did the hon. Minister say about the Executive Council? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Yes, we have skipped over the Executive Council for the time being. We can 

perhaps fit it in depending on how the time goes. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Yes, estimates. Law Amendments Committee. I just noticed the notice on my 

desk. There is a Law Amendments Committee meeting tomorrow night. We won’t be sitting tomorrow 

night. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Oh, we won’t be sitting tomorrow night? 

 

Premier Douglas: — The committee is sitting tomorrow night, but the House won’t be able to sit 

tomorrow evening. 

 

The House adjourned at 10:00 o’clock p.m. 


