



















































Hansard: March 29, 1961


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

35th Day 

 

Wednesday, March 29, 1961. 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Hon. J. Walter Erb (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I 

would like to draw your attention to a group of Grade VIII students from the School, at Gray, 

Saskatchewan, accompanied by their teacher. I hope their visit here today will be both profitable and 

pleasurable. 

 

QUESTION RE LICENSE FEES 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to direct a 

question to the Government with regard to Return No. 67, which was handed down the other day. It is a 

copy of Sessional Paper No. 160, and I don’t know whether there has been some misunderstanding on 

my part, or their part of what was asked, but I know there are license fees that have been increased in 

1961 that are not included in the answer to this question. There’s only one that is mentioned, it is one 

that I didn’t know about at the time I asked the question, but all those that I’ve heard of since this 

Session started have not been included in the answer to this question, which asked for all licenses and 

permits issued and fees charged by the Government, in which the rate charged has been increased in 

1961, showing the rates charged in 1960, and the increased rate for 1961. The only one that is mentioned 

in this Return and the answer given, for transfers or exchange of certificates of registration to a public 

service vehicle, 



 

March 29, 1961 

 

2 

 

other than to a semi-trailer, and two others in the same classification. 

 

Now, I know my own license fee was increased this year, so I know that as a matter of fact that one 

license at least has been increased since 1960. I don’t know whether this is a complete answer to the 

question, or just from one branch of the Government. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I noticed at the time that the hon. Member asked the question in the 

House, I was afraid that the way in which it was worded, wouldn’t likely produce the information he 

asked. I haven’t the question in front of me, but as I recall it, he asked us for the fees and licenses that 

were increased in 1961. In many cases, the things which he was looking for had been increased in 1960, 

and became effective in 1961. In many of those cases, the Order in Council and the actual increase had 

been passed in 1960, and I think he will find if he looks closely at the wording that the answer complies 

exactly with the wording of the question. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Of course, all the question asked was “in which the rate charged had been increased 

in 1961 over 1960.” That is exactly the wording — all licenses issued . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon Mr. Brockelbank: — What number is the question? 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — No. 67. I read the question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! When Speaker rises to his feet, will the hon. Members please cease from 

talking. That applies to both sides of the House. I think that this matter has been aired sufficiently. It is, 

perhaps, slightly irregular I think to bring this matter up on the Orders of the Day, but I think the 

Premier has given an answer in regard to this, and it appears to me the matter should be resubmitted. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 68 — An Act to amend The Social Aid Act, 1959 

 

Hon A.M. Nicholson (Minister of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation): 



 

March 29, 1961 

 

3 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the provisions of the Social Aid Act, 1959, the Provincial Government relieved 

municipalities of a considerable portion of the costs of social aid. As a condition to the provinces 

assuming this increased financial responsibility, urban and rural municipal governments, through their 

respective associations, agreed to implement minimum standards of administration as defined in the 

regulations pertaining to the Act. These standards were established to ensure, along with other 

conditions, the payment of at least minimum allowances, which would be commensurate with health and 

decency, and that the indigent person’s contact with the municipal welfare official would be such, that 

the person’s capacities for self dependence and that of his family, might be maintained, strengthened, or 

restored. 

 

In the two years since the Social Aid Act, 1959 went into effect, significant progress has been made by 

municipal governments toward achieving the goals I have outlined. Under the Social Aid Act, 1969, 

each municipal council, rural and urban, is required to appoint a municipal welfare official to administer 

social aid. In many smaller urban areas the secretary-treasurer may act as the municipal welfare official, 

or council may appoint some other person. He is often appointed on a part-time basis. This situation 

brings up the problem that the person appointed cannot be located or disturbed because he usually 

operated from his regular place of business or employment. 

 

Another aspect of this same problem is arising in rural municipalities. They, as I said, are required to 

appoint a municipal welfare official. The problem is that their case load is so small that it would be 

unrealistic to hire someone, and consequently the secretary-treasurer, who is already overworked, gets 

the task. He does not have the time nor the energy to become conversant with the program. Situations 

such as I have outlined, are by no means conducive to implementing the higher standards of social aid 

inherent in the Act and regulations. These problems could be overcome to a considerable degree by the 

amendment to the Social Aid Act, 1959, which I am proposing. 

 

The purport and the intent of this amendment is to allow municipalities to group together to facilitate 

administration of social aid, if they wish to do so, subject to the approval of the Minister. Legislative 

authority to group together would have other benefits 



 

March 29, 1961 

 

4 

 

also. It would facilitate administration by some seventy-seven municipal welfare officials of rural 

municipalities who also act in that capacity for small urban centres, villages, in their area. It would 

permit them to use only one set of books, one reimbursement claim, and make one accounting to our 

Department for aid issued. This amendment to the Social Aid Act, 1959, which I am proposing, would 

permit the welfare departments of cities also to administer social aid for, and share the cost with, the 

municipality, or municipalities surrounding them. In this way they would be able to employ a person 

qualified to act as municipal welfare official on a full-time basis. The executive secretaries of those 

municipal associations have indicated the need for this permissive legislation, as a result of 

representations made to them by their members. 

 

I move that this Bill be now read a second time. 

 

Mrs. Mary Batten (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, may I ask a question of the hon. Minister before you 

put the question? Was this one of the resolutions of the convention of the rural municipalities? Did they 

put forward a resolution to this effect, asking for permissive legislation? 

 

Hon Mr. Nicholson: — Not precisely, but the executives of both organizations did make representation 

to us to make this amendment for the reason that I have mentioned, that there are over seventy areas in 

the province, where the one person is acting as a village secretary, and secretary for a rural municipality, 

and there are a number of areas where, if this amendment were put into effect, the person handling the 

social aid for a larger centre, would be able to handle the social aid for some of the rural municipalities 

around. This amendment is as a result of representations made to us by the executives of both 

associations. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — I wonder if it would be possible for us to have the exact words of the recommendation 

of the executives? 

 

Hon Mr. Nicholson: — Mr. Speaker, I presume that when we go into Committee it would be in order to 

have the question answered. We’re still in second reading, and I think that I shouldn’t close the debate at 

this time. If there are any questions 



 

March 29, 1961 

 

5 

 

that hon. Members with to ask in Committee, I will try and have the information available. 

 

Mr. Herman Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask a question. If that Bill 

passes, it supersedes the present agreement, the present set-up that you have between the Department 

and the municipalities at the present time, does it? 

 

Hon Mr. Nicholson: — Mr. Speaker, we are on second reading, when we get into Committee it will be 

in order, but I will close the debate if I keep answering these remarks. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The situation we have at the present time is that you have spoken to this 

motion, and the hon. Members are asking questions at the close of your speech, which is the proper time 

for asking questions when the motion has not yet been put. After the motion has been put, they are not as 

free to ask questions as they are at the close of your speech. It is quite in order for them to ask these 

questions and for you to answer them. They can’t advance any opinions, but they can ask questions. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — If this Bill is passed, that cancels out the present arrangement that you have between 

the municipalities and your Department at the present time. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. Surely in second reading, we don’t indulge in 

questions and answers. It is true that when the Minister is speaking, somebody can ask him a question, 

and if he wants to give the floor he can, but surely after a statement when the House is in full Session, 

we’re not going to go into a question and answer period. This is the purpose of Committee of the Whole. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — On the point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — In answer to the Premier, I always understood that the principle of the Bill would be 

discussed in second reading. 

 

Premier Douglas: — That’s right. 



 

March 29, 1961 

 

6 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Now, the principle of the Bill is setting out a new agreement between the 

municipalities and the Government, then if the Bill passes, will that supersede the present agreement? I 

think that is a proper question, and if you don’t want to answer it, why, don’t answer it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — We have a point of order that was being put, I believe the hon. member from 

Humboldt. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — The point of order is, I think badly taken by the Premier, if I may say so, respectfully, 

Mr. Speaker, because the question is one of principle. The hon. Member in introducing this Bill for 

second reading said that this was at the request of the executive. Now, it is very difficult to debate this 

on second reading, to debate the principle of it, unless we do know what it is that the executive 

requested. Now my request, Mr. Speaker, if you will remember was, could we have the exact wording of 

the request by the executives. I don’t want to violate the rules of conduct, but it is difficult, Mr. Speaker, 

to debate the question of principle of this Bill unless we know what it is that they ask for. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — So far as the point of order in regard to the question being asked at this time, I am 

going on the assumption that this debate is the same as any other debate. The Member speaking has 

spoken, and if there are questions for clarification, I feel that it is well to have them at this time, before 

we go into debates. Then when a motion is put, the Member rising has spoken in the debate, and it 

makes it a little more complicated. I think it is a little easier to handle if we have the Member speaking 

putting forth his ideas and his statement in regard to this thing, and then have it clarified for the benefit 

of all the Members present, and then opening the matter for debate. That was the thought I was 

proceeding on, and I think it is in the rules that a question may be asked at the close of the speech. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t raise it because of this particular instance, but I’ve noticed a 

growing inclination, after a statement is made, when the House is in full Session in second readings to 

get into a long period of questions and answers which really is the function of the Committee of the 

Whole. It is quite true that while the Minister 



 

March 29, 1961 

 

7 

 

is still on his feet, questions may be asked, and if he is willing to answer them, he can, but if you get into 

a ten or twenty minute question period, of course, you are really doing the work of the Committee of the 

Whole. I was just worried about the precedent, we are establishing with the question period getting 

longer. We could get into a very dangerous situation. As long as the Minister is considered still on his 

feet, then there is no objection to him answering questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That is true. These questions are being asked more or less by the permission of the 

House. If they do get into any extreme length, it is entirely within the power of the Speaker to call them 

off. I haven’t felt so far that there was any real trouble that way, but we can’t have too many of them, 

that is true. If the House is willing, I will now proceed with the motion. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I think there are still more questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I thought the questions had all been asked. 

 

Hon Mr. Nicholson: — Mr. Speaker, I feel that the point of order that the Premier has raised is 

important. I am prepared to answer the questions . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Say no — no. 

 

Hon Mr. Nicholson: — Very well, I will wait until the question is put. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The Premier didn’t raise any point of order, and he should sit still until the 

clarification of other questions. I just asked one single question. 

 

Hon Mr. Nicholson: — Would the hon. Member repeat the question? If you please. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You don’t have to answer it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Would you mind putting the question again for the benefit of the House. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Withdraw the question. 



 

March 29, 1961 

 

8 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The question is dropped. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He has refused to answer, Mr. Speaker, and that satisfies me. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Mr. Speaker, my question wasn’t answered. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well, there is something that has to be dealt with here too in regard to the question. 

The question, such as the hon. Member from Humboldt has asked, if it requires a long answer, as I 

remember the question you were asking was the way that this was asked by the municipalities - - - 

 

Hon Mr. Nicholson: — The question was, have I the correspondence here, the answer is no — the 

question from the Member from Arm River is, as I recall it, would this write out a previous Bill, and the 

answer is no. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Mr. Speaker, would the hon. Minister give us the request as it was given to him by the 

executive? The first question you will remember, Mr. Speaker, was — “was this a resolution,” and he 

said no, and he said it was a request by the executive, and then I asked if he would give us this request as 

given to him. 

 

Hon Mr. Nicholson: — Mr. Speaker, my statement was — the executive secretaries of both municipal 

associations have indicated the need for this permissive legislation as a result of representations made to 

them by their members. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — That is why we wanted the wording they used. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I regret the length of time that is being utilized here in this manner, but I cannot allow 

this thing to go on in regard to any debate that we have gone into today, and I would like to clarify the 

situation. If the hon. Member from Arm River is prepared to propose his question, then it will be 

answered. 

 

Premier Douglas: — He already has it answered. 



 

March 29, 1961 

 

9 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I asked it three times, and I am not asking it any more. 

 

Premier Douglas: — It has been answered. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — . . . and it has not been answered. 

 

Premier Douglas: — He said the answer was no. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — It has not been answered. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. Member cannot demand an answer. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to. 

 

Bill No. 69 — An Act respecting Mentally Disordered Persons 

 

Hon. J. Walter Erb (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, since this Bill is a revision of the 

Mental Hygiene Act, and in fact will replace the Mental Hygiene Act, I think it is necessary to make a 

few more comments than what one would ordinarily make. 

 

A number of new provisions are being introduced which are intended to reflect current thinking in the 

field of mental health and the care and treatment of mental disease. The principles embodied in some of 

these new concepts were incorporated in the British Mental Health Act, 1959, which is considered by 

many experts to represent a marked improvement over the legislation it replaced in Great Britain, as 

well as the existing legislation on this continent. The purpose of these new provisions is to remove, 

insofar as it is possible to do so, the distinction between physical illnesses and mental illnesses. To this 

end, it is intended that admissions to mental hospitals will be made in approximately the same manner as 

admissions to general hospitals. It is recognized that a certain percentage of mentally ill persons, would 

not be able to exercise proper judgment in this regard, and special provisions will, therefore, have to be 

enacted in respect to their admission to, and stay in mental hospitals. Other provisions will be enacted to 

insure that the patient in the mental hospital, will be discharged when he is sufficiently recovered and 

will 



 

March 29, 1961 

 

10 

 

receive the prompt and regular attention of the medical staff throughout his stay in the hospital. 

 

The estates of persons who are now admitted to mental hospitals as patients are subject to the control 

and management of the Administrator of Estates. Patients of mental hospitals are not necessarily 

incapable of managing their own affairs, and in the future the estates of these patients will come under 

the control and protection of the Administrator of Estates only if the medical examination indicates they 

are, for the time being, not mentally competent in this regard. 

 

The present Mental Hygiene Act applies for the most part, to mentally ill persons, and mental defectives, 

with a few special provisions applying to addicts, epileptics, and psychopaths. In the new Act, all of 

these persons, as well as a new category, of psycho-neurotic persons, will come under the general 

classification of a mentally disordered person. Most of the provisions of the Act, will therefore, apply to 

mentally disordered persons. The provisions of the Act providing for compulsory admission, and 

detention will be restricted so as to apply to mentally disordered persons only if they require care, 

supervision, and control for their own protection or welfare, or for the protection of others. Most of the 

provisions of the present Act apply to institutions. Special provisions refer to psychopathic wards, and 

mental health clinics. All of these establishments, together with a new category of psychiatric centre will 

be defined to mean facilities. Almost all of the provisions of the new Act will apply to facilities 

generally, but authority will be given to the Lieutenant Governor in Council to determine the classes of 

patients to be admitted to each type of facility. It is to be noted that the word facility is contained in the 

definition of a hospital, in the Hospital Insurance and Diagnostic Services Act of Canada, which is the 

federal Act authorizing the Dominion Government to enter into cost sharing arrangement with the 

provinces with respect to hospital and diagnostic services. In that Act “hospital” is defined to mean the 

hospital or other facility. 

 

With this explanation, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, because of the lengthy explanation made by the 

Minister, I would like to ask leave of the 



 

March 29, 1961 

 

11 

 

House to adjourn the debate. 

 

The debate was, on motion of Mr. Gardiner, adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 72 — Act to amend The Northern Administration Act 
 

Hon Mr. Brockelbank (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, this Bill deals with the 

collection of hospitalization fees in Northern Administration districts. In this district, a few years ago, 

the hospitalization plan was on a voluntary basis. Then it was made on a universal basis in the north, and 

this gives to the Minister of Natural Resources, in those cases where he pays the hospitalization fees for 

residents of the area, the same kind of powers to collect the fees, as if the Minister of Public Health were 

collecting them directly, or a municipal council. Then there are a few provisions on account of the 

particular mode of life in the north to provide for collection of this fee that has been paid by the Minister 

from the income of the individual in the north. 

 

I would move that the Bill be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Could I ask the Minister a question? In regard to the collecting of this tax by fur buyers or 

fish buyers, whichever the case might be, suppose a person owed his full hospitalization tax of $48.00 

and at the same time he owed the storekeeper $48.00 on an advance given before he went out trapping. 

Now, when he brought that fur in, who would receive payment first, the storekeeper for his, or the 

Government for theirs? 

 

Hon Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, that is getting down to a question on a specific section, and 

certainly a question for Committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — These questions asked should be for clarification of the explanation the Minister has 

given. If it gets into a matter regarding clauses of the Bill, that definitely should be left for Committee of 

the Whole. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, since the Minister did not go into too much detail on some of the principles 

involved in this Bill, I would like to ask permission of the House to adjourn the debate. 

 

The debate was, on motion of Mr. Guy, adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 


