



















































Hansard: April 07, 1961


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

41st Day 

 

Friday, April 7, 1961. 

 

The House met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

HOUSE BUSINESS 

 

Premier Douglas: — I intend to call Committee of Supply, but we still have some Bills in Committee 

of the Whole, and third readings. Assuming for instance that we are all through by 8:00 o’clock tonight 

or 4:00 o’clock this afternoon if we are through with everything else, it would be rather foolish to keep 

Members over to deal with these tomorrow, if by consent, they could be dealt with today. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, as far as this group is concerned, we wouldn’t expect to be through by 

8:00 o’clock, but certainly if that were the case we would be agreeable. 

 

TABLED QUESTION 

 

Mr. Ross Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might ask the hon. Minister who just took his seat, whether he is going to be 

able to give me a Return having to do with the trips taken by Power Corporation employees in the past 

year. I placed it on the Order paper some two or three weeks ago. If I don’t get it today does that mean I 

won’t get it until next Session? 

 

Hon Mr. Brown: — That may very well be the case, Mr. Speaker. It is being worked on but I can’t 

guarantee how fast it will be in. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well suppose it should come in next week, can you send it along to my office, or will 

I have to wait? What is the procedure? 



 

April 7, 1961 

 

2 

 

Hon Mr. Brown: — My understanding is that it is tabled at the next Session. Now I could be wrong on 

this. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — If possible I would like to get it before next Session. I would like to have it just 

mailed along if . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I believe it is the usual procedure that it may be tabled next Session. That is my 

understanding of it. The point in question is that it is the property of the House and not the property of 

any individual Member. It is to be laid on the Table of the House so when the House is not in Session it 

cannot be brought forward until it is in Session. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Before the Orders of the Day I would beg to inform the Assembly that the Clerk of the 

Legislative Assembly has received from the Chief Electoral Officer, a certificate of the following 

election and return, namely Franklin E. Foley, Esquire, as Member for the Constituency of Turtleford. 

 

WELCOME TO GIRL GUIDES 

 

Mr. Douglas T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to welcome a group of girl guides who just came in to 

the Speaker’s gallery a few minutes ago. They are the girl guides from the district of Ferland, under the 

direction of their Commissioner, under the direction also of the Assistant Commissioner, under the 

supervision of their Captain and their Lieutenant. They are accompanied by the gentlemen who offered 

their services in driving the cars, so that these young people may see the Legislature at its best, I hope. 

On behalf of all members, I am sure we are all very happy to have them with us for a few minutes. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 75 — An Act to amend The Members of the Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, 

1954 

 



 

April 7, 1961 

 

3 

 

Bill No. 75 having been reported from Committee of the Whole with amendment which were read twice 

and agreed to, it was moved by the Hon. Mr. Lloyd that Bill No. 75 be now read the third time. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — In regard to Bill No. 75, I move “That the word now be deleted and the words six 

months hence be added to the end of the motion.” 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I rule that this amendment is in order and the question is before you. Is the House 

ready for the question on the amendment? 

 

Premier Douglas: — On a point of order. On a third reading, my understanding is from Beauchesne 

that a third reading can only refer back to a Committee of the Whole, instructing the Committee to 

change their Bill in certain particulars. The second reading is when an amendment can be moved giving 

a six month hoist. Once a second reading has been passed, and the principle of the Bill accepted, all we 

can do in third reading is to refer back to the Committee with instructions to change it in certain 

particulars. I would just like to be sure on that point. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — My understanding is that a six months hoist can be moved at any reading of the Bill, 

first, second or third. Any change of the Bill that requires something to be done at a certain time can be 

changed in either first, second, or third reading, and that is my understanding of it. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I don’t wish to hold it up Mr. Speaker, I only raised it as a matter of future 

precedent. I suggest we proceed with it, but I did want to raise the point. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I believe any amendments which may be moved on a second reading of a Bill, may be 

moved on the third reading, with the restriction that they cannot deal with any matter not contained in 

the Bill. But any amendment such as a six month hoist can be moved on the third as well as on a second 

reading. I believe I have already proposed the amendment. 

 

The question being put on the amendment, it was negatived on the following recorded division. 



 

April 7, 1961 

 

4 

 

Yeas 

Messieurs 

 

Thatcher Barrie McDonald 

Danielson McFarlane Gardiner 

Guy Klein Horsman 

Coderre Snedker Gallagher 

 

Nays 

Messieurs 

 

Douglas Dewhurst Brockelbank 

Lloyd Nollet Cooper (Mrs.) 

Davies Willis Brown 

Thurston Turnbull Stone 

Whelan Thibault Kramer 

Johnson Meakes Thiessen 

Snyder Stevens Kluzak 

Dahlman Semchuk Perkins 

Peterson Broten  

 

The question being put on the motion it was agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

Yeas 

Messieurs 

 

Douglas Dewhurst Brockelbank 

Lloyd Nollet Kuziak 

Cooper (Mrs.) Davies Willis 

Brown Thurston Turnbull 

Stone Whelan Thibault 

Kramer Johnson Meakes 

Thiessen Snyder Stevens 

Kluzak Dahlman Semchuk 

Perkins Peterson Broten 

 

Nays 

Messieurs 

 

Thatcher Barrie McDonald 

Danielson McFarlane Gardiner 

Guy Klein Horsman 

Coderre MacDougall Snedker 

Gallagher   

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o’clock p.m. 


