



















































Hansard: February 09, 1961


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

FIRST SESSION — FOURTEENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

Thursday, February 9, 1961. 

 

10 o’clock a.m. 

 

This being the first day of the meeting of the First Session of the Fourteenth Legislature of the Province 

of Saskatchewan for the despatch of business pursuant to a Proclamation of His Honour the Honourable 

Frank Lindsay Bastedo, Lieutenant-Governor of the Province, dated the Thirteenth day of December, 

1960, Charles Beverley Koester, Clerk of the Legislative Assembly, Commissioner designated by His 

Honour the Lieutenant-Governor for administering the Oath to the Members of the Legislative 

Assembly, attending according to his duty, Roy Borrowman, Chief Electoral Officer, delivered to the 

said Charles Beverley Koester a Roll containing a list of names of such Members as had been returned 

to serve in this Legislature, as follows, viz: 

 

OFFICE OF THE CHIEF ELECTORAL OFFICER, 

REGINA, OCTOBER 19, 1960. 

 

To: C.B. Koester, Esq., 

Clerk of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan: 

 

This is to certify that by reason of the dissolution of the Thirteenth Legislative Assembly of the Province 

of Saskatchewan, and by virtue of Writs and Election dated the fourth day of May last, and addressed to 

the hereinafter mentioned persons as Returning Officers for the Constituencies in the Province set 

opposite their respective names for the election of Members to represent the said Constituencies in the 

Legislative Assembly, the following persons have been gazetted as duly elected to represent the 

Constituencies set forth below, as appeared by the Returns to the said Writs deposited in my office, biz: 

 
CONSTITUENCY MEMBER ELECTED RETURNING OFFICER 

   

Arm River G.H. Danielson E.F. Mittleholtz 

Athabaska A.R. Guy M. Lindskog 

Bengough H.R. Dahlman T.E. Muldoon 



 

February 9, 1961 

 

 

2 

 

CONSTITUENCY MEMBER ELECTED RETURNING OFFICER 

   

Biggar W.S. Lloyd W. Brown 

Cannington R.A. McCarthy N. Wallace 

Canora A.G. Kuziak P.E. Crotenko 

Cutknife I.C. Nollet A. Bullock 

Cumberland W.J. Berezowsky D.D. Campbell 

Elrose O.A. Turnbull C. Reed 

Gravelbourg L.P. Coderre L.W. Boe 

Hanley R.A. Walker A. Casement 

Humboldt M.J. Batten A. Stangel 

Kelsey J.H. Brockelbank R. Wilson 

Kelvington C.B. Peterson R.H. Boyes 

Kerrobert-Kindersley E.A. Johnson W.H. Chrysler 

Kinistino A. Thibault E.J. Brunyanski 

Last Mountain R. Brown W. Hamilton 

Lumsden C.H. Thurston M.S. Hesla 

Maple Creek A.C. Cameron J.A. Trew 

Meadow Lake M. Semchuk G.L. Paproski 

Melfort-Tisdale C.G. Willis D.J. Vansickle 

Melville J.W. Gardiner D. Senft 

Milestone J.W. Erb J. Hubbs 

Moose Jaw City W.G. Davies L.C. Nelson 

G.T. Snyder 

Moosomin A.H. McDonald G. Bettschen 

Morse W.R. Thatcher N. Beach 

Nipawin R. Perkins H. Rempel 

Notuken-Willowbunch K.F. Klein O. Knops 

Pelly J.R. Barrie A. Klimchuck 

Prince Albert L.F. McIntosh F. Allen 

Qu’Appelle-Wolsley D.T. McFarlane D.K. Ramsay 

Redberry D.W. Michayluk W.T. Lucyk 

Regina City A.E. Blakeney J. Gebhard 

H.E. Cooper 

E. Whelan 

C.C. Williams 

Rosetown A.L. Stevens J.M. MacEachern 

Rosthern D. Boldt A. Thiessen 

Saltcoats J.E. Snedker V. Rooke 

Saskatoon City A.M. Nicholson S. Dixon 

A.T. Stone 

G. Strum 

Shaunavon A. Kluzak S. Hanna 

Shellbrook J. Thiessen V.W. Davies 

Souris-Estevan I.H. MacDougall C.M. Ching 

Swift Current E.I. Wood P. Nodge 

The Battlefords E. Kramer C. Robertson 

Touchwood F. Meakes F.N. West 

Turtleford R.H. Wooff A. Rohr 

Wadena F.A. Dewhurst A. Johnson 

Watrous H.A. Broten A. Hassan 

Weyburn T.C. Douglas D.S. Shelton 

Wilkie J.W. Horsman W.A. Haight 

Yorkton B. Gallagher C. Pachal 

 

Roy Borrowman, Chief Electoral Officer. 



 

February 9, 1961 

 

 

3 

The Chief Electoral Officer also delivered to the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly the following 

certificate:- 

 

OFFICE OF THE CHIEF ELECTORAL OFFICER 

 

REGINA, January 31, 1961. 

 

To: C.B. Koester, Esq., 

Clerk of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 

 

This is to certify that I have received the report dated 17 January, 1961, of Chief Justice E.M. Hall of the 

Court of Queen’s Bench for Saskatchewan who, following the trial of the petition of Franklin Edward 

Foley under the Controverted Elections Act, being Chapter 4 of the Revised Statutes of Saskatchewan 

1953, found the respondent, Robert Hanson Wooff, was unduly returned or elected a Member of the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, and declared the election invalid. 

 

Roy Borrowman, 

Chief Electoral Officer. 

 

The said commissioner having previously administered the Oath to the Members who appeared, and the 

Members having subscribed the Roll containing the Oath, they took their seats in the Assembly at 3 

o’clock p.m. 

 

3 o’clock p.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor entered the Chamber and took his seat on the Throne. 

 

The Honourable Mr. Walker, Provincial Secretary, then said: 

 

“I am commanded by His Honour, the Lieutenant-Governor to inform you that he does not see fit to 

declare the causes of the summoning of the present Legislature until later today, when the Legislative 

Assembly shall have elected a Speaker, according to law.” 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor then retired from the Chamber. 

 

The Hon. Mr. Douglas, addressing himself to the 

 



 

February 9, 1961 

 

 

4 

Clerk, moved seconded by the Hon. Mr. Lloyd, that Everett Irvin Wood, Esquire, Member for the 

Constituency of Swift Current, do take the Chair of this Assembly as Speaker. 

 

The question being put by the Clerk, it was 

 

Resolved, nemine contradicente, that Everett Irvin Wood, Esquire, do take the Chair of this 

Assembly as Speaker. 

 

The Clerk having declared Everett Irvin Wood, Esquire, duly elected, he was conducted to the Chair, 

where, standing on the upper step, he returned his humble acknowledgements to the Assembly for the 

great honour they had been pleased to confer upon him by choosing him to be their Speaker. 

 

Thereupon he took the Chair, and the Mace was laid on the Table. 

 

3:15 o’clock p.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor reentered the Chamber and took his seat upon the Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker then addressed His Honour to the following effect:- 

 

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR: 

 

The Legislative Assembly have elected me as their Speaker, although I am but little able to fulfil the 

important duties thus assigned to me. 

 

If, in the performance of those duties, I should at any time fall into error I pray that the fault may be 

imputed to me and not to the Assembly whose servant I am, and who, through me, the better to enable 

them to discharge their duty to their Queen and Country, hereby humbly claim all their undoubted rights 

and privileges, especially that they may have freedom of speech in their debates, access to your person 

at all seasonable times, and that their proceedings may receive from you the most favourable 

consideration. 

 

The Hon. Mr. Walker, Provincial Secretary, then said:- 

 



 

February 9, 1961 

 

 

5 

MR. SPEAKER, - 

 

I am commanded by His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor to declare to you that he freely confides in the 

duty and attachment of the Assembly to Her Majesty’s person and Government, and not doubting that 

their proceedings will be conducted with wisdom, temper and prudence, he grants, and upon all 

occasions will recognize and allow, their constitutional privilege. 

 

I am commanded also to assure you that the Assembly shall have ready access to His Honour upon all 

seasonable occasions, and that its proceedings, as well as your words and actions, will constantly receive 

from him the most favourable construction. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor was then pleased to open the Session with the following Speech:- 

 

MR. SPEAKER AND MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY: 

 

IT IS MY PRIVILEGE to welcome you to the First Session of the Fourteenth Legislature of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The birth of a second son to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II and His Royal Highness the Prince Philip 

was the occasion of general rejoicing everywhere in the Commonwealth. 

 

The Progress of the Canadian economy over the past year has been disappointing. Instead of maintaining 

a strong recovery from the recession of 1958, the advance of the economy came to an end early in 1960. 

National production failed to make significant gains, capital investment declined, and unemployment 

rose to a new post-war peak. In December last, official federal statistics reported that over eight percent 

of the Canadian labour force was out of work and seeking jobs. 

 

Although somewhat higher than one year ago, unemployment in Saskatchewan remained below the 

average for the national as a whole. In order to stimulate employment opportunities, My Government 

has proceeded with the construction of important public projects including the largest highway program 

in the history of our province. Activity at the Squaw Rapids power site continues at maximum levels. 

Announcement has been made that construction of the new Saskatchewan Power Corporation Head 

Office Building and the new Liquor Board Warehouse and Head Office will proceed immediately. My 

Government 

 



 

February 9, 1961 

 

 

6 

 has consciously followed a policy of scheduling the maximum amount of construction work during 

winter months in order to maintain employment in industries that are habitually plagued by seasonal 

fluctuations. All municipalities are being encouraged to take advantage of the assistance available under 

the Federal-Provincial Winter Works Program. Unemployed persons desiring further training are being 

urged and assisted to attend vocational training classes. To alleviate the hardships which unemployment 

has imposed on workers and their families, substantial social aid payments have been made. 

 

The bumper grain crop harvested in 1960 resulted in a sizable increase in the value of agricultural 

production. The wheat crop averaged almost twenty-two bushels per acre. A record acreage was sown to 

rapeseed and the yield exceeded four hundred million pounds. More high quality feed was harvested 

than in any previous year and livestock producers were able to partly restore fodder reserves which were 

depleted following two years of poor hay crops. Favourable climatic conditions prevented severe 

grasshopper damage. In spite of increased agricultural production, however, cash income from the sale 

of farm products declined from the previous year. 

 

My Government will continue to encourage diversification in farming. Emphasis will be given to 

pasture development in Northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Considerable interest has been shown in the reports issued by the Agricultural Machinery Board on the 

performance testing of farm machinery. You will be asked to approve funds which will maintain this 

service to agriculture. 

 

A crop insurance plan was formulated and submitted to the farms of Saskatchewan. In response to 

petitions more than forty thousand farmers were invited to participate in this plan. You will be asked to 

approve legislation to amend The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Act which will extend the final date for 

receipt of applications for crop insurance in 1961 to the end of this month. 

 

Serer and water systems were installed on more than seven hundred farms during the first year of the 

program designed to improve rural living. You will be asked to provide for the installation of modern 

plumbing systems on an additional one thousand, five hundred farms. 

 

You will be asked to approve legislation to place the administration of ground water resources under 

The Water Rights Act. Amendments to The Provincial 

 



 

February 9, 1961 

 

 

7 

Lands Act and The Conservation and Development Act will be submitted for your consideration. 

 

Work continued on the development of the multi-purpose South Saskatchewan River Project. 

Construction of the main dam and reservoir proceeded on schedule. Further engineering and economic 

studies were undertaken to determine the areas most suitable for irrigation. You will be asked again to 

provide funds for the provincial share of construction costs during the coming year. 

 

Industrial growth in Saskatchewan continued to maintain an encouraging pace. The value of 

manufacturing production in 1960 was comparable to 1959. During the year, thirty-two new industries 

located in the province. The majority of these firms represented new types of industry being established 

in Saskatchewan and are evidence of the diversification that is taking place. In addition, many firms 

undertook major expansions. Industrial history was made when steel was first poured by the 

Interprovincial Steel and Pipe Corporation in the spring of 1960. A large steel fabricating plant and a 

major paint factory were established in Regina. The munitions firm, Gevelot of Paris, opened a shotgun 

shell plant in Saskatoon. A factory to manufacture aluminium windows and school furniture and a feed 

mill to produce more than seventy lines of feed were established in Saskatoon. In Moose Jaw, a steel 

fabricating firm is now manufacturing steel buildings. In the same city, the largest floral greenhouse 

between Medicine Hat and the Lakehead has been brought into operation. The range of items 

manufactured in Saskatchewan expanded to include agricultural implements, snow plows, telephone 

cable and plastic pipe. My Government welcomes the announcement that Interprovincial Co-operatives 

Limited intends to establish an agricultural chemical plant in Saskatoon. 

 

Despite adverse national trends in the mining industry, the value of minerals produced in Saskatchewan 

in 1960 shows an increase over 1959. 

 

Production of potash ceased during the year due to engineering difficulties. Good progress has been 

made towards the solution of the problem of water seepage and prospects are bright for production of 

potash from two mines within this year. 

 

More than four thousand, four hundred oil wells produced approximately fifty-three million barrels of 

oil, exceeding 1959 production by more than eleven percent. 

 



 

February 9, 1961 

 

 

8 

The Boundary Dam Power Station at Estevan was officially commissioned last year. The facilities of 

this station together with those of the Queen Elizabeth Power Station at Saskatoon have doubled 

electrical generating capacity in the province during the last two years. The Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation now supplies electric power to approximately one hundred and eighty-seven thousand 

customers. The farm electrification program is now in its final stages. Last year three thousand, five 

hundred farms were connected. This year electric power will be extended to an additional one thousand, 

four hundred farms. 

 

My Government proposes to make further assistance available to local governments to assist them to 

meet rising costs of education and to improve standards. Accordingly, grants for school purposes will be 

increased. 

 

Twenty-four additional urban centres were served with natural gas in 1960. More than seventy-one 

thousand homes, business establishments and industries in ninety-three urban centres are now supplied 

with this fuel. Steps have been taken to assure a long-term supply of natural gas for Saskatchewan 

consumers. A number of communities will be newly served during the coming year. 

 

Teachers’ Scholarship Funds, introduced for the first time last year, are enabling teachers to return to 

university to complete their training qualifications for the Professional Certificate. In view of the value 

of this program in improving the quality of secondary education in Saskatchewan, you will again be 

asked to vote funds for this purpose. 

 

The Student Aid Fund, established in 1949 has during the years of its operation made more than eight 

thousand loans available to students. The service supplied by such a fund is so significantly in the 

interests of our youth that provisions for an increase in the capital of the Fund will be requested. 

 

All major construction and equipping of the Saskatchewan Technical Institute at Moose Jaw has been 

completed and programs of instruction are available for more than one thousand, four hundred students. 

 

Although the enrolment in the vocational training program for the Metis youth in Northern 

Saskatchewan is relatively small, the progress of the students has been most encouraging. My 

Government considers it desirable to extend this program in order to provide opportunities for these 

young men to be better equipped 

 



 

February 9, 1961 

 

 

9 

to take part in the economic progress of the province. 

 

Construction of university buildings to serve the needs of growing student enrolment continues. Last 

year, two major projects, a new Biology building and a new Arts building, were brought to completion. 

In the coming year the University plans major building undertakings on the Regina campus. 

 

The Advisory Planning Committee on Medical Care is engaged in an examination of all aspects of an 

extension of health service benefits for the people of Saskatchewan. The large number of individuals and 

organizations that have responded to the invitation to submit briefs to this Committee is indicative of the 

widespread interest there is on the subject of medical care. It is expected that the Committee will present 

its report within a few months and that it will form the basis on which a prepaid medical care program 

can be established in 1962. 

 

The Mental Health Act designed to bring the law respecting mentally ill persons into conformity with 

modern attitudes will be submitted for your consideration. 

 

A decline in anticipated revenues required that certain projects planned for 1960 be postponed including 

the construction of a Regional Mental Hospital at Yorkton. Work on this hospital will proceed in 

accordance with the comprehensive policy of improving facilities for the mentally ill as soon as funds 

are available. A new facility will be available for mentally retarded persons when the Tuberculosis 

Sanatorium at Prince Albert is closed this summer. A transfer to Prince Albert of a number of patients 

now provided for will permit the Saskatchewan Training School at Moose Jaw to make greater use of its 

training facilities and to accommodate a larger number of mentally retarded persons who can respond to 

its educational programs. 

 

Legislation will be introduced to amend The Social Aid Act to permit municipalities to join together for 

the administration of social aid. Amendments to The Deserted Wives’ and Children’s Maintenance Act 

will be placed before you. 

 

The Government has continued to assist municipal and charitable organizations in the building of 

housing for senior citizens and homes for those requiring nursing care. At the end of 1960 this program 

provided accommodation for three thousand, seven hundred senior citizens. Over two hundred units will 

be available in similar projects presently under construction. 

 



 

February 9, 1961 

 

 

10 

One hundred and nine subsidized rental housing units are being constructed in the City of Regina 

through a partnership arrangement between the city and the Federal and Provincial Governments. My 

Government is anxious that other municipalities take advantage of the assistance available to provide 

housing accommodation of this kind. 

 

Uncertainty as to whether the Government of Canada will implement the recommendations contained in 

the report of the Fauteux Commission on Penal Reform has made it difficult to plan the expansion of 

provincial correctional institutions. Proposals which will improve these facilities will be submitted for 

your consideration. 

 

The response by the public to the provincial recreational program has been excellent. Improvements and 

additions to public facilities in provincial parks and additions to public facilities in provincial parks will 

be proposed. More land is being acquired for camp and picnic sites along the Trans-Canada Highway. 

Basic planning for a park in the vicinity of the South Saskatchewan River Project, including a 

tree-planting program, will commence during the year. 

 

Improvements of the standard of the more frequently used forest access roads will be undertaken and 

tourists will be encouraged to holiday in the northern part of the province. 

 

An abnormally dry summer created serious outbreaks of forest fires. Use of modern suppression 

techniques, including water bombing, a helicopter and smoke jumpers, assisted materially in reducing 

losses. 

 

You will be asked to consider legislation which will amend The Provincial Parks and Protected Areas 

Act, The Forest Act and The Fisheries Act. 

 

Further progress has been made in providing highways to meet the travel demands within our province. 

Over two thousand, five hundred miles of the provincial highway system are now dust free. The 

highway bridge at Prince Albert was opened to traffic. A start was made on the construction of the 

Petrofka Bridge. 

 

The final report of the Continuing Committee on Local Government will be received in the near future. 

My Government wishes to express its appreciation to the Members of the Committee named by local 

government organizations for their work on this very important question. The report will undoubtedly be 

comprehensive and will likely shed light on many facets of the problem. 

 



 

February 9, 1961 

 

 

11 

Before any legislation is introduced, the report will receive the most thorough study and consultations 

will be held with local government organizations. It is the hope of My Government that all concerned 

with this important question will co-operate in helping to establish the strongest and most effective form 

of local government. 

 

There has been continued progress in the building of the grid road system. By the end of 1960, one-half 

of the twelve thousand mile grid road program was completed. A program for the regravelling of grid 

roads was commenced. 

 

Nine towns and villages took advantage of the Government’s assistance to install water and sewage 

disposal facilities. You will be asked to approve funds to make assistance available to other 

communities. A study of ground water resources was advanced. The requirements of the provincial 

economy for additional water supplies makes it necessary to expand this program. 

 

Demand for local and long-distance telephone service continued to increase. The number of telephones 

in use increased by over ten thousand. This brings the total number of telephones in use to over one 

hundred and eighty-three thousand. New dial offices were placed in service in several communities last 

year. Meadow Lake, Wilkie, Unity, Outlook and Maple Creek are scheduled for conversion to dial 

operation in 1961. 

 

A program to assist Rural Telephone Companies to replace poles and provide a better standard of 

maintenance was instituted last year. It will be proposed that this program be enlarged to provide further 

improvement in rural telephone services. 

 

Contributory pension plans for employees are now very numerous. It is felt desirable to gather 

information regarding these plans in order to determine if portable contributory pension plans are 

practical and desirable. Accordingly, you will be asked to consider legislation providing for the 

registration and reporting of pension plans. 

 

You will be asked to amend and revise The Workmen’s Wage Act to provide for the more orderly 

payment of wages to workmen. 

 

The Co-operative movement in Saskatchewan continues to progress. A co-operative feeder program 

 



 

February 9, 1961 

 

 

12 

has been supported and aided. Credit unions continued to develop rapidly. You will be asked to consider 

amendments to The Credit Union Act. 

 

The Co-operative Fisheries Limited and Northern Co-operative Trading Services Limited have shown 

further strength during the past year. The use of the co-operative technique in Northern Saskatchewan is 

providing a useful method in furthering community development. At the request of the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indians, assistance will be given for the establishment of co-operative projects on Indian 

reserves. More co-operatives for the Metis people will be encouraged. 

 

A unique step in the Provincial borrowing program is being taken this year. The Government plans to 

make available Saskatchewan Savings Bonds for sale exclusively to the people of this province. The 

primary purpose of this issue will be to provide an opportunity for the people of Saskatchewan to invest 

their savings and at the same time participate in the development of their own province. As well, the 

bond will make a new source of funds available for the financing investment in the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation, the Saskatchewan Government Telephones and other activities. 

 

Two Federal-Provincial fiscal conferences have been held since the Legislative Assembly last met. All 

provinces joined in requesting a fairer portion of the constitutionally shared tax field, in order to carry 

out their own responsibilities to give increased assistance to local government. At the last conference, 

the Federal Government proposed that the rate of equalization payments should be frozen and not 

permitted to increase with the growth of the Canadian economy. Saskatchewan will be represented at a 

further conference scheduled to take place in the near future. At this conference My Government will 

continue to urge the extension of the principle of equalizing major tax revenues among the provinces. 

Only in this way can all Canadian provinces continue to share in the economic and social growth of our 

nation. 

 

Several questions of importance to Saskatchewan were referred by the Government of Canada to Royal 

Commissions and committees of inquiry. In its submissions to the Royal Commission on Transportation, 

My Government advocated a more equitable distribution of the burden of the cost of railway 

transportation in Canada. The Government’s views were directed to the relief of the prairie region from 

the impact of post-war increases in railway freight rates and to the preservation of the Crow’s Nest Pass 

Agreement rates 

 



 

February 9, 1961 

 

 

13 

on grain and grain products at their present levels and under the control of parliament. 

 

A brief was placed before the Royal Commission of Canada’s Automotive Industry, stressing the 

importance of lower priced motor vehicles to our provincial economy and objecting to artificial 

restrictions on trade. My Government also urged the maintenance of the freest possible climate for the 

circulation of ideas and information by the periodical press before the Royal Commission on 

Publications and recommended public support for worthwhile Canadian journals of opinion. 

Preparations are underway on submissions to be presented shortly in Ottawa to a special Senate 

Committee making a study of manpower and employment conditions and to the Parliamentary 

Committee on Agriculture and Colonization inquiring into the cost of farm machinery in Canada. 

 

During the past year, representatives of the Government of Saskatchewan have met with representatives 

of other provinces and of the Government of Canada to seek agreement on the best method of enabling 

Canadians to amend their own constitution. The Government of Saskatchewan has welcomed this effort 

to declare in law the independence which Canada has already achieved in fact by bringing to this 

country the formal power of amending her own constitution. Saskatchewan has expressed the view that 

any amending procedure should provide sufficient flexibility in the constitution to permit this nation to 

cope with future economic and social problems. It is earnestly hoped that the discussions will be 

successful in reaching agreement on a method of amendment worthy of the Canadian people. 

 

You will be asked to approve amendments to The Farm Security Act extending the protection given in 

the case of crop failure and extending the protection given to farmers against a final order for 

foreclosure of the home quarter. 

 

Legislation will be introduced consolidating and amending the law as to legitimacy by the introduction 

of The Legitimacy Act. 

 

Amendments to The Court of Appeal Act, The Conditional Sales At, The Distress Act, The Religious 

Societies Land At and The Commercial Agents Act will be submitted. 

 

The Public Accounts for the last fiscal year, together with estimates for the year beginning April 1, 1961 

will be submitted. 

 



 

February 9, 1961 

 

 

14 

I leave you now to the business of the Session with full confidence that you will favourably discharge 

your duties and responsibilities. May Divine Providence continue to bless our Province and guide the 

Legislature in all its deliberations. 


