



















































Hansard: February 21, 1961


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

FIRST SESSION — FOURTEENTH LEGISLATURE 

9th Day 

 

Tuesday, February 21, 1961. 

 

The House met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

CORRECTION 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day may I make a 

correction with regard to some remarks I made yesterday. I attributed at one point a statement to the 

“International Federation of Free Trade Unions,” and my reference should have been to a statement by 

the “International Labour Organization on referral from the International Federation of Free Trade 

Unions.” 

 

I thought too, Mr. Speaker, that the House would be interested in a statement which I have released to 

the press with regard to the Saskatchewan Savings Bonds, and with your permission I shall just read the 

pertinent parts of the statement. It has reference to the Saskatchewan Savings Bonds which were first 

announced about December of last year, but for which details were not completed at that time. 

 

I am announcing now that the bonds will bear interest at 5% and will go on sale on March 1st. They will 

be dated March 15, 1961, and will be redeemable at par sometime after September 15, 1961. If they are 

held to the date of maturity, March 15, 1971 they will be redeemed at a premium of 3%. Interest 

payments will be made annually by cheque. The bonds will be available in $100 denominations or any 

multiple thereof. They will be saleable only to residents of Saskatchewan under co-operation of societies 

who hold offices in Saskatchewan, and a maximum of $10,000 may be purchased by any one person. 

The bonds will be non-transferable and non-assignable except by estates. 

 

The bonds will be on sale for a period to be established by the Provincial Treasurer. The purchase price 

will be at par if the purchase if made by March 31, 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

2 

and interest to March 15 will be added on if purchases are made later than March 31. The sale will be 

handled by agents authorized by the Provincial Treasurer to include all branches of a chartered bank in 

Saskatchewan, and five major investment firms in the province, and the Saskatchewan Co-operative 

Credit Society Limited, which I understand will appoint as its agents the Credit Unions. These agents 

may in turn appoint sub agents. It is expected that the sale of the bonds will be held yearly and that $4 to 

$5 million will be raised annually from this sale. 

 

MOTION OF CONDOLENCE 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Also, Mr. Speaker, while I am on my feet I am sure that all hon. Members will 

have heard with regret of the death of the mother of the Prime Minister of Canada, the Rt. Hon. Mr. 

Diefenbaker. All of us will know that Mrs. Diefenbaker has lived to a very ripe old age, and she has not 

been in good health for sometime. Nevertheless we know that her death will be felt very greatly by her 

son, our Prime Minister. I knew that the Members of the Legislature would want to join in expressing 

our sympathy at this time. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Thatcher) 

 

“That this Assembly learns with profound regret of the loss suffered by the Rt. Hon. John G. 

Diefenbaker, the Prime Minister of Canada, on the death of his mother, Mrs. Florence Diefenbaker, 

and extends to him its most sincere condolences, praying that Divine Providence will assuage his 

grief.” 

 

Mr. Ross Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to associate myself and 

my colleagues with the remarks of the Provincial Treasurer in this connection. We are all aware of the 

deep attachment which the Prime Minister had for his mother. We know that she will be missed, not 

only by him but by others, and our sympathy certainly goes out to the family at this time. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

3 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon); — Mr. Speaker, I wish to welcome a group of students from the 

Grosvenor School in Saskatoon, with their teacher. 

 

I am sure all the hon. Members will join with me in saying how pleased they are to have them with us 

today and we hope their trip will be an enjoyable one, and also a profitable one. 

 

THRONE SPEECH DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Kramer, seconded by Mrs. 

Strum; 

 

And the proposed amendment thereto, moved by Mr. Thatcher, seconded by Mr. McDonald: 

 

Mr. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, may I first of all congratulate you on your 

election to your high office. We were all, I think, rather pleased that you did not put up too much 

resistance in being escorted to your Chair. We all recognize your capacity for fairness in conducting the 

affairs of this House. 

 

I wish also to extend congratulations to the mover of the Address-in-Reply, the hon. Member for the 

Battlefords (Mr. Kramer). I know of no M.L.A. in the House who works more strenuously on behalf of 

his Constituency than the hon. Member for the Battlefords. I wish also to single out for special 

congratulations the new lady Member representing the Constituency of Saskatoon (Mrs. Strum) for the 

wonderful address which she gave during the course of her maiden speech. 

 

I wish also to congratulate the hon. Provincial Treasurer (Hon. Mr. Lloyd) on having delivered a fine 

address to this Legislature yesterday. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

4 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — His was an address delivered with dignity and regard for the Opposition and with 

regard to the people of this province. It was indeed a wholesome type of address — the kind of address 

which I think befits a Member of this Legislature. The hon. Provincial Treasurer is respected by people 

in all walks of life, not only for his personal integrity but his integrity as a public servant. 

 

I wish again, and regretfully to take note of the fact that Opposition criticism has followed the usual 

pattern of not proffering any constructive criticism or any constructive counter-proposal to the Speech 

from the Throne. I wish again to point up the fact that although the Opposition maintained there was 

little of significance in the Speech from the Throne, there were things that were contained in the Speech 

that are of real significance to the people of this province. Sometimes I rather think, Mr. Speaker, that 

the Opposition almost expects a super-spectacular event, and I am almost led to believe that even though 

this administration were to successfully put a man into space, and send him to Venus and back in 

bouncing health, it would still be considered of no great significance, but I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, 

that things have been done and references are made in the Speech from the Throne to things that are 

more meaningful in terms of benefits to the economy of Saskatchewan and to the people of 

Saskatchewan, than the great endeavours of sending a man into space. 

 

I would like to mention a few of them. His Honour‟s address speaks of the continuous strides and 

progressive development of our province. It mentions having undertaken last year the largest — or the 

current fiscal year — the largest highway program in the history of this province. It announces that 2500 

miles of dust-free highway is now available to the travelling public. Mr. Speaker, it is recognized 

throughout Canada that Saskatchewan has a particularly difficult problem in providing highway 

services. It is generally recognized that there are more miles of highway per capita in this province and 

that distances per capita are the greatest in all of Canada. It is recognized that with the limited financial 

resources available to this province, the Department of Highways has done a most efficient job in 

providing highway services. In addition, Mr. Speaker, it is well-known too that the benefits of assistance 

made by the provincial treasury for the development of municipal grid road systems is well received, 

and is recognized as a major effort on the part of this administration in the development of better rural 

roads. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

5 

It is mentioned in the Speech from the Throne that 6,000 miles of the 12,000 miles of grid road program 

has been completed. This is of significance, Mr. Speaker. It mentions, too, gravelling of grid roads and 

that assistance for this is now available to municipalities. It mentions, Mr. Speaker, great expansion of 

the buildings and facilities on the campus of our university of which we are all proud. It specifically 

mentions the opening of the new biology and arts buildings on the university campus in Saskatoon, and 

it tells of plans for new university buildings on the Regina campus of our university. These are all 

significant things in terms of providing better service in many fields to the people of our province. 

 

It makes reference to the completion of the Technical School at Moose Jaw which will accommodate 

some 1400 students. I am certain the hon. Leader of the Opposition appreciates the value of the 

Technical School in his home city of Moose Jaw. 

 

The Throne Speech states, too, that over 8,000 loans have been made to Saskatchewan students since the 

inception of the Student Aid Fund in 1949, and that a substantial increase in this fund will be requested 

of this Legislature. 

 

It mentions continuation of Teachers‟ Scholarship Grants, although it says nothing about the grants that 

are also available to worthy students entering the university. Nevertheless, further assistance is also 

made available to worthy Saskatchewan students who wish to enter the university. 

 

It also mentions that in spite of adverse economic factors, grants for general school purposes will be 

further increased. It draws attention to the continued development and progress in the construction of the 

South Saskatchewan power and irrigation project. This involves a heavy financial commitment for the 

Province of Saskatchewan. The total cost of development on completion will range somewhere in the 

neighbourhood of $130 million. Mr. Speaker, it will be necessary to borrow huge sums of money for the 

development of this project, and I would suggest that if we are to be criticized for borrowing money for 

the economic development of this province, that it should also be said by our critics that they don‟t want 

these projects, because either we borrow money for them or we don‟t have them. It is just as simple as 

that. Here is $130 million that will be expended over a period of time by this province in the 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

6 

development of this one project alone. 

 

I note that the hon. Leader of the Opposition in the House of Commons was very much in support of this 

project. To be consistent, he should not now condemn the Government for borrowing money for this 

type of project. 

 

Further in the field of economic development, the Throne Speech records the great progress made by 

mentioning the rapid development of the Squaw Rapids project, and the official opening of the 

Boundary Dam Power Station at Estevan, which in conjunction with the newly constructed power 

facilities of the Queen Elizabeth plant in Saskatoon, has doubled electrical generating capacity in the 

province during the past two years. 

 

Power is essential to industrialization, and its consumption is the best criteria of industrial and economic 

growth. Without basic power development we cannot have industry, and the fact, Mr. Speaker, that our 

power consumption has gone up steadily is the best indication of the economic growth of this province. 

 

The hon. Provincial Treasurer mentioned in the course of his address yesterday that some $378 million 

had been invested in these projects: power, gas, and telephones. This is a worthy investment Mr. 

Speaker, and has been held up to the people of this province by the Opposition as being a burden and an 

impossible debt. This is not correct, Mr. Speaker. Either we go ahead with this kind of development and 

we borrow money for it, which is repayable by the people who use these services, or we do not have this 

desirable kind of development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this has been a particularly difficult field for a government to move into, because it is 

recognized that in this province we have serious handicaps in resource development. Not only because 

of great distances and sparse population, but also because any development that takes place in our 

province, with reference to electricity is difficult and expensive of development. We are not endowed 

with the same natural advantages as occur in provinces to the east and west of us. Comparison is often 

made to Manitoba; it is a very unfair comparison, Mr. Speaker. Manitoba‟s power development was well 

under way before Saskatchewan‟s began. That is Mr. Speaker, before a CCF Government was elected in 

Saskatchewan to undertake this kind of development. The Manitoba Government developed their 

projects at a time when costs were low and on sites that were relatively much more economical to 

develop. The Pine Falls plant is an example. Then too the relatively smaller area served in Manitoba, 

plus a more densely 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

7 

populated rural area made electrification comparatively easy in Manitoba. The area served in Manitoba 

could be put in the southeast corner of Saskatchewan. This is some indication of the problem 

confronting those who have the responsibility for the power development in this province. They have 

done an excellent job, and this work was undertaken when, as we all know, costs have increased year by 

year. It is truly a remarkable achievement, in view of these handicaps, Mr. Speaker, that power has been 

brought as cheaply as it has been brought to our rural areas and scattered urban centres. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — It is a source of great pride to me, Mr. Speaker, to go and visit particularly the 

remote northern areas of this province, places like Moody Lake south of Pierceland, an isolated 

settlement some 20 miles from Pierceland which itself is also an isolated village, to see power 

installations serving the needs and bringing better living conditions to the people living in those areas. 

These people have and will continue to supply the answer to the Opposition, Mr. Speaker. They have 

done so in the last three elections. The facts are the rural people appreciate this service and the people in 

the urban centres also appreciate the gas services that have been brought to them. They will supply the 

answer, and if you were to ask them today which they prefer, to give up these services and remove what 

is termed as a burdensome debt, they would say, „give us more of the same thing.‟ 

 

The Throne Speech also makes reference to the fact that some 190,000 people in this province are now 

serviced by electrical power. It also mentions that twenty-four additional urban centres were served with 

natural gas in 1960, and that over 70,000 customers received the benefit of this service in ninety-three 

urban centres. These are makers of progress, Mr. Speaker. This kind of development provides new 

employment opportunities. 

 

Reference has been made in this House to the increased number of public servants employed in both 

these utilities and in the public service of this province. The fact that the public service has been 

increased in terms of staff is an indication of a province meeting demands for services occasioned by 

modern circumstances. This too provides employment, particularly in the field of utility development. I 

know of no other way in which to meet the growing problem of unemployment, and to provide jobs for 

the many children who graduate from our high-schools and university to 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

8 

take their place in life. It is by developing our resources, and improving living standards that this is 

done, Mr. Speaker. The efforts made by this administration in this direction have been outstanding. 

 

I wish to refer to mineral development mentioned in His Honour‟s address. It mentions over 4400 

producing oil wells, producing 53 million barrels of oil annually, exceeding the 1959 production by 

11%. I was interested in a recent statement made by Mr. J.F. MacNicholl, Manager of the Saskatchewan 

Section of the Canadian Petroleum Association, when he stated that 130 companies with producing 

wells and the industry as a whole invested over $800 million in Saskatchewan for oil exploration and 

development. Mr. Speaker, this doesn‟t look like this administration has frightened industry away from 

the province, and that it has frightened people away from the province who are actually interested in the 

development of this province‟s resources. I think that such references as; industry would not come here 

because we treat them like an Al Capone syndicate are completely out of order, Mr. Speaker. It is 

certainly no credit to the person who made that statement, and I think this statement will be resented by 

these people as well, who have had enough confidence in this province and its administration to invest 

these millions of dollars in the field of oil development alone. 

 

Mention was made in the Throne Speech that good progress was being made in overcoming difficulties 

in connection with potash production, and it very modestly states that it hopes we will be in production 

in this particular mineral in the coming year. 

 

I submit again, Mr. Speaker, that these are genuine marks of progress, and nothing that is said by the 

Opposition speakers can gainsay those well established facts, because the people of this province daily 

see the evidence of these hallmarks of progress. 

 

Well Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn my attention directly to the activities of my own Department, 

after expressing very keen appreciation to the Power Corporation, for the service that it has brought to 

the farmers of Saskatchewan. I would like first of all Mr. Speaker, briefly to review some of the 

agricultural events of the past year — some of our problems. Now hon. Members of the House will 

recall that a year ago we had a supplementary estimate of $6 million in the agricultural vote of this 

House to provide emergency assistance to those farmers who had their crops snowed under. This 

provision amounted to $6 million — the Federal Government shared 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

9 

half of this cost but we still had a heavy obligation in transportation assistance on behalf of farmers who 

found it necessary to ship in feed and fodder from outside sources of supply. 

 

I want to mention Mr. Speaker, in connection with this, that we in Saskatchewan live in a very 

hazardous, natural, agricultural environment, that often calls for heavy emergency expenditures of this 

kind. It is unfortunate that this $3 million so sorely needed for emergencies could not have gone into the 

development of roads and those things that are strictly within the provincial jurisdiction. 

 

We were very fortunate in having a good spring, last spring. The early rains gave us one of the best 

forage crops that we‟ve had in our history, and as a consequence we did have well above a normal crop 

harvested under very satisfactory conditions. Therefore, all in all, production-wise Saskatchewan had a 

good year. But, we must realistically again, face the future. We‟re all aware of the fact that subsoil 

moisture is deficient. We are aware that we may again have a widespread drought and grasshopper 

infestation, and we must prepare for these eventualities. We have on hand sufficient chemicals and 

supplies readily available to farmers at very reasonable costs Mr. Speaker, and again I mention this to 

the House; from a cost of $3.00 per acre for grasshopper control, for chemicals, I should say, used in 

grasshopper control, $3.00 an acre in 1949, by bulk purchase we have brought this cost down to 15¢ an 

acre at present. These are things that have been done on behalf of our farm people; this represents a very 

substantial investment, but we believe it‟s worthwhile to have ample supplies on hand in order that we 

can move readily to control insect infestations. 

 

I would like to say something about the newly created Family Farm Improvement Branch. A year ago, 

Mr. Speaker, at this time, the plan was merely in its thinking stage. We had no organization set up as 

yet, and certainly we had no applications on hand. We have done well in our first year of operation. We 

had quite a number of administrative and technical problems to surmount in our first year of operation, 

but I am glad to report that we were able to complete some 750 installations, and that at the moment we 

have over 4700 applications on hand, of which some 1500 have been serviced by technical servicemen. 

So we enter the new fiscal year well equipped to increase the number of farmers that will receive this 

service. This is a very well-received service, and a very natural follow-up to the 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

10 

rural electrification program. This program, like many others Mr. Speaker, was criticized in this House, 

and it is hard for me to understand why a program of this kind should be criticized. It‟s true, we‟re 

subsidizing this program, and with every justification, Mr. Speaker. We recognize the economic 

disadvantage of the farmer in providing these services on his own initiative, and paying the high cost 

that he would have to pay both for supplies and technical service, so we give the farmer these services, 

and I predict Mr. Speaker, that we will be expanding this program to meet increasing demand, and my 

hope is that the Provincial Treasurer, in the allocation of his budget in the future years, will be able to 

allocate sufficient to this branch to meet the demand requirements. 

 

I should also like to make reference to AMA, which is the Agricultural Machinery Administration. This 

is a new field of activity initiated in this province for the testing of farm machinery for performance and 

use under working conditions in Saskatchewan. Not only for performance and use, but for any 

mechanical defects that might develop in new machinery, particularly. It has been very well received. 

The farmers of Alberta Machinery Testing Organization, and as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I am glad 

to say that the Alberta Government is co-operating with us, and is providing to us a token grant to carry 

on this work, and is also paying for the reports which we send to the farmers of Alberta. I am hopeful, 

and I have reason to believe, that Manitoba will also co-operate in this new field of endeavour, and it is 

my hope that the three provinces together can combine their financial resources to provide a still better 

testing service for the farmers of the three prairie provinces. 

 

I should like also to make reference to the northern pasture development. This has been a good program. 

We now have some twelve bush pastures under development. The land developed and cleared to date 

will carry 8,000 head of livestock. If we are to increase the numbers of livestock in this province, we 

need to look to the north. The possibilities there Mr. Speaker, are tremendous. We hope too, that these 

pastures will not only encourage other people to clear land, and to seize the opportunities of producing 

more cattle by developing land for grass, but we also wish to assist those farmers who do not have 

sufficient land resources to expand in this direction. These community pasture facilities add stability to 

farm income in these areas. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

11 

I should also like to mention Mr. Speaker, the land clearing program on Crown Land. Not too much is 

said of this — it is not as spectacular as some other programs — a good deal is said about farm credit, 

but in the case of Crown Leases, it might interest this House to know that since this program has been 

inaugurated, nearly $9 million has been spent by the Provincial Department of Agriculture in clearing 

land on behalf of Crown lessees, and the total land cleared to date is some 600,000 acres. This has been 

a benefit, not only to the Crown lessee involved, but has been of benefit to the entire economy of the 

province. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Just a brief reference to crop insurance. Everyone in the House knows the basis of 

the Agreement between the Federal and Provincial Governments. Here we have inaugurated a program 

this year. Applications and information have been sent out to some 40,000 farmers. I cannot say to the 

House at the moment as to whether there will be crop insurance areas set up because 25% of the farmers 

in an area representing 25% of the acreage must file applications before an area can be declared. We will 

know this by the end of February, and as hon. Members know, the date for receiving applications has 

been extended, and the Members will be asked to amend The Crop Insurance Act accordingly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to turn to the economic problems confronting the farmer. I regret that time is 

running out, and I am not going to trespass, I can assure you, on any of the time of the following 

speakers. In the post-war years significant developments have taken place in the agricultural industry 

that have transformed our view completely as to how we ought to treat this industry in an economic 

sense. Gone are the days where we can continue to depend on the so-called law of supply and demand, 

as a means of governing agricultural surpluses. This is completely out of date, Mr. Speaker, because I 

submit that farmers operating in the kind of economic environment they are today have set costs and 

their total income must meet their total costs. This has been far from accomplished, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let me give some examples. The farmers of this province now have some 40,000 more tractors than 

they had in 1946; 40,000 more combines; 47,000 more trucks. Because of mechanization and the 

transformation of the industry, demands have grown for better service in transporting children to schools 

involving greater distances. There have been many bad effects from this 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

12 

great technological advance. We can mention, for example, the general trend from the agricultural 

industry to other segments of the economy for employment; the thinning out of the rural population; the 

drying up of small hamlets, towns and villages in favour of larger centres. These are some of the 

consequences of mechanization, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It might interest the House to know that in the agricultural population of Canada, for example, in the 

period 1946 to 1959 the number gainfully employed dropped from 692,000 from a gainfully employed 

population of 1,200,000 to 692,000. It‟s going on all over the country, in the United States as well, and 

since this province is mainly an agricultural province, and a province which, because of moisture, is a 

low productivity area, the liquidation of farmers from the farms has been of greater significance. This is 

the reason the population has gone down in the province, Mr. Speaker. What are the causes of this 

trend? I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that it is not because of the mechanization of the industry 

altogether that this has taken place, but it is primarily due to the cost-price squeeze that the farmer finds 

himself in. It is for this reason, Mr. Speaker, that a delegation of 1,000 farmers went to Ottawa not too 

long ago, seeking redress for the money that they had already lost because of the cost-price squeeze. 

According to the submission made to the Federal Government at that time, it was stated that the farmers 

of this province on account of wheat alone, had lost some $500 million in the three-year period 

1954-1956 as compared to the previous three-year period. This is a tremendous amount of money. They 

asked for deficiency payments to help make up this loss in income in part at least. 

 

I have had information gathered in regard to farm income, and on the basis of this information, for 

example, in 1957 which was a normal year, the total farm cost including wages, depreciation on 

machinery, taxes, health, educational services etc., this total cost to the farmers of Saskatchewan, some 

100,000 of them, was $711.8 million. Then I turn to determine what the gross income was for these farm 

people, and I find that their gross income in 1957 was $586 million. In other words, Mr. Speaker, the 

industry as a whole went in the red by $125.8 million in 1957, and conditions have grown steadily worse 

since then. This is big money we are talking about, and this is a heavy burden; it is too much of a burden 

to be asking the farmer to carry. 

 

As I stated, the mechanization of the industry has removed the possibility of the family farm being 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

13 

self-sustaining by virtue of its own resources. Farming now is a very exacting business the same as any 

other business, and the income required by the agricultural industry as a whole must be equal to the total 

cost that this industry is expected to bear, not only for farm operations but for providing local 

government services as well. This is the crux of the local government problem, and a provincial 

government problem too, wherein there are increasing demands because of mechanization for better 

services which are of course legitimate demands. As I previously stated, it is in this manner that we 

make progress, however, people must have the money to pay for those services. The big objection by the 

farmer is that he has not sufficient money to maintain services at the present level without talking too 

much about increasing services. He is aware of the fact that his income problem must be solved and 

when this is solved, Mr. Speaker, the major problem facing local governments and provincial 

governments will be solved as well. 

 

For a solution to these great economic problems we must of necessity look to the Federal Government 

which has responsibility for national policy and fiscal policy, and has control over interprovincial and 

export trade. 

 

I was very much interested in the recent national convention held by the Liberal Party. I was particularly 

interested in their agricultural program, because in this House I have heard year after year hon. Members 

opposite get up and suggest that somehow it was within the capacity of the Provincial Government to 

correct the mistakes and the negligence of our national Government in regard to farm income. So it may 

be very interesting to make some observations on the policies that came out of the national Liberal 

conference in Ottawa recently. I would have thought that the Members of this House and other people 

from Saskatchewan who attended that conference would have insisted upon agricultural policy that 

would have solved the income problems of the agricultural industry. I submit that the policies that went 

before the platform finally adopted by the national Liberal convention falls far short of achieving that 

objective. They have done a good deal of hollering about what Mr. Diefenbaker has done, and what he 

didn‟t do on behalf of agriculture, but I submit, Mr. Speaker, that with slight variations the program on 

which they hope to be elected in this province in the next federal election, is identical to the 

Conservative program, and it is based on the same economic philosophy that surpluses must be made to 

disappear by the workings of the law of supply and demand. That is, by making farm prices so 

unattractive 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

14 

to farmers that they will get out of a particular line of production. This is what we have had during the 

whole post-war period. 

 

One of the revealing statements that emerged from this convention — I wonder sometimes why these 

policies are developed — I think they are going to miss the mark. The prairie members, it said, persisted 

at the closed door session, but when the final policy came out it was satisfactory to them. One 

observation was made by a representative from Yorkton, who said this: 

 

“The motion was supported by Mr. . . . of Yorkton, and other speakers who contended it would give 

western Liberals the kind of political talking point they needed. They had earlier warned that they 

could not win prairie seats without such a program.” 

 

I suggest to them that they will not win any prairie seats on the program they adopted at their national 

convention. Here is a condemnation that comes direct from some Members sitting right in this House — 

a condemnation of former federal Liberal policy, when they said and I read from the text: 

 

“Although Saskatchewan agriculture has shown a greater increase in efficiency and productivity over 

the post-war years than any other major Canadian industry, it is confronted by prices which have 

declined over the past ten years while the farm costs have risen by one-third.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, out of seven of those ten years there was a Liberal Government in power in Ottawa. Here 

is a concrete admission by them that agriculture came to what they termed stagnation when they said, 

and I quote again: 

 

“Here is a measure of the cost-price squeeze. Here is the situation that has led to intolerable low 

income in farming, and to a tremendous migration from agriculture and stagnation and ineffectiveness 

in Federal Government policy.” 

 

Seven of those years, Mr. Speaker, there was a Federal Liberal Government in power in Ottawa. 

Inadvertently they made a self-confession, but unhappily, Mr. Speaker, they did not come up with a 

proper solution. What did you think was offered? One more dollar than the Conservatives are offering. 

They are offering parity, they say, 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

15 

based on efficient production, parity on three hundred bushels. I submit the implementation of this 

proposal would drive the agricultural industry deeper and deeper into the depths of depression, Mr. 

Speaker. I mention again that for one year alone this industry in this province alone was deficient by 

$125 million in meeting its obligation. 

 

Bold new policies will be required, and Mr. Speaker, I haven‟t any strong political sentiments regarding 

solving the farm problem. If the Liberal Party does it, I will give them full credit for it. If the 

Conservative Government does it, I will give them full credit for it. If they do it, but over the years, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think all within reach of my voice will agree that they haven‟t solved the basic economic 

problems facing the agricultural industry, and I plead that they reconstruct their program and that it be 

similar to the kind of program that we will have when the New Party presents its farm program, which I 

can assure you will guarantee to the farmers of Canada that never again will they have to fear because of 

lack of adequate income to meet total farm costs. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — What is your program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Some people say, how can this be accomplished? How can you provide farmers 

with a high level of income and at the same time meet the problem of increased production? Well, 

increased production should not be a bad thing, Mr. Speaker, provided we have policies that will provide 

markets for our surplus products outside Canada, for people who are hungry. It is said from the most 

reliable authority that two-thirds of the people of the world go hungry. I suggested before in this House 

that we might use some of the money which is now going for defence and which we all admit does not 

provide defence any more be used to extend credit to under-developed countries, the hungry countries, 

and thereby not only provide a market for our agricultural products, but assure a continuing market for 

the many industrial products that Canada‟s industrial set-up can produce in abundance. 

 

It is in this manner that we can improve living standards in these under-developed countries. This is a 

good investment, Mr. Speaker, not only in terms of goodwill and proper human relationships between 

people but it will also prove to be good business. 

 

I would take my hat off to any Government that would work vigorously in this direction. But the Liberal 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

16 

platform here says it is worried about surpluses and who is going to suffer the consequences of getting 

rid of surpluses? We know the farmer has been paying the bill so far. For example, a year ago an 

announcement was made that floor prices on hogs would be lowered, and as a consequence our farm 

people went out of hog production. Our hog production in this province, or marketing I should say, 

dropped 34%, and our hog production went down about 25%. This is not good. This is the way the law 

of supply and demand works and which is supposed to exonerate governments from any responsibility 

for maintaining farm income. Our Liberal friends, in concocting their policy, say this, and again I quote: 

 

“We reaffirm, the Convention said, our belief in flexible price support for major products, so that 

governments would be relieved of carrying excessive stocks.” 

 

What does this mean, Mr. Speaker? This means that the farmer will be asked again to carry the loss by 

putting prices so low that he will be liquidated out of business. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I submit, Mr. Speaker, that under present circumstances this cannot be done 

without great injury to the farmers concerned, and to the entire economy of the country. I submit that in 

face of the general depopulation of rural areas, and reduction in numbers of those gainfully employed in 

agriculture who sought employment in other industries, in light now of the increasing unemployment 

problem in other industries. I submit a prosperous agriculture could absorb all of the unemployed that 

are in Canada today. Farmers need help; they need help to operate their costly machines more 

efficiently. A prosperous agricultural industry could provide employment for another 600,000 people. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the hon. Minister would permit a question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Not at the moment. I must say to the hon. Member that I will be finished in just a 

minute. I‟m not going to trespass on anyone else‟s time. Mr. Speaker, I suggest that bringing in policies 

of this kind are not only good for the agricultural industry, but they are good for the entire economy of 

Canada, and they are part and parcel of finding a solution to the growing problem of unemployment. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

17 

My time is up, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Would the Minister permit a question now, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — When I‟m through, yes. Because of the reasons I have enumerated, because the 

Address of His Honour indicates continued progress and further development of the future of this 

province, and because the group on this side of the House believes in the policy of planning production 

in the interests of serving the needs of all the people, not only of Saskatchewan but all of Canada, I 

support the motion. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, before the Minister sits down, would he permit one question? He has 

been telling us about all the advantages of socialist planning and agriculture. Now, I want to ask him this 

question: Why is it that recently all these Socialist countries such as China, Poland, Russia, 

Czechoslovakia are over here buying our wheat? We have surpluses, yes, but they cannot grow enough 

agriculture under their system or enough feed to feed the people. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, the reply to that is very obvious. This is an indication that they need 

it, and I am not interested in their techniques of production or their economic philosophy or anything 

else. The fact is that the Chinese people, 600 million of them need food. If other countries have 

misfortunes and crop failures we should be prepared to feed them too. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Your system has failed! Your system is for you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — That‟s a pretty small one, Ross. Pretty feeble! 

 

Mr. Ian H. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, first of all I wish to congratulate you on 

your high office as Speaker of this Assembly, and 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

18 

I know you will be fair with us at all times. And I also congratulate the mover and the seconder of the 

Speech from the Throne. Unfortunately, I can‟t see fit to congratulate any of the following speakers 

from that side of the House, because I have sat here now for two weeks and I have heard very little. 

Most of the speeches from that side of the House were criticism of the Leader of the Opposition and 

very little else. 

 

I have the great pleasure, Mr. Speaker, of representing that Constituency which has always been an 

exceptional asset to the Province of Saskatchewan, namely Souris-Estevan, and while I feel that it is one 

of the most progressive portions of this province, I might point out, that they have turned their back on 

socialism and joined the eastern half of the province and have got into the Liberal camp. 

 

We have natural resources in Estevan and together with the water supply that was available, it gave 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation an opportunity to locate their huge boundary dam installation. Most of 

the developed oil resources in the province are located in the Souris-Estevan Constituency. We have 

better-than-average grain farmers to produce better-than-average crops in our area and many of these 

people I have the pleasure of knowing personally. 

 

At present we have good highways leading to our city and we are served by both railroads, the Canadian 

Pacific and the Canadian National. However, we are waging a tremendous battle along the Soo Line at 

the present time to get the Canadian Pacific Railways to keep the railroads and the last passenger trains 

service to our community. Now it is hoped that the Board of Transport Commissioners, which is having 

a hearing on this thing, see fit to keep that last passenger train intact. It happens to be one of the railroad 

lines that made money in the past year of business, and we simply do not want to lose any of our 

services at this time. 

 

Now, in the transportation field we have quite a problem in our Constituency and that is the bus system. 

We have tried to get bus services extended from Carnduff to Gainsborough, and the Government saw fit 

to have the municipal hospital located in Gainsborough. The senior-citizens‟ home is located in 

Carnduff and these people have no means of getting back and forth except by charity. I will hope that 

the Government will take a second look at this problem and try to see that the people in that 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

19 

eastern end of the Constituency get some service to which, I believe, they are entitled. The Crown 

Corporations, I was always led to believe, were for service and not for profit, yet when we ask for a bus, 

they say it is not profitable. 

 

We also, in Estevan, have an airport, which has great possibilities for the future. Since the war Estevan 

has struggled to keep the airfield and the buildings in shape. These facilities were indeed a boon to the 

city in the days of the oil boom, because they provided a great deal of accommodation when 

accommodation was at a premium. Now much of the credit for the purchase and the maintenance of 

these buildings must go to the mayor of Estevan, Mayor Nicholson, who has been the mayor of that 

centre for some twenty years and has just been re-elected to another two-year term. Prior to that, he 

spent five years as an alderman on the town council, and I have had the pleasure of working with that 

gentleman on the city council of Estevan. 

 

Now, Estevan used to be a judicial centre with a fine court house, both modern and beautiful and its 

surroundings were a picture-place in the city. However, we used to have a resident judge and just 

recently, the Government saw fit to change their judicial centres, leaving Estevan out. I ask the question: 

Why is this Government trying to make justice pay for itself? It is obvious that the administration of 

justice has become some sort of a political football. We had a good judge at Estevan who was both 

young and active. Yet today, a large centre like Estevan, has no judge and we object strenuously to 

losing any of our services. For example, from December 6, 1960 until January 24, 1961, there was no 

judge to hold court in Estevan. During that period, there were eighteen estates pending with widows and 

children awaiting the outcome. 

 

I am responsible for the welfare of the Souris-Estevan Constituency for the present time at least, and I 

should like to hear from the Minister as to his aims and objectives and whether or not it is the intention 

of the Department to make justice pay for itself, dollar for dollar. At present we are served by the judge 

from Moosomin, who, I understand, is ready for retirement. I feel, that there was no good and valid 

reason why a young judge was removed from Estevan when he could have handled easily Weyburn, 

Arcola and Moosomin, as well as Estevan.”Humanity First,” was the slogan of this Government before 

it got into office, but I contend that removing our judge from that city, makes justice only for the rich. At 

present, there are some thirteen judges serving twenty-one judicial centres in Saskatchewan. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

20 

Now in my short time in the political field I have made some observations and I should like to offer 

these as requests to the Government, in the hope that they will be sympathetic to our problems and try 

and do something about them. 

 

Firstly, I might suggest to the Government that Highway No. 18 be completed from Carnduff to the 

Manitoba boundary. At the present time it stops short at Carnduff and we lose a lot of traffic, both local 

and tourist traffic, to North Dakota, where they can travel on blacktop. If this road is completed in 

blacktop, we will have a black ribbon from the Manitoba boundary through to the City of Regina. 

 

I also suggest, that Highway No. 9 from the North Dakota boundary to our lake resorts of Carlyle and 

Kenosee should also be completed and blacktopped. Any travellers on a weekend will know what I 

mean when I say that that road at the present time is most dangerous and dusty and it certainly would 

help the tourist trade if we had that highway blacktopped. Since the Constituency of Souris-Estevan 

supplied this Government with a good deal of its revenue, these requests are not out of order. 

 

Now, while I am on the subject of highways, I suggest too, that on the wide highways, like Highway No. 

39 from Weyburn to Estevan and from Estevan down to Oxbow, the speed limit should be raised from 

60 miles an hour to 70 miles an hour by day and 55 miles an hour by night. With the new cars and new 

transportation we have, these speed limits are not unrealistic. In the meantime it would release our 

policemen who sit along the highways nabbing motorists for other police duties. I noticed in the State of 

Montana the last time I was down there, there was no speed limit at all except where marked and I 

seldom found any of the travelling public pass you, if you were travelling in the neighbourhood of 70 

miles an hour. I think that the speed limit should be raised also on the Trans-Canada Highway, which is 

another wide highway. The visibility in Saskatchewan, because of our flat terrain, is very good most of 

the time. 

 

Now, the Souris-Estevan Constituency, during the past ten years, has prospered and a good deal of the 

prosperity in our area has been due to the development of the oil industry and the satellite industries it 

brought with it to that area. The general influx of people brought a good deal of money to the area and 

our city expanded and jumped from about 4,000 people to a city of 9,000 people almost overnight. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank; — Will the Leader of the Opposition please listen? 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

21 

Mr. MacDougall: — The oil boom lasted for about three or four years and suddenly it ceased. Now, the 

legislation that was passed, which I say was very questionable, was the legislation on the road allowance 

tax. There are many things to consider in this business and I don‟t believe the Government should make 

it difficult for business and industry to stay within our boundaries by grabbing at every straw of taxation, 

because it just simply tends to drive industries away. If other provinces can make concessions to these 

industries to try to attract them within their boundaries and to hold them, then I suggest we should do 

likewise. I suggest that we have not got the biggest oil fields in Canada or the most productive ones 

either. However, we have certain assets and one of them is the proximity to the major markets in the 

east. A good oil well in Saskatchewan will produce somewhere in the neighbourhood of one hundred 

barrels a day, while over in Alberta, a good well can produce anywhere between three hundred and 

approximately two thousand barrels a day. Saskatchewan crude oil too, is not as desirable in most 

refineries as is Alberta crude, because of the high sulphur content. 

 

Now, if Crown Land costs are cheap, this would stimulate interest in our province and in the oil 

industry. The Government policy, regarding handouts to co-operatives is another deterrent to industries 

having faith in our Government. This produces an unfavourable investment climate and you cannot 

blame companies for locating in other provinces where they are sure of more favourable treatment. In 

the interest of investment by private enterprise, there should be no tax concessions or favours granted to 

the co-operatives, unless we are prepared to make these same concessions all along the line. 

 

I have here a copy of the February 2nd issue of a magazine “Oil in Canada” and it shows a number of 

wild cat wells, drilled in Canada, and here is what I find; In Saskatchewan there is one, in Alberta there 

are fifteen and in British Columbia there are four. The oil companies, I point out, are still searching for 

oil elsewhere. 

 

I will also mention geophysical parties work, and I find as of January 15th, there was only one working 

in all of Saskatchewan, while eighty-eight crews were at work in Alberta and British Columbia and nine 

in the North West Territories. Again, I have a copy of the different lands, being auctioned off in Alberta 

for oil and gas. To date, there are some seventeen different land sales listed as against two in 

Saskatchewan. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

22 

Again, I point out, this Government need only sit back and ask themselves why. It won‟t be long before 

even the furthest of the back benchers will be going to wonder about their Government, with exception 

of course of those whose brains are too bleached from brainwashing. 

 

At intervals of four to five years since about 1945, this Government has alternately been trotting out the 

threat of confiscation of mineral rights and lulling the farmer into a false sense of security. During the 

past six months we seem to be in one of those periods, where the Government is taking unto themselves 

the minerals by threat of forfeiture. Notices are sent out six month prior to the Crown taking the 

minerals over. There is no final notice of warning, Mr. Speaker, it is six months in advance then you 

lose your mineral rights. And I suggest to any farmer, that they might just as well check any favorite 

attention that they get from the Government, because it might mean the confiscation of their mineral 

rights. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — On a point of order, the hon. Member is absolutely wrong. 

 

Mr. MacDougall: — The mineral tax is nothing more than a nuisance tax with the purpose of taking 

over all mineral resources to the Crown. This is unjust, because frequently you are taxing people for 

something which might not even be there. It is an amazing thing to note, that if your oil and gas rights 

are forfeited, you cannot get them back. However, if it is the coal rights involved, you have up to five 

years to redeem them. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — That is not true either. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! If the hon. Minister has a correction to make he can do so at the 

conclusion of the speech. 

 

Mr. MacDougall: — Thank you. In short, this plan of mineral taxation is a confiscatory one, and no one 

knows whether or not paying the tax would ever be justified in financial return. No one is certain how 

many, if any, minerals lie under his land and it maybe one hundred years before any mining is started. 

The value of minerals might never cover 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

23 

the taxes. Natural products hidden beneath the earth are of no value whatever until they are recovered. 

 

Now, when the CCF Party came into power, its bid for public support was bolstered by the promise that 

they would clip the wings of large corporations and financial institutions. This went over big in 

agricultural Saskatchewan. However, now the farmers are feeling the same pressures that industry felt 

before. When the press pointed these things out that sooner or later all would feel the pressure of 

socialist demands they were criticized and bitterly denounced. Such would never happen; socialism was 

good for the down-trodden. 

 

Well, the turn of events, Mr. Speaker, indicates that these warnings of the newspapers were well 

founded. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support the amendment to the motion; I cannot support the motion. 

 

Mr. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, before speaking to the amendment I wish to 

congratulate you on your elevation to the office of Speaker. I know you will conduct this House in a fair 

and impartial manner. I should like also to congratulate everyone in the House who has participated so 

far, with particular attention to the Members of the Opposition who have done a very good job so far in 

opposing the Government, and in showing the people of Saskatchewan that they are not what they are 

cracked up to be. 

 

I will try, in the few moments that I have, Mr. Speaker, to contribute my little share. 

 

I was rather amused the other day when the Minister of Education got up and mentioned that the 

Members on this side of the House had accused the Government of coasting and drifting. Well, I 

personally think that the Members who did mention that were probably slightly wrong, especially when 

the Minister went on to elaborate on the Throne Speech, comparing it with a new automobile. He was 

comparing the Throne Speech with that of a new automobile. It‟s all right to want to have a new 

automobile, but he said, “They were quite content to drive the old automobile and get mileage out of it”. 

Well, they are certainly getting the mileage, Mr. Speaker, but what the Minister forgot to mention is the 

fact that the automobile is still on the blocks; they wheels are turning, the mileage is going, but they are 

getting nowhere. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

24 

Then the Minister of Agriculture mentions the great agricultural problems that we have. We may have 

agricultural problems, but under a free enterprise system one of our biggest problems is probably 

over-production, and trying to solve the question of transportation to get this production to the less 

fortunate people of the world. 

 

Is he suggesting a socialist system as they have in China under the Communists? He said that the 

systems which have been advocated here have been no good. If that is so, why doesn‟t he mention it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I did not suggest that whatever! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — He said the other systems were wrong. However, Mr. Speaker, in speaking a few 

moments ago on the question of the amendment to the Speech from the Throne, which I believe is of 

tremendous importance because it involves the freedom of the people, and freedoms of local 

government. Before you can consider the freedoms of local government you have to go back in time to 

find out where or how we got these local governments. From what I can gather, Mr. Speaker, the first 

type of local government was the family unit. That was the first local government, but for some reason 

or the other families banded together and formed tribes and out of these tribes they appointed some to 

educate the hunters, to educate the arrow-makers, and these became your first school groups, 

administered through the chiefs and councils. 

 

But for some reasons where other, larger tribes were taking advantage of these lesser tribes, you found 

that they were being sort of driven together and they gathered together into larger tribes and formed 

nations. The chiefs of these nations eventually took advantage and control of the people and became 

almost totalitarian, until you come into the Middle Ages, where you had the establishment of what we 

call the feudal system. Liberal movements of these days, liberal-minded people of those days, realized 

that it was very necessary for the people to have local government, and they have shed blood in this 

world, Sir, in order to get this freedom of local government. 

 

Eventually we have been handed down what we have today — our local municipal governments. These 

groups of people, or local government, were formed, and in many fields they were not in a position to 

administer such things as international affairs, or roads until we moved on into the present time; so that 

the senior 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

25 

governments were given the options and the right to administer and help the local, junior governments to 

participate in their types of government. However, I still see the need of a central government to 

administer the many things that local governments are unable to administer, because it is beyond their 

economic scope of their ability. 

 

History is repeating itself, Mr. Speaker. This present administration, due to their greed and desire for 

more power, and requiring more bureaucratic control, are gradually trying to take away the rights of the 

people and local self-government. It is a right that should be maintained. Liberal policies, Mr. Speaker, 

have always been to give the right to the individual to judge for himself what should be best for him and 

his immediate family. I believe in that Mr. Speaker, and I believe we should be sure of maintaining that 

freedom. Consequently, this is one of the reasons why an amendment was added to the 

Address-in-Reply, asking the Government to grant the people of Saskatchewan, through their junior 

governments the right to decide for themselves as to what type of government they should have. Let 

them decide, and not have an authority established by the present administration laying down the rules 

and regulations as to what type of Government they should have. It is just like the Government coming 

along and saying, you have a choice of how to die: do you want to be shot-gunned or do you want the 

rope? We still have not had the assurance from this Government that before any change of local 

government will be given to the people they will have the chance to express themselves on a ballot. 

 

I concern myself greatly with that, Mr. Speaker, and for that reason I have to support the amendment — 

because it guarantees the freedoms of the individual and the rights of the people of self-government. 

 

I believe Mr. Speaker, that the inalienable right of every human being is the right of association with 

whom he wishes. I also believe Mr. Speaker, that no legislation should be on the statutes of any province 

that would deny this right to any individual or to anyone. I believe Mr. Speaker, that if he be a business 

man, he should not be forced through any economic pressures to comply to rigid policies of 

manufacturers or distributors or rigid regulations established by governments. I believe Mr. Speaker, 

that if he be a farmer, he should not have to conform or to submit to the dictates, controlling his way of 

life, through economic pressures, 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

26 

and again through controls established by government. Be he a professional man, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t 

believe that a man should have to conform to the dictates of any monopolistic associations, or be he a 

wage earner, to work under conditions or wages below a decent standard of living, or have to conform to 

dictates of every monopolistic union boss or manager. 

 

Every man Mr. Speaker, is born free; every man should be free, providing, though, that his freedom does 

not infringe upon the freedom of anyone else. Freedom of expression Mr. Speaker, is sometimes denied. 

I believe that they have been recently denied. 

 

We have a problem that is so pressing in this province; the problem of unemployment. I was rather 

concerned Mr. Speaker, when I picked up the paper on February 8th, 1961, to find that there was a 

demonstration of the Regina unemployed which was planned to take place on the day the Legislature 

opened, but it had been called off. The only reason it was called off, according to the press release which 

was issued jointly by the Regina Unemployment Committee, and the Saskatchewan Federation of 

Labour, was the fact that the Premier was not prepared to see them. Apparently he does not believe . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege. That statement is absolutely false. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Corrections can be made at the close of the speech. 

 

Premier Douglas: — No, Mr. Speaker, the hon. Member makes a statement. I have the right to stand up 

on the question of privilege and protest an untrue and false statement being made. I have never refused 

to see the unemployed at any time. I have agreed to see them when they asked to be seen. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Mr. Speaker, I probably haven‟t got the eloquence of the hon. Minister in the best way 

possible, but I do know that the Minister in question, did not see the delegation when they were prepared 

to see him on that particular day . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, that is not true — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege, the hon. 

Member cannot make statements which are absolutely false. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

27 

Mr. Speaker: — These can be corrected at the close of the speech. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t propose to allow these statements to be made. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — I reserve the right, Mr. Speaker, to rise on the question of privilege of an untrue 

statement that was made. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! If you don‟t mind, Sir, I feel that I shall have to make a little explanation in 

regard to something that is apparently badly misunderstood in this House. If I may read Mr. Beauchesne, 

citation 126, a portion of the first paragraph. 

 

“If a Member desires to ask a question during the debate, he should first obtain consent from the 

Member who is speaking. If the latter ignores the request, the former cannot insist even if he thinks he 

is being misrepresented. He cannot make a denial during the speech, but he must wait until the 

Member has resumed his seat, and then he may ask leave to make a statement, or he must wait until 

his turn comes to address the House. Standing Order (in our book number ten) is compulsory. 

 

“No one has the right to interrupt a Member who is addressing the House, be putting a question to 

him, or by making or demanding an explanation.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I have another, if I may, we‟re off the air now anyway. These are not questions of 

privilege under consideration — I have a piece here regarding questions of privilege. 

 

“Members often raise so-called „questions of privilege,‟ on matters which should be dealt with as 

personal explanations or corrections, either in the debates or the proceedings of the House. A question 

of privilege ought rarely to come up in Parliament. It should 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

28 

be dealt with by a motion giving the House power to impose a reparation or apply a remedy. There are 

privileges of the House, as well as Members individually. Wilful disobedience to orders and rules of 

Parliament in the exercise of its constitutional functions; insults and obstructions during the debate, are 

breaches of privileges of the House. Libels upon Members and aspersions upon them in relation to 

Parliament and interference of any kind with their official duties, are breaches of the privilege of 

Members. But, a dispute arising between two Members as to the allegation of the facts does not fulfill 

the conditions of Parliament and privilege.” 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, on this point of order. I am sorry I have no books at my hand. 

I am sure that hon. Members will agree that when unparliamentary remarks are made in the House, they 

must be immediately corrected, and among unparliamentary remarks, I am sure you will find included 

statements made by any Member in the House, in regard to particular business of which another 

Member had the first hand personal knowledge. In other words if one was an actor in that part, then no 

Member in this House can get away with telling me what somebody told me, because I have first hand 

knowledge of that, and if I say this is what he told me, that must be accepted. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Pardon me, may I debate this point of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I don‟t think you can, I‟ve made a ruling on this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I didn‟t hear you make a ruling, I heard you quote Beauchesne, but I didn‟t 

hear you say, that you have ruled according to that, and I wanted to point out some of the implications 

on this question, because where statements are made, and in regard to the actions of another Member, 

the actions of which he knows or she knows very well indeed, if those have to be left to some later time 

to correct — I don‟t think that will work at all, I think any of these things that are unparliamentary and 

imputational in language, must be corrected at once. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

29 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mrs. Mary Batter (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, I agree with the hon. Minister, as I am sure you do 

too, your Honour, that where someone accuses the hon. Minister of saying something, and he gets up 

and says, that‟s not true, — that‟s a question of privilege, and he is entitled to deny that he made that 

statement but, if someone reads out of a news report, and says that a delegation was going to and 

intended to parade before the Legislative Buildings, and that the newspaper report states that they did 

not do so because they could not meet the Premier or the Government, surely this is not the same sort of 

thing. He is quoting from the newspaper, and if the Minister wants to deny a report in the newspaper he 

should take the proper steps as pointed out by your Honour to make that denial. That is not a question of 

personal privilege. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on this point, the hon. gentleman did not quote the newspaper in 

saying that I had refused to meet the delegation. That‟s not what the newspaper said. What he did was to 

say, on his own, that I had refused to meet the delegation, and I reserve the right . . . 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I did not, Mr. Speaker, I did not say that. I can read it word for word as I said it, 

because . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! If you please, I think that the quotations that I read, make it very clear that the 

hon. Member speaking cannot be interrupted. If the hon. Members think that they are being 

misrepresented or if they care to make a denial in regard to what the Member speaking has said, I think 

that in conformity with what I read, they should wait until the Member takes his seat. If he is not 

prepared to be interrupted at that time, they will have to make their contribution and their statement at 

the close of the speech according to the citations I read, and if my ruling in that regard is not to be 

accepted, then it shall have to be appealed to the House. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I will continue, Mr. Speaker. I mentioned something about newspaper clippings, and 

then the press release was issued jointly. I gave that point, but I said maybe the Premier had no intention 

at the moment to meet these people and he gave them an alternative. That is only my supposition, and I 

believe I have the right to suppose that. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

30 

Premier Douglas: — No, you have no right . . . 

 

Mr. Coderre: — But however, he went on and gave them an alternative date. The fact remains, Mr. 

Speaker, that he was prepared to meet them but not at that particular time. 

 

Premier Douglas: — That‟s not true! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — They do mention they are concerned about unemployment and they feel it is a very 

important matter, and that something should be done. Sometimes I believe there were probably a couple 

of reasons for that — there are actions going on elsewhere. There is an election in the Turtleford 

Constituency, I understand, that is possibly one of the reasons why they do not want to deal with the 

question of unemployment at the moment. They don‟t want to put anything on the floor of the House 

prior to the results there. Or probably they are waiting until later on in the Session. The Premier would 

like to wait until later on in the Session to deal with this very important matter. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that unemployment is so important in this province today that it should be given 

top priority and if a delegation of union people and unemployed people come in to see the Premier, the 

Premier should be prepared to drop everything and see them. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I am concerned, Mr. Speaker, in more ways than one when these people are concerned 

about employment. They want employment; they want some security of some sort; we should see that it 

is discussed with them, and give the full power of the House to try and cope with it as much and as well 

as this Legislature can. 

 

I am concerned, Mr. Speaker, for another reason, because if these people are employed, it puts a little 

more of that green stuff into circulation and the purchasing power is greater. Our agricultural people 

would directly benefit by it. 

 

However, apart from that there are many things not in the Speech from the Throne I feel should be there, 

and sometimes the people with whom I have occasion to discuss are not quite satisfied with the 

legislation which we have. On several occasions I have had the privilege of speaking to many wage 

earners in all walks of life from all over the province, and elsewhere. Some- 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

31 

times some of these wage earners feel they have become a tool, a tool of management or else a tool of 

the union bosses, and probably sometimes both. Many of these wage earners, Mr. Speaker, feel they 

have lost their freedoms in every sense of the world. Let us take, for example, the wage earner who is 

qualified for a certain position, applied to a union shop for a job. He has to sign an agreement as to the 

conditions of work, his attendance, etc. If it is a closed shop he is given his position on condition that he 

join the union. All complaints this man may have, all discussion this man may have with management 

about his problems, his ambitions, his desires to better his way of life, or possibly he may have shortcuts 

that could help management, he cannot normally go to management and discuss his problems, whether 

they be working problems or otherwise. He has to go to the steward — the shop steward. He is unable to 

communicate with management so far as work is concerned. Wages, conditions, etc. He has to join that 

union within thirty days of taking employment. If he doesn‟t, the union forces him under the agreement 

that they have, out of a job. 

 

I have concerned myself with that, Mr. Speaker, and what I am going to say, I think, may get a rise out 

of some of the Members of the Government. I am concerned with freedom of the individual. When he 

has freedom to organize, should we not have freedom not to organize. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Yes, and work seventy-two hours a week! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — If there is no union in that particular establishment you have someone taking 

advantage of him. After taking employment in some rather secure position, we find management takes 

advantage of the wage earner. He doesn‟t know whether his future is secure; whether after a time he is 

going to get a fair wage or decent working conditions. Oftentimes employers take advantage of the 

employee. Sometimes the employee is not in a position to stand up for his right. He is meek because he 

wants that job security, and it forces him probably through fear of losing his job, to keep quiet. In any 

event, the thinking in the wage earner‟s mind is job security — not conditions of work. He wants to be 

assured of his job so that he can provide a decent living for his family. 

 

In either case, Mr. Speaker, these men‟s freedoms and rights have been taken away from them. I believe 

in local union autonomy and this must be preserved at all times, but not union monopoly. Whenever the 

word 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

32 

monopoly appears many socialists get up on their feet and say, „You can‟t have a monopoly‟ but still we 

have a monopoly in these particular cases. 

 

I believe, as I mentioned before, in the right of the wage earner to associate as a unit or organization to 

better his working conditions. This is a right that has been granted by a Liberal Government in the past, 

by the Saskatchewan Trade Union Act, and it was later supplemented in 1944 by the Labour Relations 

Act. This just shows, Mr. Speaker, that we are not opposed, as Liberals, to any of this legislation. We 

put it on the statute books. These very laws, Mr. Speaker, are still on the statutes and are still being used 

as a base or foundation on which our labour legislation is based. The Workmen‟s Compensation Act was 

established before these boards were even dreamed up. Workmen‟s Compensation, 1928; Trade Union 

Act, 1938; and then you have many others — Coal Miners‟ Safety Act, Mines Regulation Act, 

Minimum Wage, Workmen‟s Compensation Board, Workmen‟s Wage Act and Apprenticeship Act. All 

these Acts were put on the statutes by previous administrations. Not necessarily by socialism, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — They‟re a lot better now. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Naturally they‟re bound to be better. There is certain progress in this world, and things 

have been progressing. We didn‟t have them prior to these days, because the need was not necessarily 

there. As we progress, legislation must progress, but this Government, as I have shown, Mr. Speaker, is 

still on the blocks; they‟re getting the mileage, but they‟re getting nowhere. 

 

I can show you something that really concerns me so far as freedom is concerned. What has happened to 

the laws of our country which permit situations, as I quote you, Mr. Speaker, and I will quote it, so that 

the hon. Members won‟t get up and make another hassle about the rules and regulations of the House; 

this appeared January 7, 1961 in „The Leader-Post‟: “B.C. Mother Fights Union Fine for Son”. I believe, 

Mr. Speaker, that the duty of a mother or father is to look after the welfare of their children when they 

are below the age of maturity. It is their right that is handed down, not by government, but by the means 

of freedom given to all of us. I quote from this clipping: 

 

“A North Vancouver woman has challenged a Trade Union‟s right to fine her sixteen year-old son for 

not attending a Union meeting.” 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

33 

Has that young fellow, Mr. Speaker, any right? Is he obligated to attend a Union meeting? Apparently he 

has because the quote goes on: 

 

“Mrs. Emily Anderson says that out of $9.60 her son, Grey, a high school student earned in eight 

hours of week-end work in a food store, he was fined $5.00 for not going to a meeting, or 52% of his 

wages.” 

 

Is that freedom? Is that a right? I have more to say, Mr. Speaker, on human rights in a few moments. 

 

“Mrs. Anderson told the Retail Food Clerks Union, C.L.C. that it has no authority to order a minor 

where or when to attend a meeting. Mrs. Anderson said that the boy had no choice but to pay $15 

union initiation fee in order to work. In five months work this year he has earned $38.10 as a parcel 

wrapper; the union has taken $21 of this.” 

 

This is 55% of his earnings, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I am sympathetic to unions, and I still am, but providing Mr. Speaker, as I have said before, that their 

freedom does not infringe upon the freedoms of anybody else. That is an infringement upon this 

person‟s freedom. A young man, sixteen years old, may not according to the law of the land, be a fully 

matured person but he has to attend a meeting probably for some brainwashing, in this case, who 

knows? This mother is concerned — maybe the son did not want to go to these meetings or the mother 

didn‟t want him to go, but the union insists on his going. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. Member a question? Do you know of any 

similar case that has ever taken place in the Province of Saskatchewan, and in addition what has this 

British Columbia case got to do with this Government? 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I think that is a very fair question, and I will try to give a fair answer. Mr. Speaker, 

time and again, labour unions who have put themselves in these situations have wrested the control and 

the rights from individuals across the country, and being concerned for the people of Saskatchewan I 

believe that we should guard ourselves. I have to give examples of what may happen. We are affiliating 

with the proposed New Party or organization and this particular party is proposing to merge with labour. 

I am concerned for my freedom, Mr. Speaker. I am 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

34 

concerned for the freedom of my child who will someday be a man of sixteen and will have a chance to 

work. I would like to be assured that when he becomes of age he will have that freedom — the freedom 

of an individual; freedom of association, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I believe that somehow or other that particular union must have been in very bad shape if they had to 

force a person to come to the meeting. I belong to the Canadian Legion, and I believe in that 

organization, for the betterment of the people of the country. Any organization that has to force people 

into it in order to become effective, does not seem to me to be the type of organization that we require in 

a free society, and a free democracy. 

 

All I can say, Mr. Speaker, is just when and where do human rights begin or stop? We have another case 

in point, of course another one from British Columbia. The S.I.U. forced a company to discharge four 

men because they tried to exercise their rights as citizens to join a trade union of their choice. The S.I.U. 

tried the men in absentia when they were out working on a ship at sea. They were accused of giving aid 

and comfort to another union. They wanted to join a union, but they didn‟t want the one they were with. 

They had no choice, Mr. Speaker. These men had lost their rights of joining a union of their choice, and 

according to a clause in the working agreement, the men had to be members of the S.I.U. in good 

standing in order to hold their job. 

 

They were tried and convicted by the S.I.U. courts. I went to school and I heard we had courts of the 

land to do that, but the S.I.U. court found them guilty and they were deprived of their membership, and 

the company was then instructed to lay them off because of the agreement with the company. If you 

don‟t agree with that then you‟re out — you can‟t get a job. Where are these person‟s freedoms? He is 

prepared to join a union, but where is his freedom? He‟s out of a job because he doesn‟t belong to that 

particular union. 

 

Anyway, these four men were not quite satisfied, so they brought the matter to court, and after the judge 

had looked the situation over, he said he had no choice but to interpret the law in favour of the union, 

and that was it. I think it is shocking, Mr. Speaker, when actions of unions like this actually cause people 

to lose their jobs. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

35 

Mr. Speaker, the reason we probably have situations like this is probably because management in many 

cases and employers have taken terrific advantage in the past of our wage earner. They have denied their 

rights in the same manner. It is only unfortunate, though, that at the moment I don‟t have any 

information, but I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that before time is very much gone, I will have more 

information that shows similar situations and discrimination in respect to the wage earner that has been 

made by even management and employers. 

 

My main concern is to see that the individual has freedom. My main concern is to assure myself and my 

fellow man that we have a human right and that it should not be infringed upon by anyone, Mr. Speaker, 

be they management, be they labour unions, or be they government. I was very pleased, in looking at 

human rights and freedoms, that in 1948 the United Nations went to work and gave the world a Human 

Rights Declaration. This was accepted by all countries. Article 23 of the Human Rights Declaration 

guarantees life, liberty and security to a person. It guarantees security and freedom of opinion and 

expression. I mention that in there because in many cases, men have no freedom of opinion and 

expression. All these rights, Mr. Speaker, have been won through the centuries and a struggle and a fight 

to allow them to continue. But Article 23, as it applies to us, states that every man has the right to work. 

This has been approved by all nations of the world — even the Communist world; even the socialist 

world believe that a man has the right to work. That is Article 23 of the Human Rights Declaration of 

the United Nations. All countries subscribed to it, to a free choice of employment, to just and favourable 

conditions of work and to protect us against unemployment. I should like to draw the attention of the 

Government to that section — protection against unemployment. 

 

This has been followed recently by a Canadian Bill of Rights, and of course this brings us on to the 

question of freedom. But the other day in the mail, Mr. Speaker, I received a little bulletin known as the 

“L.R. Bulletin.” I read it, and I shall quote from it, December, 1960. This “L.R. Bulletin” is the “Labour 

Review Bulletin,” the organ of free Canadian Labour. 

 

I went to the library, because I was a little skeptical of its origin, because I could see where labour is 

actually concerned. I went to the Legislative Library and I asked the librarian if there was such a thing as 

a “Labour Review” and he said there was. It is published as a free organ of Canadian labour, and it is 

published in Hull, authorized by the Post Office Department, 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

36 

and so on. It is the official organ of Free Canadian Labour, the C.F. of L., and is published, I believe, by 

the B.L.E., now what that means I don‟t know but I think it is Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers. 

This is a union which has been trying to maintain their right: I quote: 

 

“What price freedom — freedom of assembly and association is recognized by the Canadian Bill of 

Rights as one of the fundamental freedoms to be sustained by all laws enacted by the Parliament of 

Canada. That existing laws are consistent with this admirable Declaration was apparently assumed by 

our legislators in passing the Bill. 

 

Yet in its bearing on an important field of association, that of trade union organization the relative law 

is lost and its agencies are unmindful of freedom. As a result, for many thousands of Canadian 

workers, freedom of association is a hope rather than a fact. 

 

There can be no freedom of association without freedom not to associate. This has been laid down 

firmly by the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights. 

 

There is no freedom of association for workers who join a union to hold a job, who would lose his job 

if he quit the union. The right to quit is a vital test of freedom.” 

 

I just thought I should mention that at this particular time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have expressed my personal views in how I believe our freedoms have been infringed upon, Mr. 

Speaker. But the freedoms of many people are being infringed upon by this Government also. This 

Government has created situations in this province that are actually disgraceful. I am not going to speak 

in favour or in defence of Premier Smallwood of Newfoundland, but remember when Premier 

Smallwood was having some difficulties with the lumbermen in Newfoundland, what a hue and cry 

came from across the floor. I remember that day, Mr. Speaker. I didn‟t know much about the problems 

but Premier Smallwood knew the story — he was accused of being wrong without even looking into the 

situation. Mr. Speaker, right here in Saskatchewan we have slave labour conditions. There are 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

37 

men in our Saskatchewan lumber industry who are receiving less than sixty and seventy cents an hour. 

Please take note, Mr. Minister of Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — I don‟t believe it. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I will show you, Mr. Speaker. Lumbermen in this province are only getting about that, 

and are working a ten to twelve hour day. Do you know why, Mr. Speaker? They are paid by piece 

work. They have so much work to do and they have to do it, and by the time they have done their work, 

it averages out to less than sixty some cents per hour, or near seventy cents an hour. Where is our 

Minimum Wage Act? Where is our Hours of Work Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. William: — I‟m just looking for it in my desk! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — But do you know the reason, Mr. Speaker? The Timber Board, an Agency of this 

Government, is paying the producer so little for the lumber — as low as $35 a thousand and sometimes 

less, then recently it even dropped another $3.00. It is making a tremendous profit at the expense of the 

workmen. These profits are not passed on to the cutter. When they bring it up in front of this House and 

say, “Oh, we made a little profit on the Timber Board”, they made a little profit, all right. Slave labour 

profit, Mr. Speaker, at the expense of the wage earner. The actions of this Board are certainly not 

comparable to the actions of the Wheat Board, so that when they have a surplus or profit they pass it on 

to the producers. Why doesn‟t the Government do that? Then they wouldn‟t have this situation of slave 

labour conditions. You can bring a lot of lumbermen from the northern part of Saskatchewan right in 

this Chamber any time you wish, and find out what they are getting per hour. 

 

The reason for this abominable slave labour condition lies directly upon the doorstep of this 

Government. I thought that slave labour camps were strictly behind the iron curtain. A preview, 

probably, of what we can expect when the present administration gains control of our labour unions. It is 

not the labour unions that are trying to gain control of them, it‟s the socialist thinking. . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — That‟s pretty hard to believe. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — However, we‟ll just drop it at the moment Mr. Speaker, and carry on. I‟d just like to 

show what costs of strikes are; some of our freedoms have been lost, in- 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

38 

directly or directly to some infiltrated elements within our labour unions, Mr. Speaker. From 1945 to 

1948 for example Mr. Speaker, there were 25,919,000 man-days lost due to strikes and walkouts in 

Canada. A little over one million persons were involved, and then other people were directly or 

indirectly affected, because these stoppages of work Mr. Speaker, had created more bottlenecks and 

layoffs in various other interconnecting industries. If we convert this into terms of dollars and cents 

based on probably an average of $1.25 an hour, it amounts to more than one quarter of a billion dollars, 

Mr. Speaker. This is a terrific loss to the national economy, a terrific loss to our agriculture economy, 

because we are suffering by the strikes, and if you would convert that sum into terms of our 

Saskatchewan budget, we‟d have medical health services, or anything else on the house for the next 

twenty-five years. This is a tremendous loss to the wage earner as well. I have had the occasion when I 

was in Toronto, in Windsor and Detroit to talk to some of my relatives, who happened to be working in 

some of the industries, where they had been on strike, and they are firm believers in labour unions. But, 

in all cases that they have struck, they have mentioned to me time and again, Mr. Speaker, that it will 

take them ten or fifteen years to recover what they have lost due to the extensive strike. 

 

There is a direct loss to the wage earner, and a direct loss in revenue to the national economy. Right in 

this province, Mr. Speaker, we have some firms who have no labour organizations within their ranks. 

The most cordial relations exist between the wage earner and management. You could not even get one 

person in that group possibly, to join the union, because they are quite content — they do not want any 

more. There, management is working in close co-operation with wage earners. That is what you would 

call a local autonomy of these working people. But, we find Mr. Speaker, that somewhere we have this 

continual nibbling at one another of agitators within our union ranks who are constantly preaching hate 

for management, hate for people who are trying to produce, then we are dividing ourselves Mr. Speaker, 

and it‟s time the Government did something about it. There is division everywhere. There is our 

problem. Do the problems lie with our labour bosses who are extracting funds from our wage earner, 

and in many cases investing it across the line in some real estate of some sort? This is costing our 

Canadian wage earner a terrific amount of money. No wonder they did create that division, for personal 

gains. I am in full sympathy Mr. Speaker, with the wage earner, but I‟m not in full sympathy with many 

of these labour bosses, who are constantly agitating 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

39 

and creating hate. If there would be more thought in the world Mr. Speaker, it would be a much greater 

and better world to live in. 

 

Does the fault lie with the labour bosses, or does the fault lie with management? I‟ve got something to 

say about management as well Mr. Speaker. Many of the employers are trying to line their pockets with 

the sweat extracted from the labourer at wages below a fair level, or does it lie with the Government, 

who permits this kind of division within our boundaries which could cause economic and social chaos 

that would be felt by all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As human being who believe in freedom, we must be united, because, Mr. Speaker, there are 

Communist elements under the International who have infiltrated into all units of our economy. They 

have infiltrated within the ranks of labour Mr. Speaker; they have infiltrated within the ranks of 

government; they have even infiltrated within the ranks of management, for one purpose, Mr. Speaker, 

to divide us all and then to conquer us. 

 

Mr. Khrushchev made it quite clear sometime ago, when he expounded some of his theories under the, I 

don‟t know whether it‟s the second, third or fourth International or something of that sort. The 

objectives were only too well defined by Mr. Khrushchev. What are we doing about it? Creating more 

division? That word of hate, it doesn‟t matter who has created that word of hate of capitalists — creating 

hate of all sorts. The most important word in free enterprise is freedom of the individual, Mr. Speaker, 

providing that freedom doesn‟t infringe upon anybody else. The old, extreme socialists are again rearing 

their heads, Mr. Speaker — their ugly heads, in the throes of an economic recession, and they‟re trying 

to divide us as I previously mentioned. It is noted Mr. Speaker, from time to time in bold threats, 

socialist threats, and independent threats, that our socialist party is slowly and surely attempting to 

absorb our labour unions. Some of these power-mad socialists Mr. Speaker, as well as power-mad 

labour union bosses, are attempting this for one purpose only, not to improve the standards of all Mr. 

Speaker, but to improve their personal position both in power and in wealth. A preview Mr. Speaker, of 

what we can further expect from this power-mad group. 

 

The proposed platform Mr. Speaker, of this new Marxist group, in attempting to get all, from all walks 

of life, incorporated into this supposedly new political 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

40 

type of thing, is I feel, impossible, because as groups we differ. We have different opinions, different 

ways of getting there, but as individuals we have the same common ideals. Let us not get groups 

together as this new Marxist party is proposing to do Mr. Speaker — let us get the people together as 

individuals. 

 

The Liberal philosophies have been that of freedom of the individuals, to give him his rights, providing 

his rights do not infringe on somebody else, not of power groups, but of the individual. 

 

The amalgamation of labour and of socialists is a medicine that we will have to swallow, because it is 

almost a fact. But I‟m sure that when we turn around and look at the labour bosses that it will be a very 

bitter pill — one we‟ll have to caution ourselves and be wary of what steps they may take. Because, as 

explained by Khrushchev, in his International, the inner elements of Communism are infiltrated solidly 

into them. There was circulated Mr. Speaker, just a couple of days ago, in the Town of North Battleford, 

a little pamphlet by the Communist Party. Ironically enough, just on the eve when there was an 

organization meeting, a labour boss from the east, who was speaking on organization, and on a sort of 

get together of the proposed new merger. Still, socialists for years Mr. Speaker, have had this same 

disgust for mergers, and now they‟re going all out for it. 

 

Marx and Engels, Mr. Speaker, and many other old socialists have from time to time, told us what is in 

that bottle of socialist medicine. Knowing what Marx and Engels have told us, we can‟t swallow this. 

It‟s because we know Mr. Speaker, that when this new merger comes into effect the rights of the 

individual will be infringed upon. 

 

It is the proposal of the top brass of both of these political parties, that is the CCF and some of those 

power-mad labour bosses, of raising funds and creating a political slush fund, which will be raised 

through the check-off system. And, this fund Mr. Speaker, will be used by these ambitious, and 

glory-seeking gangsters on both sides, for the glorification of their socialist friends. This, in my opinion, 

is unfair, Mr. Speaker, and it is a bad approach for a political party to take. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown; — What are you worried about? 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

41 

Mr. Coderre: — Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, what am I worried about? I‟m worried about the 

freedom of the individual, and I‟ll show you. 

 

Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, the CCF Party, the almighty humanity first party trying to sneak into this 

little game. Now here‟s what they‟re going to do. The poor, unwary wage earner will have deducted 

from his weekly pay cheque, and both the CCF, Mr. Speaker, and this labour group, have agreed in 

principle to this — he will have a weekly check-off, a “tithe” that he will pay for the political party. 

They‟ll take it from these wage earners, whether they are affiliated with that political party or not. What 

a dirty thing to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — They‟ve left a way out alright, Mr. Speaker. It is said, of course, (they put it very nice) 

it is said that the wage earner may contract out, and do you know how? If he dares, and that‟s the point, 

if he dares. Did you see what happened to those men in the S.I.U. in British Columbia? You see why I 

brought this up a while ago. These men dared defy that union and join another union; they wanted to 

join a union alright, because they realized this association was necessary for themselves. They joined a 

union, but as soon as they defied that particular union, in that particular organization they were out of a 

job. This same thing will apply here, Mr. Speaker. This unwary wage earner who wants to contract out, 

because he doesn‟t believe in this new Marxist party, would be the object of threats that would be 

brought within their organization. These Communist gangsters. Oh yes, if he dares, he will be able to 

sign out but when that man signs out Mr. Speaker, what does he do? He would lose the secrecy of his 

ballot. They call this democracy. 

 

I have to go back to this “Labour Review,” and it gives us here the version of the wage earner, hard 

working people, gives us their version of what socialism is. Well let‟s look at the fine print. 

 

“The most considerate socialist political organization in the world, the Labour Party of Great Britain, 

defines socialism in its litany as the common ownership of the means of production, distribution and 

exchange. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

42 

Now the dictionary Mr. Speaker, by which way we stand, as being a standard dictionary in Canada, and 

many parts of the world, the English dictionary, the Oxford Dictionary, varies the wording, but not the 

meaning. 

 

“A theory or policy which advocates the ownership and control of the means of production, capital, 

land, property etc. by a community as a whole, in the interests of all.” 

 

Now this is quite a catalogue, Mr. Speaker. The means of production, capital, land, property, etc, and 

this is what it says at the end, it takes just about everything. There Mr. Speaker, if the full socialist 

program were carried out, all industry and trade would be taken over by the government. Do you see 

what this socialist organization is trying to do? They have not dared to implement their socialist plan Mr. 

Speaker, but they are trying to, and once they have control of the work force they‟ll be able to expand 

and put into effect their complete socialist plan. 

 

Where is going to be our freedom? Have they got freedom behind the iron curtain? I fear, Mr. Speaker, I 

greatly fear, that history is repeating itself — from freedom to slavery, and now we‟re getting into a 

worse kind of slavery. 

 

It is a generally accepted opinion Mr. Speaker, that many union organizations say that the Labour 

Relations Board should be reviewed. They have not handled with fairness, actually justice for both 

parties, all the cases that have been before them. It has not been handled in fairness, Mr. Speaker. I say 

that because in many cases and I give you an example where a person has had to appear in front of a 

Labour Relations Board in regard to some decisions, a man from Regina had to appear at a Labour 

Relations Board, and had to go to Saskatoon, or a man from Saskatoon, several men from Saskatoon, 

have had to come to Regina, and this very often has been a disadvantage. Of course, this is according to 

socialist thinking because Mr. Donald MacDonald, Leader of the Ontario Socialist Party said, and I 

quote from „The Leader-Post‟ March 6, 1959. I will quote this whole clipping, Mr. Speaker: 

 

“Mr. Donald MacDonald, Ontario socialist party leader is to be commended for his candor. A 

legislative committee suggestion that companies be allowed to tell their side of the story when their 

workers are being organized would be a 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

43 

bad thing in his opinion. In fact, according to the paper such permission would make it extremely 

difficult for unions to expand. Unionism that cannot survive and prosper under attack from employers 

or anyone else must be bad for the worker and bad for the community.” 

 

It is just a question, that the Labour Relations Board, the way they have been acting seems to be 

pro-something and anti-something else. My suggestion, Mr. Speaker, to the Government would be that, 

in effect the Labour Relations Board would have a representative, say for example, a member of the 

Ministerial Association which could concern itself with the moral aspects of the decisions handed down 

by the Labour Relations Board. Then from there would have a representative from the labour union, and 

then a representative from the employers‟ association, a representative of the Government and a 

representative on the Board from other organizations which are directly related with the case and not by 

the Government, and you would have a true Labour Relations Board which would look at all aspects 

from a point of view of fairness and justice to all. 

 

Another point, Mr. Speaker, which has been somewhat of a concern, and I have noted that many 

employees in the city of Regina particularly some of the boys who are out of work, and some of them 

are very capable, and their main concern is how to obtain employment. I have also had the occasion to 

talk to an employer who was prepared to keep his staff on permanently. On four occasions I have had to 

speak to employees, they requested that they would like the opportunity to make an agreement 

personally with management or employer for job security rather than certain wage restrictions. There is 

a firm that I know that has employed first class journeymen and paid $2.00 and some cents an hour, and 

the employer kept them on for about eight months and then laid them off. When the management came 

to those men and told them, “We have to lay you off; the job is done.” These wage earners said: “Give 

us less wages, we would like to stay on the rest of the year.” The management said, “I cannot do it 

because (is it the Minimum Wage Board or Regulation) I cannot make an agreement because it is a 

question that certain trades have got to have a certain wage.” 

 

I do know that this particular chap was rather concerned about losing his job. He would rather have had 

job security and would have been prepared for the eight 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

44 

months of the year to take a little less per hour. It is a union agreement, as far as the union is concerned 

the employer had to pay agreed wages. 

 

That was the concern of this man anyway, and he doesn‟t have a job today, and he is very concerned 

about it. I think it is something that should be looked into to assure such men get permanent 

employment, rather than the question of the probably higher wages. I would like to see the wage earner 

get $25.00 a day, if possible, but I would also like to see the wage earner employed the year around. 

 

Here is another point I would like to bring out, Mr. Speaker, and that is the question of application for 

certification or decertification. I heard from management, in this particular case. When a group of 

workers within an organization apply for certification, the Board discusses the matter, looks it over, and 

within a very short time the certification is granted by the Board. But if after a time the employees feel 

that the union is not doing a job they may ask for decertification. What has happened is this: the 

collectors collect through the payroll, I suppose they don‟t want to lose revenue but anyway when they 

start having this money coming in, they seem to leave these wage earners in many of our industries just 

by themselves, and they just don‟t seem to come around. So finally the wage earners get to the point 

where they are not too satisfied with the union and they figure they can possibly do a better job, more 

job security in this respect, so they ask for decertification which is a right which is granted them in this 

province. 

 

But then when it comes to that, the Labour Relations Board seems to postpone the demand for labour 

relations. I understand if you apply for decertification you have to apply within the thirty or sixty or 

ninety days of the contract year. I feel, Mr. Speaker, that if you can apply for certification and it is 

granted within a reasonable time, application for decertification should be granted in equal time, 

providing both parties are in agreement. But why this long delay? It seems to be to the point where 

giving the opportunity to those who are willing to come around and exert a little more pressure on them. 

I don‟t know, but I think that is the part of the legislation that should be looked into. 

 

I feel, Mr. Speaker, that in view of the lack of good relations, or good legislation to promote 

employment which would promote a greater extent of purchasing power, more for the prime producers 

of this province, and in view of the fact that the Speech from the Throne did not grant or give a right to 

the municipal people 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

45 

to have a vote, I feel, Mr. Speaker, that I will support the amendment, but I cannot support the motion. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege. In accordance with your ruling I am 

rising on a question of privilege. I want to deny categorically that I have ever, at any time, refused to 

meet any unemployed group. As a matter of fact to this date the unemployed have never asked me for a 

meeting directly. I was phoned by the Secretary of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, and told that 

the labour unemployed group would like to meet the Cabinet and myself at some time. I said we would 

accommodate them any time they suggested, and the date finally set was February 28th. At no time was 

I asked for a meeting; at no time have we refused. 

 

Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon): — Mr. Speaker, would the hon. Member answer a question? 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I‟m not the Government, but I will answer any question I can. 

 

Mr. Stone: — Are you in favour of right-to-work legislation? 

 

Mr. Coderre: — The Government is not in a position to do it, but I believe that a person should have 

some freedoms; I believe in the freedom of the individual and freedom of association. Whether you call 

that right to work, or not, I don‟t know. I haven‟t legislated and I don‟t know anything about it but I feel 

that the individual should have a right of association. 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — I enjoyed the hon. Member‟s speech very much, and am 

sorry it wasn‟t all on the air. I would just like to take a moment to refer to his claim that we had slave 

labour in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. Member is entitled to make an explanation, but he must contain himself to 

the explanation . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — That is exactly what I am going to do — explain that there is no slave labour 

insofar as the Minimum Wage regulations are concerned. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

46 

Mr. Coderre: — Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Minister speaking . . .? 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — No, that is an explanation in regard to your . . . 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I have not asked for an explanation from the Minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It is his privilege to make an explanation at the close of your speech, if he has the 

consent of the House to do so. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — I‟m just going to quote from the Minimum Wage Court Order No. 9. This is the 

application . . . 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I merely want to ask a question. I don‟t want to 

interfere with the hon. Minister who is on his feet, but on a point of order, is it your ruling that this is 

going to be allowed for all Members of the House, or will the hon. Minister later on be permitted to 

indulge in the debate, in spite of the fact that he stands up and speaks to a question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — I tried to ask a question half way through . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I will have to make a ruling. You cannot make a denial half way through a speech. I 

have no desire to try to hamper the privilege in regard to a point of privilege, but my argument is that 

denial is not a point of privilege. That is the point I am trying to make. A point of privilege can be raised 

at any time, but I am trying to clear up the point that a denial is not a speech; you must wait until the 

Member has taken his seat and then may ask leave to make a statement. I believe that is quite clear. If 

leave of the House is given, I believe the Minister can make a statement, but he must contain himself 

strictly to the point that he wants to bring up, and not make a speech in regard to it. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Mr. Speaker, does not the statement which he requests have to be on a point of 

privilege? Does he not first of all have to make a point of privilege to the satisfaction of the Speaker, and 

then ask for permission to make a statement on this? I don‟t know. I‟m asking. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

47 

Mr. Speaker: — I think you have a point there which I would like to look into. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — The reference of course, was to slave labour which I am going to disprove, and 

if I may proceed now, I consider that my point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Mr. Speaker, I made the statement that I know there are some people in the province 

— I didn‟t say that he . . . I am quite aware that there is a Minimum Wage . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! If the Minister has a point that is directly concerned with his 

Department that he wishes to clear up that has not been corrected with regard to what has been said by 

the former speaker, he may do so, but he must do it shortly and briefly and come to the point quickly. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Is he going to participate in this debate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — It is just a matter of an explanation with regard to what was said. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Rule on it! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Excuse me, Sir, how do you want this to be treated? Are you asking me a question or 

are you making an explanation, or are you . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — No, I am attempting to seek information in order to clarify my thinking on the 

apparent confusion that has developed here this afternoon. My interpretation was that the only time you 

could rise on a point of privilege was that if a Member was directly misquoting a statement which you 

had made in the current debate — not outside of the House, or a press clipping, as I thought the speaker 

was correct in everything that he said in regard to it, but now to give the laxity to everyone of us to stand 

up after a Member sits down and on the pretext of there being some explanation which another Member 

wishes to make, that the speaker had make a statement which is not, in another Member‟s opinion, 

correct, is not my understanding of the rules. The Member made 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

48 

a statement that there were some conditions in the province which he thought were comparable to slave 

labour. I don‟t think the Minister has any privilege to stand up and say, “I‟m going to quote the 

Minimum Wage Act”. He is getting into the debate and once he does that he loses his privilege of 

speaking again. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think possibly the hon. Member has a point here, and if the Assembly will 

permit I would like to give the matter further consideration, and if you don‟t mind, Sir, we will go on 

with this debate at this time. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order I agree with the Member from Maple Creek (Mr. 

Cameron). I don‟t think anybody can rise unless it is a matter of personal privilege, but there is nothing 

to prevent the Minister from replying to the previous Member, providing of course it is understood that 

he is taking part in the debate. There is no objection to that, but he certainly cannot make a statement 

and not be considered taking part in the debate. If the Minister wants to use his time in this debate in 

replying to the Member he is quite within the rules of the House. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I wonder now are we going to get off the track 

again, because after all by a gentlemen‟s agreement and by agreement of the Legislature this afternoon, 

the roster of speakers was drawn up; they were told what to expect and when something like this 

happens it is going to throw the whole House into confusion again in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! I have endeavoured to straighten out the House on a problem which I 

feel has been in this House for some time, and that is in regard to raising points of privilege which were 

not actual points of privilege, but rather matters of denial or because someone has felt that he had been 

misrepresented, and he considers it a point of privilege. It is quite possible that, in regard to this matter 

of explanation, I have possibly gone a little too far and I would like the matter to be dropped at this time, 

and I will give it study so if the debate at this time will continue, and the hon. Minister of Labour (Hon. 

Mr. Williams) will consent to forego his point at this time, I would like to have the debate continued and 

we will look into this matter further. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

49 

Mr. J.R. Barrie (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, before I take part in this debate, I would like to associate 

myself along with all the other previous speakers in the congratulations they extended to you on your 

appointment to the high office in this House. I see that this office is a rather difficult one at times, but I 

am quite certain from my personal acquaintance with yourself that you will conduct this office, and 

conduct the proceedings of this House, in a very fair, impartial, and capable manner. I hope that I and 

the other Members of this Legislature will co-operate with you in the fullest extent. 

 

I also want to take this opportunity to extend my congratulations to the previous speakers in this debate, 

and in particular to those new Members of the Legislature who made their maiden speeches. I think that 

each one of them did a very good job, and will make considerable and substantial contributions to the 

proceedings in the House. 

 

I would be remiss if I didn‟t at this time make some reference to the fact that the people of the Pelly 

Constituency, saw fit to return me for another term to the Legislature; it‟s something I appreciate very 

much. I will endeavour to carry out my duties here, in their interests, during the next four years to the 

best of my ability, if I am spared to attend these Sessions. One thing I might mention is that about five 

years ago in this Assembly there was a certain prophecy made that I wouldn‟t be back after the next 

election. Well, that prophecy didn‟t turn out to be very true, because my good friends in the Pelly 

Constituency not only saw fit to return me once again, but with an increased majority. 

 

I‟ve been rather surprised listening to the debate, particularly in regard to the attitude of the people 

opposite. I came here to attend this Session with the expectation that our friends, after their victory at the 

polls in June last, would be very buoyant and optimistic. Well I don‟t know what‟s wrong, but it seems 

to me that there is a lack of lustre, and certainly no indication of enthusiasm thus far in the Session. This 

was brought to my attention particularly with the restrained and apologetic speeches made by the hon. 

Minister of Travel and Information, (I believe I haven‟t got his right title — Industry and Information I 

guess it is) 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

50 

and the Hon. Premier. Neither one of them is up to his usual standard as I had experienced it in previous 

Sessions in this House. I am wondering the reason for this apparent change of attitude across the way. 

There must be some cause. I have been wondering whether certain developments that have taken place 

since last June are partly or wholly responsible. I am wondering if this suggested merger about to take 

place, which will result in the death and burial of the CCF Party is having this particular affect at this 

time. I suppose there is a certain amount of controversy, and a certain amount of strain within the 

socialist party, because I understand there is going to be a leadership race in a few months time for the 

national leadership of the New Party. Some of these particular things may be the reason. I myself am not 

only wondering, what is the reason for this particular attitude, I have heard other Members, Mr. Speaker, 

exhibit the same interest during this Session. 

 

Now, I want to commend the hon. Provincial Treasurer, for certain statements he made yesterday in his 

speech with regard to the debt of the province, and I want to congratulate him for making public in his 

speech certain figures, particularly in connection with the gross debt. For some time, yes for some years, 

from my observation and opinion, it has been more or less put to one side. There has been great 

emphasis put on the net debt. I believe the gross debt is something that I think emphasis should be put 

on and I believe I have mentioned this before in this House. Not that I am complaining about the amount 

of debt, but I think the public of this province, or any province, or any country, should know, and should 

be constantly reminded of the amount of debt, and the consequent interest and carrying charges on that 

debt, so they will know and realize what it costs to provide them with services. The various services that 

their government, whether it is senior, local government, or a Federal Government provide, cost money. 

They should know what these services of government cost. This is something I think is important. This 

is my own personal opinion, and to repeat myself, I want to compliment and commend, the Provincial 

Treasurer for being forthright and frank in his speech yesterday afternoon in this regard. 

 

He also mentioned the progress made, and in the substantial retirement of the gross debt of the province 

since this socialist Government came into office. Well, I think in all fairness, and I think he will agree 

with me, that part of the accomplishment which has been made by the present Government in 

connection with the 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

51 

retirement of debt, part of that credit must go to agencies outside of the Government. The Government 

came into power in 1944, and since then they have substantially reduced, as I have mentioned, the public 

debt, but $70 odd million of the debt was retired by other than agencies of the Government. I am only 

going to mention a few such as the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool which received assistance from the 

Provincial Government prior to 1944 when they were in difficulty. They retired or paid off a $13 million 

loan. It was considered as part of the public debt. The Saskatchewan Co-operative Creamery is another 

organization which was having difficulties, and was assisted by the Government prior to 1944. They in 

turn were able to pay off their particular amount of debt. So, in all fairness, I think these other agents 

should be given some credit along with the Government for the reduction in the total debt of the 

province. 

 

One matter the Provincial Treasurer made mention of was that during the term of office of this 

Government, they have increased, very substantially, the grants to education. If my memory serves me 

correctly, I think he mentioned from $6 million to $25 million. That‟s a very substantial increase in 

contributions by the Government to the cost of education, but I think it should have been more, because 

during that particular period, or I take it for granted during the period that he referred to yesterday, the 

revenues of this province increased by five times. I don‟t think it would be out of the question or 

unreasonable to expect that the burden of education, the cause of so much trouble, particularly in our 

urban and rural areas, should have kept pace with the increase in revenues, so I don‟t think it‟s too great 

a credit to say that the costs of education have been increased about four times, whereas the revenues of 

the province, in that period have increased five times. 

 

One other reference the hon. Provincial Treasurer made yesterday which I thought was a little bit 

foolish, if I can use that word, was in his defence of this new Saskatchewan Power head office building. 

He made mention that this was going to employ Saskatchewan labour; this was going to use 

Saskatchewan steel; there would be Saskatchewan brick used in the building; there would be 

Saskatchewan cement used; and it would provide work for other building trades. I quite agree with this, 

but where I take exception to his statement is that there are probably more essential buildings necessary 

in this province at this particular time than this SPC building. Had other buildings been built, wouldn‟t 

they have used Saskatchewan steel, Saskatchewan cement, Saskatchewan brick, and employed 

Saskatchewan labour in the building 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

52 

trade? This is a rather ridiculous statement. I will have more to say about that particular building later 

on. 

 

I don‟t intend, Mr. Speaker, to deal at any length with the New Party, or so-called New Party. During 

this debate we have heard references made on many occasions to a victory which took place in the 

federal field in the Constituency of Peterborough. This has been referred to many times. I didn‟t hear 

anything mentioned about what happened, or the results of the particular by-election in our neighboring 

province, Alberta, at Medicine Hat. I just want to bring to the attention of my friends across the way the 

statement made by one of their supporters in the federal field, Mr. Douglas Fisher, the Member of 

Parliament for Port Arthur. When he was talking some time ago about the New Party he said that he 

gave the life of that New Party, if it once got off the ground, ten years. Some reference was made in this 

House, on occasion as to the Liberal Party being down and out. I am quite sure in my mind, Mr. Speaker 

than when all of us here are dead and gone, there will still be a Liberal Party. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — How will they get along without you? 

 

Mr. Barrie: — If I am to believe one of their supporters, one of the CCF socialist Members of 

Parliament, he doesn‟t agree they are going to last very long. I believe I am inclined to concur with him. 

 

In connection with the Speech from the Throne, I believe the term „barren‟, was used by former 

speakers, Mr. Speaker, and I think possibly from what most people would have expected, we could call 

it barren. I noted a great part of the Speech from the Throne deals with the self-appraised 

accomplishments of my friends across the way. There was mention made of declining revenues, and 

there was mention made of certain economies. I want, also, in addition to the reference made in the 

Speech from the Throne regarding economy, once again to compliment and commend my friend, the 

hon. Provincial Treasurer for certain reports he made, or were made shortly after he took office, to the 

effect that he was going to carry out certain very necessary economies. I think in many respects, in 

connection with the spending of this Government, this is long past due. While this pleased me very 

much as an individual, the next thing I noticed was the very opposite, a contradiction and an 

inconsistency: I note they are going to spend a million 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

53 

dollars or the liquor board is going to spend a million dollars, in the City of Regina to construct a new 

liquor warehouse and head office. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Self-liquidating! 

 

Mr. Barrie: — It‟s quite liquid alright. I think possibly there are places, if the Government is having 

difficulties in getting the necessary finances, where that million dollars could be put to better use, and 

would benefit many more people. 

 

Then, of course, along came the announcement of the thirteen storey sky-scraper, the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation building, which according to press reports is to cost in the neighborhood of $6 

million and possibly more. Now, as far as I am concerned and I think I have mentioned this in this 

House before that, in my opinion, any building such as an office building to be constructed for 

Government use, and I think it is only practical good business, should be a building of very sound 

construction, but there is no necessity for luxuries, frills and extravagances such as have taken place in 

the past, and are apparently going to take place in connection with this particular building. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to quote from an article in the “Leader-Post” with a picture of the proposed 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation building attached. Certain statements that were made in this article by 

Mr. Brown, the hon. Minister in charge of the Power Corporation surprised me, and I quote: 

 

“Mr. Brown said no decision has been reached in financing the building. Two methods are being 

considered. The corporation could raise the money and erect the building, or it could have a private 

company do the building and lease it on an arrangement, which would give the S.P.C. eventual 

ownership.” 

 

Well, we hear all about socialism and government enterprises, and then he is considering having a 

private company, some of these capitalists I suppose, come along and build the building and make an 

arrangement so they can occupy it and pay it off. Probably his plan is a good one, but I am surprised at it 

coming from a devout socialist. I want to go on and quote further from this particular article, and what 

I‟m going to quote now, Mr. Speaker, is in connection with certain statements 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

54 

made by the General Manager of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, David Cass-Beggs, I quote: 

 

“The Saskatchewan Power Corporation will have the highest office building in Saskatchewan. It will 

be faced on the street side with white Saskatchewan brick, and dazzling gold-colored Japanese mosaic. 

The basic structure of the Y shaped building will be steel.” 

 

This is going to be another show place. I want further to quote, and this is quoting Mr. Cass-Beggs, or 

quoting from the article in which he is supposed to have said: 

 

“The building will be a spectacular architectural show place. Mr. Cass-Beggs said it is possible that 

the lights will be burning all night because they will double as heaters for the offices.” 

 

I wonder what they will do in the summer time? I want you to pay particular attention to this quote, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

“He said that 1% of the cost of the building, will be spent on definite works of art.” 

 

($60,000.00 if the cost is $6 million) 

 

“These might include murals and sculptures, and will be secured by the competition of artists.” 

 

I certainly am opposed to luxury and extravagance of this kind for an office building, particularly when 

there are people in this province, if you don‟t know it in the City of Regina, then you want to get out into 

the country where the money can be spent and spent time and time again, to far greater advantage than 

to provide some luxurious office for certain individuals and employees of the Power Corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, according to this article, Mr. Cass-Beggs went on further to say: 

 

“I doubt if you would find, short of the new City Hall in Toronto, another building in Canada which is 

an functional and attractive.” 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

55 

Well, now, we are trying to compete with the City of Toronto, with more people in the one city, than we 

have in the whole province of Saskatchewan. If we are going to try and compete with buildings such as 

the Toronto City Hall which I had the privilege not long ago of seeing, then I wonder what the people 

who are receiving $2.50 supplementary allowances, the people who are going through mud axle deep on 

municipal roads, and paying the tax loads there are here now, I wonder what they think of this kind of 

extravagance and luxury. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want now to deal with industrial matters, and I want first to state that I am very happy to 

see any development in this province along industrial lines. I want also to say, I would welcome any 

new industry which would come into this province and help the economy of the people of 

Saskatchewan. Yesterday the Provincial Treasurer talked a great deal about misrepresentation, errors, 

contradictions, and insults. In this particular regard, I don‟t like to use the word misrepresentation, but 

there has been a lot of misrepresentation in connection with the industrial development in the province. 

These particular statistics and figures which have been used, particularly by the Premier of this province, 

are certainly distorted, or misleading, or maybe the Premier is in error. I have here a publication by the 

Department of Trade and Commerce, more commonly known as the White Paper, but I believe this is 

where the Premier or his advisers, or speech writers, or whatever you might call them, probably get their 

information. It has been pointed out time and time again by people in the Opposition, that they are using 

the wrong figures. There has been some industrial development in the Province of Saskatchewan, and no 

one can spend more time than the Premier of this province going up and down the province, in season 

and out of season, speaking to service clubs, in this Legislature and outside of the province, trying to 

make people believe we have had a spectacular industrial development in Saskatchewan. It‟s too bad it 

wasn‟t true. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we must face the facts. In order to back up this mission he has, apparently, in connection 

with industrial development, he used certain figures. Now this has been pointed out as an error, and it 

was pointed out in this House a few days ago by a previous speaker. He uses the figure of $600 million 

as the increase. Well, now on pages 9, 10 and 11 of this White Paper, issued by the Federal Department 

of Trade and Commerce, these particular items are all set out. I 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

56 

think I can still read. Instead of the sum of $600 million which the Premier has quoted as often in 

connection with the increase in manufacturing in Saskatchewan, I find that the best that I can make out 

of these particular figures, for the year 1960, was $23 million. I see a figure here, certainly, of over $600 

million, but this particular figure includes many things I don‟t think any of us with the widest stretch of 

imagination would consider manufactured articles, or in relation to the manufacturing business of the 

province. 

 

This is some of the propaganda which emanates from the Department of my friend the hon. Minister of 

Industry and Information. I think he should check some of these errors, and the man in charge of the 

Industrial Development office. They should double check some of these things. It‟s too bad we didn‟t 

have industrial development such as this, but quoting a figure which includes all these various things 

which are not manufactured does not help. I don‟t know, I suppose this is probably something we should 

expect from a socialist Government. 

 

Insofar as they are concerned, and despite all their alibis to the contrary, they have to accept the 

responsibility. As socialists preaching a doctrine, by which they want to eliminate capitalism, the basic 

principle of their philosophy is to do away with the capitalistic or free enterprise system. They have to 

accept the responsibility of certain great losses we have had in the Province of Saskatchewan. I don‟t 

think any reasonable person would consider for one minute, in view of the speeches by Cabinet 

Ministers, members of the socialist party, in the province and outside of the province, claiming so much 

for socialism, and forever and ever criticizing and condemning the profit system, I don‟t think that is the 

kind of climate which is going to induce any reasonable business man who has money to invest to come 

here and invest it. I am going to say that one of the things we have possibly lost which has gone 

elsewhere, is an industry in this province which would provide plenty of employment in a large part of 

the province where employment is needed, for some of our Metis friends and native people. This is in 

connection with the recent announcement of three new pulp mills going into the Province of Alberta. 

 

Once these mills are established in the Province of Alberta, then in spite of the fact we have the 

materials 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

57 

and labour force, our chances of ever obtaining a pulp mill are remote, to say the least. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must inform the hon. Member that it is now 5:30. 

 

(The House recessed at 5:30 o‟clock p.m.) 

 

The House resumed at 7:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — When the House recessed I was discussing the loss to the province of a pulp mill with 

the announcement of three additional mills to be constructed and put into operation in Alberta. 

 

Our forest industry has been declining for the past three years. Revenue from this source dropped 

considerably during the past year. Our revenues dropped $73,000.00. We are producing less than 10% of 

our potential cut based on a sustained yield program. Now we will have to, where it is possible, have 

free enterprise, or somebody, go into production of our forest industries, and if we could increase 

production to say only 50% of the potential, it would mean instead of $8 million, $40 million of 

production in a year. 

 

When you look at the Province of Manitoba, you find they are fortunate in having a pulp and paper mill. 

In the October issue of “Western Business and Industry” there is an outline of the Saskatchewan forest 

production for 1959 which I just mentioned amounted to a little over $8 million. In the Province of 

Manitoba, production during the same period was in excess of $20 million. This is a serious loss to the 

province, and when we have an abundance of raw materials, and we have the labour force here that 

could make use of this particular raw material. We know we have certain difficulties in freight rates, but 

that isn‟t all the trouble. 

 

I am quite sure the value of our production, is as low as it is, because of some other underlying reasons. 

One of these reasons is one of the monopolies we have in this province, and have had for some years, 

with respect to the forest industry — the Timber Board. This Timber Board has the complete monopoly 

on the production of all spruce lumber off Crown Lands in the Province. They also insist that all pulp 

wood taken 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

58 

off Crown Lands has to be disposed of through the Timber Board. The Timber Board hasn‟t been able, 

in the northeastern part of the province in particular, to do a job in disposing of that timber. The private 

operators in that area, in my Constituency in fact, have had no difficulty, no difficulty whatever, in 

disposing to Canadian Forest Products and other United States firms anything they can produce. 

 

We heard this afternoon, in this House, about certain low wages, prevailing in the forest industry in the 

northern part of the province. I believe it possibly has some foundation, and probably the reason for that 

is the price the producers have to take, when they are producing lumber or pulp for the Saskatchewan 

Timber Board. Just as recently as yesterday, I contacted gentlemen who are in this business, and I‟ve got 

the up-to-date prices which were prevailing yesterday on contracts where deliveries are being made at 

the present time. I am going to read to the House, the variations of prices in pulp. For instance for 

fire-killed pulp, where there has been a forest fire and they have taken pulp out of that area, the Timber 

Board pays $11.50 a cord stock-piled in the Town of Swan River, Manitoba. The private companies who 

are purchasing the same product, the same pulp wood under the same conditions, stock-piled in the 

Town of Swan River, are paying $16.00 a cord. That‟s a big difference, Mr. Speaker, in the price. It 

makes a terrific difference to the producers. 

 

Now we will go onto peeled pulp wood. The Timber Board is paying $17.25 a cord, stock-piled in the 

Village of Arran in my Constituency, just inside the Manitoba-Saskatchewan boundary. The private 

companies buying this same peeled pulp wood are paying $22.50 for it. There is quite a difference here 

too. The people who are producing and selling to the private companies certainly could afford to pay 

much more to the people who are cutting the timber and hauling the timber. 

 

When we get down to green, rough pulp wood, for some reason or other the Timber Board has no 

market, or I assume that that is the reason the Timber Board are not purchasing green rough pulp from 

my area at least. The private concerns are in the market, and they are buying green pulp, delivered to the 

Village of Benito in the Province of Manitoba, and are paying $15.50 a cord for it. Now, the only reason 

I see we are not producing more pulp and providing employment, and the Government receiving more in 

the way of revenue, and many other advantages from it, is because we have this 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

59 

monopolistic Timber Board. I am sorry to say, and I don‟t know the reason for it, but insofar as these 

companies who are buying from private individuals are concerned, they apparently are not interested in 

dealing with the Saskatchewan Timber Board. 

 

We have thousands upon thousands of cords of this wood, and I am satisfied that if this Government 

would change its policy in connection with pulp, it would provide employment for thousands of people 

in the northern part of this province, such as our Metis people, our native Indian population, as well as 

other bush workers and truck drivers. It is by virtue of this policy that the Government has apparently 

insisted upon year after year, that this is lost to the people of Saskatchewan. It is also a loss to the 

Government itself in the way of revenue. 

 

I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, the Government take a good look at the conditions that have prevailed, 

and are prevailing at the present time. We hear a great deal about unemployment, and it is a problem, a 

real problem. The tendency is, of course, to blame certain industries, and to blame the Federal 

Government. We‟ve heard plenty of that. Insofar as I am concerned at the present time, I think this 

Government should take a good look at their policy. It is a shame and disgrace to think there are 

thousands upon thousands of cords of timber in the northern part of this province that could provide 

employment, could be sold to provide revenue to the Government, and provide people with a good basic 

living. But just because they insist upon this monopolistic department of government in handling these 

products, they can‟t get a market. It‟s a crying shame. 

 

I‟m going to repeat myself, Mr. Speaker, I hope this Government will see fit to examine and examine 

carefully, the policy that is in effect, and make some changes, and thereby act and not talk. This 

unemployment situation we hear a lot about is a very serious problem for many of our people. This is 

one means by which the Provincial Government, by a change of policy can provide many, many jobs, 

for a great number of people who need work very badly at the present time. So I say to the Government 

don‟t talk any more, but act. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, just before I leave this particular subject, I would like to mention the actual lumber 

production. It‟s alarming when you go into retail lumber yards in the province, and right in my own 

district which is only a matter of a few yards from the forest where lumber is being taken out by certain 

producers for the Timber Board, and you find they are able to sell 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

60 

you fir lumber which is produced in the Province of British Columbia for practically the same price, or 

an equal price in some cases, as native Saskatchewan spruce. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is something very seriously wrong when a condition of this kind exists. There is 

another suggestion I am going to make to the Government, and that is that they undertake to effect a 

change of policy, insofar as lumber for residents is concerned, particularly those close to the forest 

reserve. A change should be made to the farm people in particular to go into the forest reserves as they 

did years ago. I am quite aware of the fact thee must be conservation methods adopted, and the cuts that 

are taken out have to be curtailed to a degree, but allow the farm people to go in, and with the 

expenditure of very little in the way of cash, practically all they would have to invest, outside of their 

own labour, would be the cost of the permit, and the saw bill, in order to obtain their lumber. There are 

many people in the northern part of the province in particular, and I think this would apply all over the 

northern part of Saskatchewan, who years ago, at very little cash outlay, were able to obtain lumber, and 

to build the buildings they presently have on their farms. Many of these buildings are getting in a state of 

disrepair. Many farmers need new buildings, many need to expand their building, but at the current cost 

of lumber at a lumber yard or at the Timber Board piling yard dealers, the cost makes it prohibitive for 

these people, under present conditions, to proceed with repairs, let alone any expansion or new 

construction. This is another way the Government, by reviewing their policies and making some 

changes, can assist many of our people in the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a few minutes to discuss a matter that‟s in the forefront today, 

and has been for some little time. That is the matter of the change suggested, and being promoted, of our 

local government administrations. One place where I have to differ with my hon. friend the Provincial 

Treasurer is that in 1956, after urging the calling of a Municipal-Provincial conference, particularly by 

my friend the hon. Member for Moosomin, this conference was convened. I had the privilege of 

attending that conference, and when this conference was convened, I thought it would be a very good 

thing. I had just been elected in the general election of 1956. I had never sat in this House. I came down 

to that conference, which was held in this Chamber, and I thought it was being organized on the basis of 

where the municipal people would sit down, and have a far greater degree of participation in the 

conference. I found the time was pretty well take up by Members of the 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

61 

Government, and the theme of most of their addresses, and the conclusion of most of their remarks, were 

to the effect that there had to be a change, a reorganization, in local government administration. I am not 

going to argue about that, but even at that time, five years ago, it was very apparent to me as an 

onlooker, that the Government felt, and possibly for reason, felt there had to be this change to a larger 

unit for municipal administration. Of course, I think they were largely influenced by the Royal 

Commission on Agriculture and Rural Life, headed by Professor Baker, and I have here a copy of part of 

the Commission‟s report. This is a synopsis of a certain portion of the report. I notice in this particular 

report, Mr. Speaker, insofar as that commission was concerned, they were very definite. On page 35 of 

this summary of rural roads and local government, it states that only two of the three alternative systems 

considered, the county, and the modified county, substantially fulfil the minimum requirements for a 

satisfactory municipal system, and local government as a whole. 

 

The Baker Commission, of course, were very much in favor of this. It goes on to say on the same page 

that of the two acceptable systems, the full county system is the most desirable. So, it is very evident 

even prior to 1956, or at least in the year 1956, certain emphasis was being placed from the top and from 

this Commission, on a reorganization of municipal boundaries. 

 

The reason I have mentioned this, Mr. Speaker, is that despite anything which might be said to the 

contrary, it is my opinion this whole matter of suggested reorganization has come from the wrong 

source. If local government, the school units, the school boards, the rural municipal councils and the 

village councils and their representatives had come to the Government, and requested a larger unit, then 

I would have considered it in a very different light. 

 

At the conference I just spoke about, in 1956, the Continuing Committee was set up. They continued 

until the present time, and they are still continuing as far as I know. This particular Committee has not 

brought down its report yet. The hon. Provincial Treasurer made some mention in this Chamber 

yesterday about some of us people who wished to take a certain line on this particular matter, and 

suggested that we are insulting the committee members. Well, I don‟t consider anything I have said or 

am going to say an insult to the committee members. I suppose the contention is that as the report hasn‟t 

been brought down yet, we shouldn‟t talk about it. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

62 

I want to remind the Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, that for weeks and months past we have had these 

meetings held all over the province where not only written reports, but radio has been used, television 

has been used, moving pictures have been used, by the various representatives of this Committee, pretty 

well outlining what they will no doubt conclude in a written report. I don‟t think it‟s any secret what 

these people are likely to recommend. 

 

I had the privilege of attending one of those meetings. The gentlemen who were there, and I have every 

respect for the gentlemen who are appearing as representatives of the Committee, very frankly stated 

what they thought. I imagine the expressions they made at that time will be what will be in the report. So 

I don‟t think there is any reason to say we are insulting these particular gentlemen. They have probably 

done a very good job, but again I want to repeat that these particular meetings, I assume that all of them 

were such along the line as the one held in the Town of Kamsack, were designed as a very definite 

promotion of this particular system. 

 

I don‟t like to use the word, but I am going to, and it is brain-washing. Insofar as the people who 

probably had some objection to this particular system were concerned, they had a very limited 

opportunity to express their opinions. I was very disappointed in the type of meeting, and the apparent 

regulations which were set down by the people representing the Committee at that particular meeting. 

The lack of opportunity to express themselves given to the people who they had called into that meeting 

from all the surrounding district concerned me, and some of these people had some real suggestions to 

offer; some of them had some real good reasons as to why they didn‟t think a certain thing should be 

done or should not be done. As a result of all this, in talking about insults, I have found amongst friends 

of mine, that there has been a certain amount of insult heaped upon those people who down through the 

years have served as public servants on local government bodies. These are the men and women in 

Saskatchewan who have given of their efforts, their abilities, and their time, in order to carry on our 

school administration, our municipal administration and such like. As far as any suggestion that there 

are insults by talking about this, if there is any basis in fact for it, then as far as I am personally 

concerned, I would rather insult the few people on the Committee, than insult the people who have 

served for so many years as our municipal officials. 

 

This, in my opinion, is an effort further to centralize power in this province. To take away from the 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

63 

small man in the small school district, and in the village, and in the rural municipality, a certain amount 

of power that he now has, and in my opinion is rightfully his. I can‟t despite anything I‟ve read or heard, 

see where they are going to have the same say, in their own local affairs they have today if they are 

going to be put into a county system, and have fewer members than they have on the municipal councils 

and school boards today, in a much larger area. 

 

It‟s a centralization of power. Now, that centralization of power is coming from the top, rather than from 

„the grass roots‟ to the well know expression, is something I think this Government, and the Committee 

should take into fuller consideration. Possibly they have, because it is very evident to everyone of us in 

this House that in the last few months what has happened must impress you without a shadow of a doubt 

— a large majority of the people in the province, are incensed over the action which has been taken, and 

the promotion in this particular regard. 

 

If my memory serves me correctly, I believe there have been 179 rural municipalities who have held a 

vote, and around 30 villages. Members of local government, reeves and councillors arranged these votes, 

and I suppose in many cases pressure was put on them by people who were very confused in the whole 

matter. One of the main reasons for their confusion and their doubt is what this change is going to cost. 

The people in the province, in the rural areas today, believe taxation on land has reached and exceeded 

that saturation point, and they are afraid, and I should think they have good reason to be afraid, this plan 

is going to cost a lot more money. It doesn‟t matter how much they are going to get in additional service. 

I know that is one of the excuses offered, but if they can‟t pay for what they have now, how on earth are 

they going to pay more? 

 

I want to commend the speakers who appeared in the Kamsack meeting. I believe it was Mr. Trout, or 

Mr. Fahlman, if my memory serves me correctly. When they were asked as to the possible cost or 

economy of this larger county system, they honestly and frankly told the people assembled there it 

would cost them more money, but they said they expected they would probably get more service. Well 

there is nothing to stop the people in the present municipal set-up, to get more services today, if they 

want them, and if they are able and willing to pay for them. This is one of the reasons the people in rural 

Saskatchewan are so incensed today over this promotion 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

64 

that has gone on for the last few months. Surely, the overwhelming votes in opposition, recorded in each 

and every one of the areas where a vote was taken should certainly impress any Government, any group, 

or any committee that there is something seriously wrong with this particular proposal. 

 

Now, I want to say something that probably we will hear a lot about from the other side. The Liberal 

Opposition has taken a stand in this matter. Some of us as individuals may have said other things, but I 

think the official stand of the Liberal Opposition has been consistent, and it‟s consistent today. All we 

have said, and all we have urged, is very simple. We have insisted upon, and we will continue to insist 

that before any change is made in local government boundaries or reorganization the people in every 

area where change is proposed should have the opportunity to express, by a ballot, whether they want it 

or not. That is the stand we have taken, and it is hoped this will be carried out, in the days that lie ahead. 

I am sorry there was no assurance given either by any Member of the Government or in the Speech from 

the Throne. Probably that‟s expecting too much, but I think, it could have been included in the Speech 

from the Throne. Some assurance could have been given, to many thousands of people in Saskatchewan, 

that what we have proposed, would be granted them. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne includes no assurance of such nature, and for the 

various other reasons I have mentioned, I am glad we have an amendment whereby the Members in this 

House will stand up and vote, either for or against the amendment. I am very certain that vote will be 

very interesting to the rural people in Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it is very evident to everyone present, and yourself, that I will support the 

amendment, and I cannot support the motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker (Attorney-General): — I am very happy, Mr. Speaker, to take part in this Throne 

Speech Debate, for several reasons. First of all, because it gives me a lot of pleasure and satisfaction to 

be able to congratulate you, on your election to the high office of Speaker, and to express on my own 

behalf, the confidence that you will discharge your duties in a manner which will be a credit to yourself, 

a credit to the Constituency from which you came, and a credit to this legislature. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

65 

I want to pay a word of tribute to the mover and seconder, for the very eloquent testimonials they have 

given, and for the very eloquent way in which they expressed their support for the policies of this 

Government. They, (and it is easy to see,) were wisely chosen by their constituents, to represent them in 

this Assembly. Their constituents will be, I am sure proud of the performance which they will turn in. I 

am sorry that the whole tenor of the debate, since their addresses, has not been kept up to the same 

uniformly high standard which they set. 

 

I want, also, while I am in this congratulatory mood, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate all of the new 

Members who have been elected to this Assembly, and to congratulate those who have spoken, on the 

high quality of the addresses which they gave, and I make that comment without any distinction as to 

one side of the House or the other. 

 

I am pleased to welcome the evidence of merit, which is shown, on both sides of the House, by new 

Members, and I am sure that this House will derive a lot of benefit in the next four years from the 

contribution which these new Members bring with them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak in this debate, I should say at the outset, in case I forget at the end, to say 

that I will support the motion, and will vote against the amendment. I will support this motion, Mr. 

Speaker because I think it is an eminently good statement of policy for the Province of Saskatchewan. 

We have been somewhat surprised to hear, that there are those who think that it is perhaps too modest a 

statement, or that it does not set out an ambitious enough program for the future. To them I can only say 

that their taste has become dulled and satiated by the splendid performance of this Government over a 

period of seventeen years, and that if they had been comparing this document, with any Speech from the 

Throne that has been read in this House, prior to 1944, there isn‟t any doubt in my mind but that they 

would say that this is a very progressive and forwarding looking document indeed. 

 

I am not going to deal with all of the things that were referred to in the Speech from the Throne, nor all 

the things that were referred to in the debate. I would like to say, however, there are a number of 

different achievements recorded in the Speech from the Throne, and a number of separate proposals and 

promises for the future, anyone of which would have been taken by any previous Government in this 

province, as being justification for a whole term of office. I look, for example, 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

66 

at the unprecedented highway expansion of the current fiscal year. This is the largest highway program 

in the history of the province. Yet, everyone can remember that during the late twenties, a Government 

was elected to this province that undertook a large highway program for two years. They virtually 

bankrupted the province in the process, but for two years of the five years that they were in office, they 

undertook a large highway program, and even three years later that Government went back to the people 

on the cry that they were the good-roads Government. It‟s true, of course, that they didn‟t elect a single 

Member, but even their program has been exceeded by this Government in its first year after a general 

election. We saw Liberal Governments in this province who generally could contrive to have a big 

highway program, or at least they called it a big highway program, in the year just before a general 

election, but here is something new: the largest highway program in the history of the province, in the 

year immediately after a general election. I suggest, that significant fact ought not to be lost sight of by 

the people of this province. 

 

The Speech from the Throne refers to the expansion of power facilities. In one year, this province spent 

$60 million on expanding its power utilities, more than the province had spent in the entire previous 

history before the election of a CCF Government. This $60 million was largely for the production of 

increased volumes of power, but also for the extension of power services to more customers. It is not 

only a testimonial to the activity of this Government, but is proof, if proof were needed, of the economic 

development, the industrial development of the province. 

 

Natural gas — I find it almost unbelievable myself, — when I see the figures: twenty-four new 

communities added during one year, a total now of ninety-three communities in Saskatchewan served 

with natural gas. Well, I know that there are approximately ninety-five or one hundred communities in 

Saskatchewan that have R.C.M.Police detachments, and that‟s how I get the impression of how many 

one hundred is, spread out over the province of Saskatchewan. There are just as many communities with 

natural gas as there are with the R.C.M.Police detachments. It is a very wide-spread service indeed, Mr. 

Speaker. Numbers don‟t mean very much in the abstract, but numbers when you relate them to 

something, a physical fact, do become significant. I know that numbers don‟t mean very much to the 

erstwhile financial critic over there, because he has never been 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

67 

trained to any capacity to understand. When I say that this number is about equal to the number of the 

R.C.M.P. detachments in the province, we can then form some impressions of how side-spread the use 

of natural gas is in Saskatchewan. I am sorry if I have to speak so “figuratively,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

Then of course, not enough has been said about the unique and novel program of farm sewer and water. 

This is a first for Saskatchewan. I know of no other jurisdiction in North America, or anywhere else, that 

has made it the business of government, to go out and see to it that rural people enjoy these modern 

amenities of life. This was something that was only possible because of the farsighted rural power 

program that was launched back in the early fifties. This program will increase the attractiveness of rural 

life, will help to keep farmers on the land, and at least if they can‟t make any money, they will be 

happier there with an indoor bathroom to use. 

 

This Government, has been able in the past year, to see the crowning reward of several years of 

planning, preparation and promotion of a steel industry. Last spring the first steel was poured in 

Saskatchewan. This is a first which the Opposition, if it had the chance would boast to the heavens 

about. This is an achievement which any Provincial Government ought to be proud of having realized. 

 

The South Saskatchewan River project is going on — a project which will cost this province roughly 

some $25 million for the dam alone, in addition to a much larger sum for power development and a 

substantial sum amounting to millions of dollars for recreational and other developments for the benefit 

of the people of Saskatchewan. This is an ambitious project — one which dwarfs any physical 

achievement by any previous Provincial Government in the history of this province. Then, of course, we 

have the welfare and education benefits which have been extended. I do not propose to deal with them, 

except to refer to the Student Aid Fund which I believe is a very important program. Until now over 

8,000 people have benefitted in this province by direct Student Scholarship Loans in addition to about 

500 who already have, in the first year, received direct scholarship grants to enable them to attend the 

first-year university. 

 

I am pleased to see in the Speech from the Throne reference to the fact that this may be extended in the 

coming year. This Government will always, as long as any Member of this Government lives, I am sure, 

the people 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

68 

who form this Government will always be proud of the fact that we have witnessed the greatest 

expansion in our university facilities in the history of the province. A five-fold increase in the total value 

of buildings on the university campus, and in addition, the proposed launching of a second institution at 

Regina to serve the needs of the young people of Saskatchewan. This Government realizes as no 

previous Government in this province has realized, the importance for the future welfare of 

Saskatchewan of an education at university level for these young people. 

 

Then of course there is the expansion of the provincial grants. One of the Members who spoke this 

afternoon remarked that there had been a five-fold increase in provincial grants, and he attributed this 

statement to the Provincial Treasurer who spoke yesterday. The fact is the Provincial Treasurer referred 

only to the last ten-year period. The Opposition Member, however, in quoting this, referred to a period 

in which the CCF Government had been in office, sixteen years. The fact of the matter is that if you take 

the whole seventeen year period, school grants amounted in the first year to $2¾ million dollars — that 

was the last year of the Liberal Government. This year $30 million — not a five-fold increase but more 

than a ten-fold increase in fifteen years. Then my hon. friends say, “Well, of course, there has been an 

increase in the provincial revenue”. Well there has been an increase of about five-fold in provincial 

revenues, but at the same time a ten-fold increase in provincial grants. 

 

We talk about our highways programs; we talk about increased in provincial grants to municipalities; 

assistance to the universities‟ expansion of facilities for hospitalization, care of mentally ill and so on; 

Opposition Members are inclined to come back with the answer that this, of course, is easy. Times are 

different than they were in 1944, and of course I can agree that times are different than they were in 

1944, but in 1944 Saskatchewan was one of the poorest provinces in Canada. Under a Liberal 

Government this province occupied almost the very bottom of the economic totem pole, Mr. Speaker. 

Now things are different. This province is able to provide more amenities and more services for its 

people. 

 

The Opposition then changed their tune and started saying that Saskatchewan has stagnated since 1944; 

that the CCF Government has prevented developments; that there have been actual reductions in 

industrial activity. Well, Mr. Speaker, my hon. friends might be 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

69 

able to kid themselves but to the people of the province of Saskatchewan, they are exhibiting a split 

personality. This is schizophrenia and it has not recommended them to the electors in Saskatchewan in 

five separate elections. 

 

Opposition Members: — Who has schizophrenia? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t want to take up my time or the time of the House dealing 

with the arguments which have been put forward by my hon. friends opposite. I think what I would like 

to do is take some time to review the operations of the Department of Attorney General and some of the 

information I may give may be prosaic; it may not be very sparkling but nevertheless there are some 

facts which I would like to place upon the record because the Attorney General‟s Department does not 

issue an annual departmental report. Some of these facts, highlights, and figures I have placed on the 

record for the last four years and are a permanent record of some of the statistics which may be useful to 

the House. 

 

First of all, I know, Mr. Speaker, that when I do this it will be said by my hon. friends opposite that I am 

being very tiresome. Well, I can‟t always be sparkling and if I want to put these facts on the record, I 

hope that my friends will bear with me. 

 

First of all I wish to refer to the Provincial Magistrate‟s Civil Court. Hon. Members will recall a few 

years ago legislation was provided giving to the provincial magistrates a civil jurisdiction up to $200 and 

you will remember that I said that the reason why the Government was proposing this legislation was 

that very often in isolated rural areas, disputes arose between citizens as to small claims of less than 

$200, often arising out of an automobile accident where the amount deductible was at issue. I remember 

in my own Constituency, people approaching me with this question — “Why should I have to pay the 

$200 to repair my own vehicle, and $200 to repair my neighbour‟s vehicle?” The only answer I could 

give was that you were at fault, and therefore you had to compensate your neighbour for his damages as 

well as to pay your own. But often I found that answer wasn‟t satisfactory, because the person with 

whom I was talking would say, “Well, this is how it happened” and proceed to explain to me how it 

happened. Of course, it always looked as though he was almost right, that he wasn‟t 100% at fault, and it 

looked as though he suffered somewhat of an injustice. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

70 

So I would suggest that perhaps he should have taken it to his lawyer, or to court if he wasn‟t satisfied 

with the adjustment. His answer was, “If I did that I would have paid more money to get justice done 

than the benefits I would have got by going to Court, even if I had won”. I have to confess that perhaps 

there is some truth in that. So the Government gave some thought to some way of allowing such people 

. . . 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Will the hon. Member allow a question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Yes, I have no objection. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Why would the man have to pay $200 to repair his own vehicle and $200 to repair the 

other person‟s vehicle if there had been no case and no judgment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Usually, Mr. Speaker, what happens is that the two insurance companies come to 

an agreement about the matter, and if the other driver has collision insurance he is paid by his insurance 

company, and the insurance company then subrogates his rights against the person who is at fault. So the 

insurance company is claiming $200 if the motorist was at fault, and the motorist who is at fault also 

pays the $200 for his own garage bill. This is usually the case. The insurance companies try to recover 

the $200. 

 

I have suggested to these people that there ought to be a very simple and easy way for them to determine 

whether or not they are at fault without having either to be taken into court by the other motorist, or 

without having to go to a Superior or District Court themselves. As my hon. friend knows, to dispute the 

liability of the other person‟s damages is running the risk of having to go to court to defend oneself, and 

usually insurance companies have been in the habit of taking people to the District Court which meant 

substantial additional costs. This, of course, my constituent is anxious to avoid. 

 

I discussed this with my colleagues and so we came to a policy of providing for a civil jurisdiction 

before the magistrate for an amount of $200. It was said by hon. friends opposite that this wouldn‟t be 

used, that it was a waste of time, that this service was already provided by the small debt procedure of 

the District Court. Well, it is provided by the small debt procedure of the District Court, but 

unfortunately the 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

71 

District Court only sits in twenty or twenty-three different places in the province, and this isn‟t close 

enough to the farmer-citizens of Saskatchewan. So therefore, by giving this jurisdiction to the 

magistrate, some eighty-five or ninety communities of Saskatchewan have the services of the 

Magistrate‟s Court for the purpose of adjudicating on these small claims. 

 

The services are coming to be more popular. I have returns for the first of January to September 30th, 

1960 showing that during that period there were 1,350 summonses issued in the magistrate‟s small 

claims court; that 124 contested cases were heard by Magistrates; that there were 439 uncontested cases 

and judgments were rendered in 449 instances. Now, this represents a service to the people of 

Saskatchewan which they had to pay a lawyer to render, and which would probably cost $10,000 to 

$20,000. It is still a small thing, but it is growing. I am told by one of the magistrates that there are many 

instances where he is able to render service to the public that doesn‟t show on the statistics and figures. 

That is where two motorists come arm in arm to him; they each relate their stories; he advises them what 

he thinks is the law, and if they are satisfied they go away and settle up, and that is the end of it. It 

doesn‟t cost them a penny and they have the opportunity of having legal services without having to pay 

for them, and without having to go to court to find out who is in the right. 

 

I‟m sure that my hon. friend from Humboldt isn‟t altogether happy about the success of this Court, 

because she was one of those counsellors of doom and gloom who were critical of the idea when it was 

first presented to this House. Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say something . . . 

 

Mrs. Batten: — I‟m very happy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — . . . about the Land Titles Act, and this is a matter about which I have spoken 

before during past Sessions, when I have referred to recent reforms made under the Land Titles system. I 

believe now that it is appropriate for us to review the results of these reforms. By 1956 it was becoming 

more and more apparent that the system of land titles in this province — the system of filing documents 

and recording land transactions was becoming outmoded. The large accumulation and the tremendous 

volume of records and documents in our various offices, covering a period of more than seventy-five 

years since the land titles system was first introduced, was causing 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

72 

our offices to bulge at the seams. The method which was introduced under the original land titles system 

made it impossible to separate documents which were discharged and dead from those which were live 

and current, thereby making it difficult to segregate and to destroy documents which were ancient and 

useless. This quickly growing volume of paper was also interfering with the working of the system of 

interfering with the staff in the handling of the records. It was a particularly acute problem so far as 

Saskatoon and Regina were concerned, these being the two largest offices. 

 

As a result, over a period of some ten or twelve years each of these offices were running with a delay of 

anywhere from ten to thirty days from the time documents were filed until they were dealt with. A 

survey was made of the situation in the other torrens jurisdictions in North America, both Canada and 

the United States. All of them were using virtually the same system as we were using in Saskatchewan. 

It appeared to us that the only method which they had found of dealing with this cumbersome situation 

was to increase the work space and to increase the size of the working staffs. 

 

So at that time a study of our system and possible methods of improving it was launched. In consultation 

with the Land Titles office staffs, a new system was finally worked out. This new program called for 

four major changes. First it called for the establishment of the position of administrative director, and a 

separate and distinct office for the Master of Titles. The latter position is a legal position, and it is 

traditional that the Master of Titles concern himself with the judicial functions which the Legislature 

vests in him under the Act, and concerns himself with seeing to it that the land titles system functions 

according to law. 

 

The job of planning for the administrative efficiency of the system, in our view, calls for a different kind 

of qualification, a different professional skill. The new administrative director appointed under the Act is 

Mr. V.T. Dean, a long-time official of the staff of the Provincial Auditor‟s Department, and previous to 

that a man who had practical experience as an employee of the Land Titles Branch. The value of this 

step has been demonstrated to the public who use the system, through the increased efficiency resulting 

from better administrative control, and the virtual elimination of the delays which used to attend upon 

the processing of documents. In 1960, for example, there was only one 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

73 

occasion when one office fell more than forty-eight hours behind in the objective of processing of all 

documents on a current basis. 

 

Secondly, the program called for the introduction of a new system of registration. This meant the 

replacement of virtually all the equipment and the introduction of new forms and recording systems. 

This was probably the most costly aspect of the new system, and accounted for about half of the cost of 

converting the system. This phase or branch of the conversion has been completed. 

 

Thirdly, the plan called for the microfilming of all the original grants of title from the Crown as well as 

microfilming all subsequent certificates of title. By this means, it will be possible to reconstruct the Land 

Titles system in the event of the destruction of one office, or indeed of all ten offices. This permanent 

microfilm recording is also, or would also be of great assistance in the event that a certificate of title was 

lost, misplaced, mislaid in one of the offices. So far it has not been necessary to replace a single title lost 

or mislaid under the new system of filing, although I must say that the separation of the books or titles, 

or the putting of the titles into separate fileholders did cause some apprehension, lest some of them 

might get misplaced, placed in the wrong folder, and thus lost. So far, although some have been missing 

briefly, we have never actually lost one yet. If such an eventuality should occur, then this record would 

enable us to restore the lost title. 

 

The microfilming has now been 65% completed with respect to the existing titles. We hope that this 

microfilming will be completed by September 1st of this year. The microfilming has also been done on a 

current basis on all new work coming into the office during the past two years. The microfilm program, 

however will not be complete until the Original Grants from the Crown are microfilmed, and it had been 

the intention of the Department that this should be done this year. 

 

Fourthly, the new system made it possible to embark upon a program for the orderly destruction of 

documents. Under the new system of filing dead and live documents are separately filed. It is now 

possible to specify an age beyond which dead documents shall be destroyed. Plans are to destroy liens, 

mortgages, and caveats and such things, six years after they have been discharged or withdrawn, 

provided that at least ten years has elapsed since there were registered. There is no intention to destroy 

certificates of title. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

74 

The new streamlined system of filing, Mr. Speaker, already referred to, has made it possible to effect 

striking economies in space. The destruction of documents will eventually make even more spectacular 

space savings possible. The Land Titles Office in Prince Albert, for example, built only a little more 

than six years ago, has been reduced by 40% in the amount of floor space which was required. 

Fortunately, this extra space is being used by another Government Agency. Five years ago plans were 

under way for an extension or addition to the Regina Land Titles Office involving a cost of a quarter of a 

million dollars or more. The conversion of the land titles system to the new procedure has made it 

possible to dispense with those plans, and indeed we now have surplus space in the Regina Office. 

 

The cost of the conversion was originally estimated at $374,000, part of which was incurred over each 

of the past three years. It was estimated in 1957 that the conversion to the new system would make 

possible a staff reduction of about thirty persons, and that this would effect an annual savings of about 

$100,000. It is interesting now to examine the extent to which these estimates proved to be accurate. As 

it turned out, the cost of the conversion will be less than was estimated, Mr. Speaker. To date the cost of 

conversion has amounted to $348,000 or $26,000 less than the amount originally estimated. It was 

originally hoped that the staff would be reduced from one hundred and sixty-two as it was in 1956-57 to 

one hundred and thirty-two after the conversion process was completed. As it turned out, our 

expectations in this regard were too modest, for notwithstanding a more than 10% increase in the 

number of documents registered during the past year, as compared with 1956, we have nevertheless 

achieved our objective in regard to the reduction of staff. We now propose to continue our program of 

streamlining our establishment and improving the level of service to the public, by transferring the 

offices at Arcola and Moosomin to Regina. This move will result in a savings of $17,813 per year from 

now on. Of course, during the first year we will have to offset against this the sum of about $5,000 to 

cover moving expenses. 

 

In addition there will be substantial savings accrue to the Department of Public Works if they are able to 

use this space for some alternative Government Agency. 

 

As I have already suggested, this move has not been dictated altogether by consideration of economy. 

However, although consideration of economy must not be 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

75 

lost sight of, I am always amused by my hon. friends opposite who wail against the Government for not 

economizing, and then when you do economize somewhere they carp against you for putting a dollar 

and cents value on service. It just goes to show, Mr. Speaker, that you can‟t please some of the people 

any of the time. 

 

As I have already suggested, this move wasn‟t dictated solely by consideration of economy. A survey 

made in the offices at Moosomin and Arcola revealed that only a very tiny proportion of the work in 

those two offices had originated in Arcola or Moosomin. In Arcola, for example, only 8% of the work 

done in that office originated in Arcola. The largest single source of work in the Arcola office having 

come from Regina. 

 

With regard to Moosomin, only 9% of the work of that office came from Moosomin and vicinity, and 

again Regina was the largest single source of work for that office. So it is therefore clear, if we are to 

recognize our duty of rendering the most efficient services possible to our customers, the people of 

Saskatchewan, it is our duty to provide these offices as nearly as possible to where the customers reside, 

so that the citizens of Saskatchewan will be put to as little trouble as possible in using these offices. 

 

I regret that the Member for Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) or the Member for Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) 

are not in their seats, but I want to say that I believe it is no part of the function of Government to 

fragment and break up efficient and economic services merely to subsidize or stabilize the economy of a 

larger number of communities. 

 

The purpose of the land titles system is, as efficiently as possible, and as economically as possible, to 

provide the people with an effective system of land registration. If that can be more efficiently and 

economically done in Regina than it can in Arcola or Moosomin, then it is the function of the 

Government to see that that is brought about. 

 

Under the old system it would have been impossible to have made this improvement, firstly because it 

would have been extremely difficult to integrate documents from two or three offices into a single 

office. Secondly, because space in the Regina office would not have been sufficient to accommodate the 

work of these three offices. It is therefore expected that the Moosomin office will close on March 31, 

1961 and the Arcola office will close about six weeks later. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

76 

I would like to say something now about the Courts. The judicial system has also been adapted to meet 

current conditions. Take first the number of judges in the District Court. For many years, Saskatchewan 

had eighteen District Court judges. In spite of the fact that the District Court in Manitoba and Alberta 

had practically the same jurisdiction, and despite the fact that Alberta has a much larger population than 

we have, those two provinces were provided with only twelve judges and ten judges respectively, 

compared to eighteen in Saskatchewan. Previous Governments in this province must have been more 

successful in creating political plums for their friends than were the Governments of either Alberta or 

Manitoba. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Shame! Shame! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — The Culliton Committee on Judicial Reform pointed out in 1957 that more than 

half of the judicial work in the District Court was being done in two judicial districts, that is the judicial 

districts of Regina and Saskatoon, and at that time there were only two judges in Saskatoon and one in 

Regina, so that three District Court judges were doing more than half the judicial work of the District 

Courts in this province. The pressure on the judge in Regina, however, was shortly thereafter relieved by 

the moving of another District Court judge from another city to Regina. This gave Regina and Saskatoon 

each two District Court judges. 

 

The centres have now been grouped into circuits of three, four, or five judicial centres. Circuit A, 

Regina; Circuit B, Saskatoon, and the other circuits are comprised as follows: Circuit C, Weyburn, 

Arcola, Estevan and Moosomin; Circuit D, Wynyard, Yorkton, and Melville; Circuit E, Prince Albert, 

Melfort, Humboldt; Circuit F, Battleford, Kerrobert, Wilkie and Kindersley; Circuit G, Assiniboia, 

Shaunavon, Moose Jaw, Gravelbourg and Swift Current. 

 

At the end of my remarks I would like to give a summary showing the number of writs issued in each of 

these judicial centres for the years 1958, 1959, and 1960. The summary also shows the number of trials 

conducted by the District Court in each of those three years. It also shows the number of miscellaneous 

applications made to the District Court in each of those three years, and the number of Surrogate Court 

applications for probate or administration, during each of the same three years. That Table is marked 

Table A. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

77 

Before turning it in, however, I would like to make some comments on it. Table B, which I would also 

like to hand in at the conclusion of my remarks for annexation to the record, is merely a conversion of 

the number in Table A to percentage points, so that it is possible to get a picture of the change in the 

level of each activity in 1960 as compared with the previous year. 

 

Some significant facts appear, Mr. Speaker, from these tables. First of all, Regina and Saskatoon each 

account for between twenty and twenty-five per cent of each category of the judicial work that is done in 

the province. Since there are two District Court judges at each place, one might assume then, that each 

District Court judge is able to do from ten to twelve per cent of the work of the District Court in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. In fairness, however, we should recognize that those judges who have rural 

circuits have the extra burden of travelling and the moving from one Judicial Centre to another. 

Therefore, one should expect that the judges in these rural circuits should be expected to handle ten per 

cent or less of the total judicial work of the province. Circuits A and B, as I have already said, each 

comprise nearly twenty-five per cent of the work of the province, giving to each of these judges 

approximately twelve and one-half per cent of the judicial work of the province. Circuit C, which 

comprises Weyburn, Arcola, Estevan, and Moosomin accounts for only about six per cent of the judicial 

work of the province in all categories. It is, therefore, reasonable to expect that one judge can quite 

easily service Circuit C, although Circuit C, now has two judges, one of whom expects to retire during 

the coming summer. Circuit D, comprising Wynyard, Yorkton, and Melville, and the three points 

together handle about six or seven per cent of the various categories of judicial work in the province. It, 

therefore, can be said that one judge could conveniently handle the work of that circuit. At present that 

Circuit has three judges. Circuit E, comprised of Prince Albert, Melfort and Humboldt accounts for 

about fourteen per cent of the judicial work in the province, and should, therefore, reasonably be 

expected to have two judges. That is the number which it presently has, and due to the regrettable illness 

of one of the judges, it has become necessary to authorize the Federal Government to appoint a third 

judge for that Circuit. The Government at Ottawa, however, has unfortunately not made that 

appointment to date and the work of that Circuit is suffering. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — . . . whether you‟re teetering up or down. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

78 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — After the next retirement from that circuit, it will be unnecessary to make a 

replacement. That Circuit can then be worked with two, providing that the two remaining judges enjoy 

good health. 

 

Circuit F, consisting of Battleford, Kerrobert, Wilkie and Kindersley accounts for a total of 

approximately six per cent of the judicial work of the province in all categories. Those four centres 

account for approximately six per cent of the total. One judge can therefore, reasonably be expected to 

do the work of that Circuit. There has unfortunately, however, been no judge on that Circuit for the past 

several months. The urgings of the Saskatchewan Government over the past three months, that an 

appointment should be made there, have so far gone unrewarded. This failure of the Federal 

Government to make an appointment has resulted in serious disadvantages to the people of that area. 

 

The travelling required on this Circuit, that is Circuit F, which as I said comprises Battleford, Kerrobert, 

Wilkie and Kindersley, will be somewhat less after the beginning of the new fiscal year, as it is the 

intention of the Government to discontinue Wilkie and Kindersley as Judicial Centres. A glance at Table 

B will show that Wilkie accounted for 1.06 of all the actions launched in the province, and Kindersley 

accounted for one-twentieth of one per cent. Wilkie accounted for 58/100ths of one per cent of the trials 

of the District Court in the province, and Kindersley accounted for 23/100ths of one per cent. Since 

neither of these places has adequate facilities and since each centre is only thirty-five or forty miles from 

the neighboring Judicial Centre, both of which neighboring Judicial Centres enjoy first-rate judicial 

facilities, it is fruitless, we believe, to try to maintain the appearance of active Judicial Centres at either 

Kindersley or Wilkie. The loss of the service will hardly be notice in either place because of a change 

made in the rules of court permitting the filing of material of the court by mail. This will leave only 

Battleford and Kerrobert on Circuit F. 

 

Circuit G has the largest number of Judicial Centres of any Circuit in the province, comprising 

Assiniboia, Gravelbourg, Moose Jaw, Shaunavon, and Swift Current. About fifteen per cent of the 

judicial work is done in this Circuit, and this volume of work justifies having two judges working on the 

Circuit, and that is exactly the number we have. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

79 

It will be seen, Mr. Speaker, from the foregoing estimates, that eleven District Court judges would be 

the optimum number for Saskatchewan. One more than Manitoba and one less than Alberta. Only where 

prolonged illness or incapacity impairs the ability or health of a judge are we justified in authorizing any 

number beyond eleven. It may be argued that a judge should retire and allow for a new appointment 

when he is incapacitated by illness. The Government does not share this view, Mr. Speaker, where there 

is reasonable expectation that the judge may be returning to his duties. In the Government‟s view judges 

ought not to be hastily retired, because of even lengthy physical illnesses. Where there is reasonable 

hope for a return to active duty on the bench before the statutory time of retirement, then we believe that 

the Government is justified in making other arrangements to tide the court over until he can return to his 

duties. It is for this reason, Mr. Speaker, that we asked the Legislature three years ago, to provide some 

flexibility in the number of judges. If we are to keep the number of the judges at the very minimum 

necessary for the proper administration of justice, then there must be provision for the appointment of 

one or more additional judges when illness or disability strikes. 

 

At the present we have thirteen judges — two more than the minimum number needed. We also have 

two vacant positions, one of which as I have already said, has been vacant since November 15th, and the 

other which has been vacant since February 3rd. Under the Judges Act of Canada, we are entitled to 

have, as I have already indicated a maximum of eighteen District Court judges. By regulating the 

number in accordance with the judicial work load, we are presently saving the Government of Canada, 

something like $50,000 a year. The success of this business-like method of operating our courts will 

require, however, a willingness on the part of the Ottawa Government to make appointments promptly 

when necessary. 

 

But the new conception of Judicial Centres, as opposed to Judicial Districts, was not designed solely to 

provide more flexibility in the use of judges, but to permit general reorganization of the duties of court 

officials. In the last full year before the new system went into operation, we required a staff of 

seventy-seven persons in our Judicial Districts. In the current year, because of this more flexible system 

the work is being done by sixty-two persons, or a saving of fifteen people. This reduction was effected 

simply by allowing retirements to go unreplaced, and by making transfers of the remaining 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

80 

staff to bring about the most economic distribution of personnel. Next year we hope to reduce the 

permanent staff to fifty-seven, representing an overall reduction in five years of twenty positions or 

26%, without any significant deterioration in services, Mr. Speaker. As a matter of fact, the staff 

required to operate the new Central Registry Service for chattel mortgages, which was launched in 1957, 

is included in this number of fifty-seven. 

 

As a result of the abolition of Judicial District boundaries, and by reason of the introduction of some 

flexibility into the establishment of sheriffs, it has been possible to operate this year, with eleven sheriffs 

and two extra assistants doing the same work which was done by twenty-one sheriffs under the old 

system of Judicial Districts. 

 

It is interesting to note that during this same period, Mr. Speaker, there has been an increase in the 

amount of judicial work. Let us compare the work done in 1960, as shown in Table A, with the average 

volume done during the period 1952 to 1956, as reported by the Culliton Committee. The average 

number of actions of all kinds started by the issue of a written summons during the five year period 

reported by the Culliton Committee was 11,366. In 1960 it was 13,157 or an increase of 15.7%. The 

total number of Queen‟s Bench and District Court trials in the five years period was 725; in 1960 it was 

858 or an increase of 14%. The number of Surrogate Court applications for administration and probate 

averaged 3,762 during the five year period under review by the Culliton Committee and 3,932 or an 

increase of 4.7% in 1960. 

 

When this legislation was before the House two or three years ago, the Opposition did not see any merit 

in the reorganization of our court systems. I think it is fair to say that there is not a single lawyer in 

Saskatchewan who would honestly and conscientiously advocate a return to the 1917 system, which we 

had prior to that time. In fact, the only criticism which I have heard of the new system, has been directed 

at the lack of judges in some Judicial Centres, and this is a problem, as I have indicated, which the 

Government has been anxiously trying to have remedied. 

 

It was said by the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, that the reform in the judicial system would result in the 

centralization of litigation in Regina and in Saskatoon. This was one of the major grounds for attack by 

the Opposition, on this legislation. Again the facts do not bear out this contention. Look at the 

percentage of all 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

81 

writs and summonses issued in Regina. The figures are as follows: Before the introduction of the new 

system in 1958 — 22.7%, in 1959 after the new system — 23.5%; in 1960 — 21.9% or an overall 

reduction for Regina of 8/10ths of one per cent of the provincial total in 1960. Look at the percentage of 

all trials held in the Judicial Centre of Regina: For the year prior to the introduction of the new system 

1958 — 24.9% of all trials were held in the City of Regina; for the two years after the new system was 

introduced 1959 — 25.2%; 1960 — 20.5%. An overall reduction of 4.5% since the new system went 

into operation. 

 

Now there has been some small increase in the percentage of Letters Probate, and Letters of 

Administration issued out of the Regina Judicial Centre since 1958. It may be said that this confirms the 

forecast made at that time by the Opposition. It should be pointed out, however, that it was inevitable 

that there would be some increase in this work done in the City of Regina because lawyers in small 

towns, where there is no Judicial Centre are naturally going to mail their application for probate and 

administration to a centre where there are two judges on duty, rather than to a centre where there is one 

judge on duty, only part time. This does not mean that the Regina lawyers have benefitted at the expense 

of the rural lawyers, because the rural lawyers are able to mail these applications in directly to the Clerk 

of the Court, and the Regina lawyers don‟t make a five cent piece for that, and it doesn‟t cost the rural 

lawyers any more than if they filed them at their own Judician Centres. 

 

I would like to take time to analyse the situation in Saskatoon and compare it to the rural areas, but time 

will not permit. I will just say, however, that there was a decline in the percentage of the provincial total 

of writs issued in 1960, in Saskatoon, as compared to 1958 of 1.15%. 

 

The overall effect, Mr. Speaker, of these statistics, is that all of the weeping and wailing of the party 

opposite, when this legislation was proposed, has been proven to be without justification. The 

Government‟s decision has been completely vindicated. 

 

It seems to me, and this is always the best time to take part in an argument, after the facts prove that 

your position was right. It isn‟t always the most satisfactory time. I had to suffer the stings and scorn of 

the hon. lady from Humboldt for three years, but, I am sure now . . . 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

82 

Mrs. Batten: — . . . didn‟t waste that much time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — . . . that the hon. lady will acknowledge that her objections to this legislation, at 

the time, were not based upon substantial facts, but were based upon fears which were not justified by 

the events. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Wait another three years. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — This experience, I suggest Mr. Speaker, has demonstrated, that the CCF 

Government although in office now for seventeen years, is still capable of adapting Government 

institutions to meet the changing needs of the time. It demonstrates also, that the Liberal Party, even 

though freed of the responsibility of office for almost a generation now, is still afraid and timid — that 

the Liberal Party is still willing to live according to 1917 concepts, rather than to face realistically 

present day problems. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — In addition, we‟ve tabled, in the year which I refer to, one other table which I 

would like to have included in the records, Mr. Speaker, and that is a table of criminal statistics. Now 

this table continues the table which I have put in for the previous four years. I thought that the House 

might be interested in following up the distribution of criminal cases, as between the various courts, and 

as between the various sections of the various acts, so that you see the trends as they appear from time to 

time of the offences. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Mr. Speaker, will the hon. Member permit a question? Is the hon. Minister suggesting 

that there is still crime in Saskatchewan after sixteen years of socialist power. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, I thought fifteen years ago that with the dawning of a new era, all 

kinds of backward and ugly and squalid things would have disappeared from Saskatchewan. My hopes 

have not been fully justified, however. There is still crime; there are still some people who commit 

crimes; there are still criminals; there probably always will be. We feel it is our duty to see that justice is 

done, wherever possible, and if crime persists, if crime survives, then we‟ll have to turn to some higher 

authority and recognize that human institutions are not capable of making man perfect. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

83 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to just put these figures on the record, and I will just draw your attention to 

that last table, to one set of factors — I‟m not going to deal with each Act or section, the number of 

offences under each, but I would just refer briefly to the totals. The total number of cases tried by 

Justices of the Peace declined by 1,000 during the year from 10,532 to 9,537; the number tried by 

Provincial Magistrates increased from 44,875 to 50,463; the number tried by District Court Judges 

increased from 106 to 109; the number tried by Queen‟s Bench Judges decreased from 61 to 47. 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, before I leave the question of courts, I thought that some other changes in staff and 

facilities in various judicial centres ought to be brought to the attention of the House, since the House 

was now sitting, rather than being made merely by notifying the people directly involved. I would draw 

attention Mr. Speaker, to the following transfers of personnel, which will go into effect on the 1st of 

April, 1961. In the Judicial Centre of Gravelbourg, the Deputy Sheriff, the Deputy Local Registrar, will 

be transferred from there to the Judicial Centre of Estevan in view of the fact that the Deputy at Estevan 

is due to be retired on superannuation. The Gravelbourg office, it is felt, can be operated just as 

efficiently, and with just as much use to the public, if it is operated for two hours a day instead of the 

present six hours a day, and it will be open, therefore, after the 1st of April, from 2 P.M. to 4 P.M. and it 

is proposed to appoint a part-time employee for the purpose of operating that office, similar to the 

arrangements which we now have in Shaunavon and Arcola, for instance. Gravelbourg will continue to 

be under the direct supervision of the Sheriff for the Assiniboia Judicial Centre. 

 

With respect to Moosomin, the Sheriff who is also Sheriff and Local Registrar for that Judician Centre, 

will be transferred to the Judicial Centre of Melfort on April 1st, as the Sheriff there is retiring on that 

date. The Moosomin Judicial Centre is presently being operated on a part-time basis by a Deputy Sheriff 

and Deputy Local Registrar, and it is expected that the Moosomin office will continue to operate in the 

same way. The Sheriff of the Judicial District of Weyburn who is past the age of retirement will be 

retiring on April 1st on superannuation, and the Sheriff for the Judicial Centre of Estevan will be taking 

care of both Judicial Centres, in addition to Arcola, which he is now looking after. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

84 

The Deputy Sheriff for the Judicial Centre of Wynyard will be transferred to Weyburn to fill the position 

vacated there by a retirement which will occur on April 1st. It is hoped that the Wynyard Judicial Centre 

will continue to serve the public for a two hour period each day, and it will be operated by a part-time 

employee. As I have already indicated the Judicial Centres at Kindersley and Wilkie will be closed April 

1st next, and my litigation which arises in those areas will be handled in the nearest Judicial Centre as 

provided in the Act and in the Rules of Court. 

 

I have already spoken of the closing of the centre at Kindersley and Wilkie. This will be a withdrawal 

from those two communities of a service which was not very much used while there. As for the other 

Judicial Centres, changes are being made at Moosomin, Wynyard and Gravelbourg — the services being 

restricted to two hours a day. This will actually take care of the needs I believe, of the people of those 

communities. Otherwise there will be no actual curtailment or restriction of service beyond that which I 

have spoken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to say something about the Securities Act and securities enforcement. There 

again, there is no report tabled in the Legislature so I would like to put on record some facts and figures 

for future reference, taken from the report of the Chairman of the Securities Commission, to myself as 

Minister. As hon. Members know the securities business in Canada has not been thriving in any 

province in Canada. There has been a sharp recession in the volume of securities work. Saskatchewan, 

however, has borne up very well in this atmosphere, this climate of recession, and we had this year 

seventy-three lease brokers and broker-dealers as compared to seventy-two in the previous year. The 

number of securities issuers has increased from twenty-one to twenty-five. I described to the House last 

year, a new policy of the Government requiring securities issuers in this province who propose selling 

their stocks in the United States, to be registered with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission at 

that time. Of these twenty-five, five are registered with the S.E.C. at Washington. 

 

The number of salesmen has declined slightly from 488 to 439. The number of securities advisors has 

declined from two to one. The number of investment dealers has increased from nine to ten. The number 

of prospectuses (I presume that‟s not the correct plural of 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

85 

prospectus) has increased from ninety-seven filed during the year 1959, to one hundred this year. The 

number of salesmen‟s licenses suspended during the year was five last year, six this year. The number of 

salesmen‟s licenses or applications to withdraw increased from seven to thirteen. The total amount of 

fees collected by the Securities Commission this year was $43,470 compared with $41,701 the previous 

year. The number of cancellations of broker dealers licenses; one this year and one last year. The 

number of suspensions; one this year and one last year — that is broker dealers. The number of 

suspension of salesmen: two this year as compared with eleven last year. 

 

Last year I believe I gave a report on the enforcement the number of persons charged and convicted in 

1960: five; the number of persons charged and before the courts: three; the number of persons charged 

and not yet brought to trial, as at the end of the year; one, making a total of nine. 

 

I think it is unnecessary to give you the other information, information of detail, which probably 

wouldn‟t interest the House. However, I do feel that I ought to say something about the administration 

itself. The Securities Commission consists of a Chairman, a part-time chairman, who is also a part-time 

Provincial Magistrate. Then it has a Director of Enforcements, who is also Registrar of the Commission, 

and it has one field investigator. 

 

While I‟m discussing this matter I would like to say just a word or two concerning the resignation of the 

present chairman. During 1956 and 1957, because of changes in the enforcement policies of some of the 

neighboring provinces, we had an influx of stockateers in this province at that time, fleeing from law 

enforcement in other provinces. This is something which will always happen until we achieve a national 

securities law, a national securities administration in Canada. When changes occur in one province or 

another, these “stockateers” float from one province to another and try to find a place where they can 

operate with impunity. So during those years 1956 and 1957 and 1958 we had in Saskatchewan a 

temporary enforcement problem. The situation was aggravated by the fact that for the first seven months 

of the year 1958, we were without the services of a chairman of our Securities Commission. The 

province was fortunate, however, in securing the services of Mr. W.W. Cameron, who we got from the 

Ontario Securities Commission, where he was their Chief Counsel for many years. After his arrival in 

Saskatchewan we also recruited 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

86 

(also from the Ontario Securities Commission,) an experienced Director of Enforcement. Together, 

these two gentlemen made an extremely effective team. Mr. Mathews, the Director of Prosecutions, did 

and is still doing an effective job of prosecuting under the direction of the Department of the Attorney 

General. Mr. Cameron, by the exercise of his powers as chairman, succeeded in filtering out the criminal 

elements from the securities industry. While the Director of Prosecutions was mainly concerned with 

prosecuting offenders, the job of the Chairman was primarily concerned with the prevention of securities 

frauds, and the exclusion of fraudulent securities promoters, so far as that is possible to do in advance. 

 

At the present time, it can be safely said, I don‟t think anyone will contradict this statement, that the 

standards of the speculative securities industry in Saskatchewan is one of the highest of any place in 

Canada. That is because we have the highest standard of security law enforcement, because we have the 

highest standard of inspection and inquisition into the applications of people seeking to enter that field in 

this province. The major share of the credit for this situation, I believe and acknowledge, should be 

given to Mr. Cameron. His energy, skill, and integrity have stood Saskatchewan in good stead during his 

service in this province. I want to express on behalf of the Government, our best wishes to him, as he 

takes up his new career in the sunnier climate of the west coast. 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, I want just before I conclude, to comment on one or two things which were said by 

one of the Members who spoke just before supper. We hear from the Opposition, those who spoke this 

afternoon, about the opposition of the Liberal Party to any change in the system of local government. I 

do not pose as having any specialized knowledge of local government, but I at least claim to have 

enough common sense to know that I should not make judgments or decisions about important matters 

involving the future welfare of the people of Saskatchewan without providing myself with facts on 

which to base such a judgment. Members of the Opposition apparently are so all-wise and all-knowing 

that they are able to decide in advance that changes in the method of administering local government 

ought not to be made without even knowing what those changes may be. Well if it is a matter of sitting 

here, Mr. Speaker, and listening to these Solons of the other side, express their opposition to changes in 

municipal local government administration, or if it is a choice of reading the report of the committee and 

hearing the views of local government officials after they have seen the report, then I prefer to follow 

the latter course. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

87 

I certainly do not believe that this important matter ought to be decided on the basis of prejudices and 

biases of Members of the Opposition, who, I believe, are attaching themselves to this question for the 

purpose of gaining some transitory political advantage. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Oh shame. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — The farmers don‟t think so. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, Members of the Opposition thought that the 

compulsory automobile insurance was going to be unpopular, so they latched on to that and attacked it. 

After all, they don‟t want to agree with the Government, so what else can they do but to try and pick up 

some temporary little bubble of protest, and blow it up into a balloon which they hope will elevate them 

to office in this province. 

 

Well Mr. Speaker, we have seen them decry and disparage the school unit legislation that was 

introduced by this Government. We have seen them condemn and criticize things which I have referred 

to earlier this evening, other progressive measures introduced by this Government, only to find that they 

were wrong — looking at their record after the event. 

 

But they are not content Mr. Speaker, to stand on that record after they have been proven wrong. The 

hon. Member from Arm River, got up in the House and tried to deny the Opposition had opposed 

compulsory automobile insurance in 1946. And I predict, in the years to come, when we have made 

improvements in the methods of local government, as we will inevitably do, Opposition Members will 

then try to pretend that they were never really opposed to these things at the time.”Prove it,” they‟ll say, 

“You can‟t prove it.” I recall in this House, in 1949, hearing the then Leader of the Opposition saying 

that they weren‟t opposed to a hospital scheme — they weren‟t opposed to a hospital scheme but it 

should have been left to the municipalities. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if the hospital scheme of this province had been turned over to the municipalities, 

you‟d have just about what you had in those sad Liberal days of the 1930‟s. You‟d have virtually 

nothing of a hospital scheme. Now they‟ll try to tell you that they were in favour of hospitalization at the 

time, when every single criticism they made was aimed at destroying the effectiveness of that scheme. It 

will be the same 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

88 

again. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that it would be much better for this House, for the Liberal Party and for 

the country, if Liberals for once would come to realize that they ought to get a good idea once in a 

while, and push it and see it get established, instead of constantly needling and harassing the 

Government over proposals which the Government puts forward. 

 

With regard to municipal reorganization, I am certainly not going to vote on the recommendation of one 

or two Members opposite, that we ought to decide this question on the basis of their prejudices or their 

biases. I am going to vote to have this question decided in an orderly way, after I have the benefit of the 

report of fourteen able and conscientious municipal officials, after I‟ve had a chance to read and to study 

that report. Even more, I‟m not going to make my decision on this question purely on the basis of that 

report. I believe that when that report has been thoroughly discussed with local government officials, 

that after the fullest possible consultation, and we have had the benefit of the advice and suggestions of 

local officials, then I am prepared to make up my mind. And when I make up my mind on this matter, I 

venture to say, that history will prove that I am right and that my hon. friends opposite are wrong. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Like the time question. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — You and Hitler. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That was your idea. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Well Mr. Speaker, in the course of my remarks this afternoon, I have had not 

only to review the past, but to forecast somewhat of the future, and I have had to advise the House of 

certain curtailments and restrictions in a Government program, which I am sure will cause some 

aggravation to some persons affected. But I want to say that I am proud to belong to a Government that 

is honest enough to do things which may cause some temporary pain, or some suffering in order to 

achieve bigger goals and bigger objectives. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — After an election. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I think, Mr. Speaker, that those who criticize this Government by saying that it 

doesn‟t know how to economize, 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

89 

that it doesn‟t know how to cut down expenses, and then turn around and criticize the Government in the 

next breath because it has done that, show a lack of loyal honesty, which disqualifies them from 

occupying a seat in Government. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — It seems to me that, I don‟t mind criticism, I enjoy it as a matter of fact, — it 

seems to me that criticism ought to be consistent and it ought to be constructive, and when a political 

party devotes itself to criticizing the Government for economizing, and then criticizes the Government 

for not economizing that they had better get together. When a political party criticizes the Government 

because we are taking credit for progress in the last seventeen years, they say that everybody has 

progressed in the last seventeen years. What do they say when we say we‟ve had industrial development 

in Saskatchewan? They say we‟ve had stagnation. You can‟t fit those two arguments together. If we 

have had stagnation in the last seventeen years then this Government deserves special credit for having 

brought into being some of the grand programs that the people of Saskatchewan have benefitted from 

over the past seventeen years. The Opposition had better start showing some consistency and some 

moral honesty about these matters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that while some of my remarks may have been a little bit scattered about on various 

subjects, and the subjects may have been selected at random, nevertheless, I think it is perfectly clear to 

you Mr. Speaker, that I intend to support the motion and that I intend to vote against this iniquitous 

amendment.



90 

 

TABLE “A” 

 

Summary of Judicial Activity for Each Judicial Centre 

for the Years 1958, 1959 and 1960 

 

  

Writs 

 

All Trials 

Miscellaneous 

Applications 

S.C. Applications 

For Probate or Admin. 

             

 1958 1959 1960 1958 1959 1960 1958 1959 1960 1958 1959 1960 
             

Arcola 41 141 208 2 8 9 49 49 52 120 78 75 

Assiniboia 26 122 105 1 3 3 59 52 54 76 87 67 

Battleford 555 442 453 23 25 36 121 138 359 271 273 215 

Estevan 231 277 276 28 19 23 177 409 476 212 104 105 

Gravelbourg 152 88 77 4 21 10 123 99 88 68 63 75 

Humboldt 274 140 190 32 33 28 92 157 153 129 149 131 

Kerrobert 91 175 155 10 6 5 128 65 54 87 51 42 

Kindersley 56 18 7 2 3 2 144 34 34 103 81 75 

Melfort 477 405 283 42 35 30 211 217 271 193 213 199 

Melville 91 301 326 21 9 19 109 100 78 122 72 85 

Moose Jaw 623 657 540 53 70 54 782 840 1152 242 309 274 

Moosomin 162 88 53 7 3 6 60 53 47 180 128 139 

Prince Albert 969 1125 1279 91 85 85 467 670 678 213 201 206 

Regina 2357 2744 2876 205 210 172 287 288 353 485 732 707 

Saskatoon 2861 3065 3280 181 190 254 612 1192 1281 530 617 727 

Shaunavon 63 68 35 10 13 7 113 160 103 71 88 70 

Swift Current 765 1089 2113 38 33 51 126 169 164 260 289 301 

Weyburn 79 193 154 20 11 11 120 101 121 158 88 89 

Wilkie 181 85 140 6 1 5 126 138 117 82 79 54 

Wynyard 109 35 63 3 1 1 150 111  96 105 85 77 

Yorkton 214 375 534 42 52 47 72 67 116 214 229 219 

             

Totals 10377 11633 13147 821 831 858 4128 5109 5847 3921 4016 3932 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

91 

TABLE “B” 

 

Relative Volume of Judicial Work 

in Principal Judicial Centres as 

a Percentage of the Total for 

the Province 

 

  

Writs Issued 

 

Trials Held 

S.C. Applications 

For Probate or Admin. 

       

 1959 1960 1959 1960 1959 1960 
       

Saskatoon 26.3 24.95 22.9 29.60 15.3 18.49 

Regina 23.5 21.88 25.2 20.05 18.3 17.98 

Prince Albert 9.7 9.73 10.3 9.91 5.0 5.24 

Swift Current 9.4 16.07 4.0 5.94 7.2 7.66 

Moose Jaw 5.9 4.11 8.4 6.29 7.7 6.97 

Battleford 3.8 3.45 3.0 4.20 6.8 5.47 

Yorkton 3.2 4.05 6.2 5.48 5.7 5.57 

Melfort 3.6 2.15 4.2 3.50 5.3 5.06 

Weyburn 1.6 1.17 1.3 1.28 2.2 2.26 

Melville 2.6 2.48 1.1 2.21 1.8 2.16 

Estevan 2.3 2.10 2.3 2.68 2.6 2.67 

Humboldt 1.2 1.45 4.0 3.26 3.7 3.32 

Gravelbourg .8 .59 2.5 1.17 1.5 1.91 

Wilkie .7 1.06 .1 .58 1.9 1.37 

Moosomin .8 .40 .4 .70 3.2 3.54 

Arcola 1.2 1.58 1.0 1.05 1.9 1.91 

Kerrobert 1.5 1.18 .7 .58 1.3 1.07 

Wynyard .3 .48 .1 .12 2.1 1.96 

Assiniboia 1.0 .80 .4 .35 2.2 1.70 

Shaunavon .5 .27 1.5 .82 2.2 1.78 

Kindersley .1 .05 .4 .23 2.1 1.91 

       

 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

92 

TABLE “C” 

 

CRIMINAL STATISTICS 

 

for the period April 1, 1959 to March 31, 1960 

 

 J.P.‟s  Magistrates  D.C. Judges  Q.B. Judges 

 

Offences Under 

 

Cases 

 

Conv. 

 

 

 

Cases 

 

Conv. 

  

Cases 

 

Conv. 

  

Cases 

 

Conv. 

            

Sec. 221 CCC 12 12  270 243  0 0  0 0 

Sec. 222 CCC 4 3  157 150  2 1  1 1 

Sec. 223 CCC 42 41  1,236 1,176  6 3  0 0 

All other CCC cases 417 414  6,904 6,526  64 43  46 28 

Other Federal offences 335 335  1,830 1,793  9 4  0 0 

Total Federal offences 810 805  10,397 9,888  81 51  47 29 

           

Liquor Act 861 859  5,372 5,260  7 7  0 0 

Liquor Licensing Act 13 13  109 107  2 0  0 0 

Vehicles Act (speeding) 1,901 1,900  5,990 5,943  7 3  0 0 

Vehicles Act (all other) 2,786 2,781  15,928 15,518  5 1  0 0 

Highways & Trans. Act 483 482  806 789  0 0  0 0 

Education and Hospitalization Tax Act 0 0  122 119  0 0  0 0 

Saskatchewan Hospitalization Tax Act 12 12  234 233  0 0  0 0 

Fuel Petroleum Products Act 182 182  508 503  0 0  0 0 

Stray Animals Act 5 5  4 3  0 0  0 0 

Recovery of Wages Act 2 2  50 47  0 0  0 0 

Game Act 83 83  327 311  2 2  0 0 

Securities Act 0 0  144 113  1 1  0 0 

All other Prov. Statutes 88 88  822 747  4 4  0 0 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

93 

TABLE “C” (continued) 

 

 J.P.‟s  Magistrates  D.C. Judges  Q.B. Judges 

 

Offences Under 

 

Cases 

 

Conv. 

 

 

 

Cases 

 

Conv. 

  

Cases 

 

Conv. 

  

Cases 

 

Conv. 

            

Total Prov. offences 6,416 6,407  30,416 29,693  28 18  0 0 

 

Municipal Bylaws 2,311 2,308  9,650 9,462  0 0  0 0 

Grand Total 9,537 9,520  50,463 49,043  109 69  47 29 

 



94 

 

Mr. Gordon T. Snyder (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, in rising in this House on this first 

occasion, I would like to take this opportunity to express, as others have before me, the feeling that we 

have that you in your new position will exercise the authority that is vested in you and will perform your 

duties to the satisfaction of all the Members of this Legislature. 

 

I would like to congratulate the mover and the seconder of the Speech from the Throne and I would like 

to take this opportunity of also congratulating all newly elected Members to this Legislature as well as 

congratulating those who have sat in this Legislature in previous years. 

 

I want to take this Opportunity also, Mr. Speaker, of congratulating the various Cabinet Minister who 

have assumed a Cabinet post since this Legislature met last. On behalf of the people of Moose Jaw, I 

would particularly like to convey my congratulations to the Hon. W.G. Davies, on his appointment as 

Minister of Public Works. 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I would also, in spite of the fact that the Leader of the Opposition is absent 

tonight, I would like to offer my congratulations on his election. I would like to add also that it is my 

wish that his health will allow him to continue in that capacity for some little time to come. 

 

I would like to congratulate the Leader of the Opposition not only on his very slim victory in Morse, but 

also on his wisdom in choosing to be a Member in Morse Constituency rather than in his own 

hometown. By this one stroke of diplomatic genius, Mr. Speaker, he has spared the persons sitting 

opposite the embarrassment and the necessity of choosing a new leader in this Session of the 

Legislature. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — I would also at this time, Mr. Speaker, like to pay tribute to my predecessor, Mr. 

Dempster Hemming, who ably and conscientiously represented the Constituency of Moose Jaw in this 

Legislature for some several years. On each occasion his re-election was an indication of an 

overwhelming vote of confidence. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

95 

Now, I believe, Mr. Speaker, that those persons who are conscious and familiar with the history of 

Saskatchewan recognize the fact that a matter of some number of years ago, the City of Moose Jaw 

rivalled Regina, or . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I must inform the House, that under standing order 30, sub-section 2, it is my 

duty at this time to interrupt the hon. Member and to put the question on the amendment. 

 

It has been moved by Mr. W. Ross Thatcher, seconded by Mr. A.H. McDonald, that the following words 

be added to the Address: 

 

“But this Assembly regrets that Your Honour‟s advisers have failed to provide assurance to the 

electors concerned that they will be given a vote on the question of whether or not there should be any 

basic change in the organization of local government.” 

 

The question being put on the amendment, it was negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 13 

 

Messieurs 

 

Batten (Mrs.) Gardiner Horsman 

McCarthy Guy MacDougall 

Barrie Boldt Snedker 

Cameron Klein Gallagher 

McFarlane   

 

NAYS — 35 

 

Messieurs 

 

Douglas Brown Meakes 

Dewhurst Thurston Thiessen 

Williams Blakeney Snyder 

McIntosh Erb Stevens 

Brockelbank Nicholson Kluzak 

Lloyd Turnbull Dahlman 

Walker Stone Michayluk 

Nollet Whelan Semchuk 

Kuziak Thibault Perkins 

Cooper (Mrs.) Berezowsky Peterson 

Davies Kramer Broten 

Willis Johnson  



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

96 

Mr. Snyder (con’d): — Mr. Speaker, I believe I was remarking that a matter of some years ago the City 

of Moose Jaw rivalled the City of Regina in growth and population. In addition to being located in an 

excellent farming district, Moose Jaw also has the distinction of being the divisional point for the 

Canadian Pacific Railway and at the same time the general offices of Canadian Pacific Railways were 

located in the City of Moose Jaw. 

 

Now the creation of the province in 1905 and the developments thereafter, and the creating of the seat of 

Government in the City of Regina, undoubtedly turned the tide indefinitely in Regina‟s favour. It is 

possible that the decisions that were made at that time are perhaps open to question: I have no doubt that 

Moose Jaw would have made an excellent capital for the Province of Saskatchewan, but, however, 

subsequent results are perhaps only reasonable under the circumstances. 

 

I would like to say at this time, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Moose Jaw are pleased with the highway 

development that has been carried on in the City of Moose Jaw over the past number of months on the 

highway between Moose Jaw and the resort area on Buffalo Pound Lake. It is my hope that other 

programs which have been considered in the past will be put on the priority list in the near future and be 

given ample consideration by the Department of Highways. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that I would be ungrateful if I did not at this time make mention of the public 

works projects which we in the City of Moose Jaw have received over the past number of years. 

 

I refer in particular, Mr. Speaker, to the Saskatchewan Training School and in addition to the recently 

completed Provincial Technical Institute. This Provincial Technical Institute, the opening of which we 

had the pleasure of attending a short while ago, will make available opportunities for young people to 

take advantage of technical training. In addition to this it has provided employment for a staff of some 

seventy people, I am given to understand, and in addition to this, Mr. Speaker, much of the work that 

was done on this Provincial Technical Institute was done at a time when it served a very useful purpose 

in alleviating an unemployment situation. This was done during the winter months for this purpose. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, I would like to mention that the Saskatchewan Training School, which Moose 

Jaw has been blessed with, also provides employment for some five hundred and five persons, I am 

given to understand, as 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

97 

well as filling a very definite link and a need in our mental health program. I would also mention, Mr. 

Speaker, in this respect, that we in Moose Jaw, are very pleased with the announcement that was made 

in the Speech from the Throne to the effect that the Prince Albert Sanatorium will be converted and be 

put to good use as a home for mentally retarded children. This in effect will relieve some of the stresses 

and the strains on our training school in Moose Jaw and will make available more room for children who 

are considered to be in the category of the untrainable. For this we are extremely thankful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would also like to mention at this time, Mr. Speaker, the mutually favourable agreement that was 

reached between the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and the City of Moose Jaw. This agreement 

provides the City of Moose Jaw with an annual payment of some $250,000 for ten years, and I have 

been given the assurance of His Worship Mayor Fysh and he has given the permission to quote him at 

this time, that this was a most satisfactory agreement for our city. 

 

Now before continuing, Mr. Speaker, I intend to make reference, perhaps very briefly to some of the 

remarks that were made earlier this afternoon by the Minister of Labour in the Liberal shadow cabinet. I 

have some misgivings about mentioning any of the things which have been mentioned previously, due to 

the fact that I fear that giving any recognition at all perhaps may justify his existence. But in view of the 

fact that some of these remarks which have been made indicate a complete lack of knowledge of the 

subject which he is talking on, or has been talking on, and perhaps the person who wrote his script 

knows very little more, I would like merely to make reference to very few of the speeches that have been 

mentioned. 

 

The Member for Gravelbourg began by denouncing the closed shop. He indicated that there should 

always be a free choice regarding membership in a labour union, or whether he would not join a labour 

union. I think perhaps the best test in any question is perhaps the test of exaggeration, and I think 

perhaps this same theory that the Member for Gravelbourg has advanced here could be applied to 

hospitalization, to insurance, to taxes for education. 

 

I question very much, Mr. Speaker, whether it is within the bounds of reason for anyone to assume that 

we may accept the benefits of hospitalization, that we may accept the benefits of insurance, that we may 

accept the benefits provided by education without paying some premium for these benefits which are 

provided. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

98 

Now we heard this afternoon the hon. Member from Gravelbourg making references to slave-labour in 

Northern Saskatchewan. I would like to say particularly that this is one industry which lends itself 

perhaps to agreements and arrangements with which we are not in accord. In addition to this, I think the 

same failings, the same shortcomings have a tendency to apply in other industries, such as textile 

industries, where piece-work is the order of the day. In various of these industries this piece-work is set 

out for a person. There is so much work to be done in the course of an hour. Now this puts management 

in a definite position of advantage in view of the fact that he raises his standard so high, that of course, 

instead of doing one hour‟s work in one hour, it may take a person involved, considerably longer. In 

view of this, it is conceivable, it may take eight hours or it may take ten hours for a person to do eight 

hours work. 

 

Now, this Mr. Speaker, in my estimation, is an excellent argument for these people who fall in that 

particular category, to belong to an organization which has the strength and the authority to negotiate 

their problems for them. But while the Member was speaking on this subject, he did a direct about turn, 

and he advocated that management and labour should enter into some kind of a contract, in some 

figment of the gentleman‟s imagination, whereby labour and management may join together and that 

labour will accept a lesser wage for the purpose of working twelve months out of the year rather than 

working for a lesser portion of the year. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this is the situation, which in effect 

is the same as saying to management: “Now, here we are, we will sell jobs, who is the lowest bidder?” 

That is precisely the arrangement that they‟re asking for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, recently, Mr. Speaker, (I am going to leave the Minister of Labour for a moment), and I would 

refer briefly to other Opposition Members who have been using a large portion of their air time, 

proclaiming that labour will dominate the New Party. They have also insisted that the party will not get 

off the ground and a short while ago, when the hon. Member from Yorkton was speaking, I believe we 

saw a rebirth of McCarthyism for a moment. 

 

Now, each Member was rising in turn and declaring before this Assembly that “We Liberals are not 

anti-labour.” The hon. Member from Wilkie devoted some little time in his declaration of the fact that 

the farmer and the labourer have no common interests. 

 

To review these facts that have been stated, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that if our friends in the 

Opposition are thoroughly convinced that the New Party is 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

99 

doomed to fail and will not get off the ground, they are spending a good deal of their valuable radio time 

on a matter which should concern them very little. 

 

The truth of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that they recognize that this New Party is a dominant force and 

is being readily accepted across the country. I believe, that indications in the two recent by-elections, in 

Peterborough and Niagara will bear me out on that particular point, and that the New Party is being 

readily accepted at the New Party conferences which are being held throughout this province. 

 

In relation to remarks which were made earlier by the hon. Member from Yorkton, I can merely say that 

intelligent people are no longer subscribing to the tactics that were used by the hon. gentleman on the 

brief occasion when he was on his feet. 

 

I would like to suggest to the hon. Member from Wilkie, in regard to his remarks on the grainhandlers‟ 

strike and what have you, I would like to point out to him that adequate labour laws are in effect the best 

deterrent to labour difficulties. Direct reference was made to the grainhandlers‟ strike and I would like to 

devote only a few moments on this particular topic this time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to indicate that management openly invited this strike by refusing to negotiate the terms of the 

new contract in the exact language of the old contract with the small increase in wages which was 

recommended by the Federal Government mediator. This increase supplied on the 1959-60 crop, Mr. 

Speaker, would have meant an increase of seven ten thousandths of a cent per bushel for the 1961 year. 

 

The main reason for the strike, Mr. Speaker, was to hold on to contract provisions that these workers had 

enjoyed over the past number of years. They were provisions, which management was endeavouring to 

take away from the workers and I would like to mention some of these particular features that they were 

endeavouring to delete from their contract. It was a matter of hours at work, overtime pay, lay-off 

notices, vacations and seniority benefits. I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that the strike was 

precipitated only after a full year of patient negotiations, at which time management refused to talk 

terms and contracts were settled. Only at that time did the grainhandlers take their last course of action. 

 

I suggest in all sincerity, Mr. Speaker, that those of us who are in the trade union organizations 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

100 

with the trend as it has been over the past number of years from the country to urban centres, that those 

of us within the trade unions who sprang predominately from the farm, have a definite, fundamental 

knowledge of the farm movement and I might say that by and large I think perhaps we understand farm 

problems probably to a greater degree than many people in the agricultural movement understand the 

problems of labour. Be this as it may, I believe there is, perhaps, good reason behind this in view of the 

fact that many people in agriculture have had no direct contact with people in labour organizations. 

 

However, may I reiterate, Mr. Speaker, that we in labour organizations are conscious of the fact that 

when conditions are unsatisfactory on the farm, it immediately creates a chain reaction and it is not long 

before conditions in labour circles suffer to a relative degree. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the only 

solution is for both segments of our economy, to join together for the common good of both and to wage 

war on a common enemy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are several items, which I wish to deal with this evening that were mentioned in the 

Speech from the Throne. First of all, I would mention the general slowing down in business activity 

across Canada, accompanied with a rise in unemployment. Although this unemployment picture is partly 

disguised by an armament program, there are at present well in excess of half a million people who are 

unemployed at the present time. Estimates place this figure at an excess of one million when it reaches 

its seasonal peak sometime later on in the year. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is no part of Canada that is insulated from this general condition. Just as a 

healthy limb is not likely to be found growing from a diseased body, by the same token it is not likely 

that you will find Provincial Governments escaping for very long unsound policies in the Federal field. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, under the existing circumstances and conditions, I would imagine that it is not too 

surprising to find the Leader of the Federal Liberal Party now proclaiming that the Conservatives have 

no cure for unemployment. At the same time we find the Prime Minister of Canada declaring that these 

are conditions which he inherited from the Liberals. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that insofar as these 

accusations are concerned, both these gentlemen should be given high marks. They are both right; they 

have both hit the nail right on the thumb. I would like to remind our friends in the Opposition that these 

unsatisfactory conditions were in evidence, Mr. Speaker, at a time when the present Conservative 

Government 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

101 

took office. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that that was the main reason for their success at the polls. 

 

While the pipe line companies and various other large industries were still doing fairly well under the 

Federal Liberal regime, the Canadian people, Mr. Speaker, were haunted by the spectre of growing 

unemployment, unsatisfactory conditions in agriculture, the loss of wheat markets, and a general feeling 

of insecurity under a growing burden of inflation and debt. 

 

In the field of social security, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Government had begun to retrench and retreat 

and they failed to provide much-needed relief for agriculture. They were apparently indifferent to the 

needs of our senior citizens also. Although the Conservative Government did supply some much needed 

relief for our senior citizens, the basic trouble, the basic ailments of our economy still remained with us, 

because of the fact that the Conservatives supplied no basic alternative. The main problems inherited 

from the Liberal Government remained unsolved. 

 

I would like to mention the fact, Mr. Speaker, that in my estimation the installation of the Conservative 

Government in Ottawa, resembles very closely the installation of a second-hand incubator, filled with all 

the stale and musty eggs that the Liberals had been sitting on for twenty years. One of these eggs, Mr. 

Speaker, the health insurance egg, is over forty years old and is being handled with extreme care by both 

these political parties. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the solutions, that are being offered by these old line parties will prove 

sterile, because they fail to deal with the basic problems, the basic troubles with which we are faced 

today. These are problems which will not be solved by giving our home-owners another ten years to 

mortgage their future or by giving tax cuts to industries which have already had too many tax cuts. We 

are not suffering, Mr. Speaker, from any shortage of goods. The Dominion Bureau of Statistics, 

December 30th issue, showed that steel mills were operating at 47.2% of their rated capacity, compared 

to 58.3% for the same period a year earlier. This same issue of D.B.S. showed wholesale sales in 

October at $689,751,000, as compared to $721,015,000 in the same month last year, or a decrease of 

4.3%. Apart from agricultural surpluses, Mr. Speaker, a glimpse into Canadian warehouses and new car 

show rooms and used car lots will provide evidence that Canadian people are not suffering from their 

inability to produce goods or to produce services. They are suffering from a lack of purchasing power. 

The extent to which our so-called 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

102 

prosperity has been based on credit, or credit buying, I believe should serve as a guide to those who are 

sincerely looking for a cause and a solution to our actual problems. 

 

I am sure, Mr. Speaker, and in all sincerity, that all Members on both sides of the House are interested in 

and are sincerely looking for a solution to these problems. Therefore, with your permission, Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to quote a former Member of Parliament, and reveal some views which he has 

expressed on this matter. I quote: 

 

“I believe that the price decontrol policy of the Government in post war years will go down in history 

as the greatest blunder made by Prime Minister MacKenzie King in his long years in office. During 

the war years, the Government made a fairly good job of maintaining price controls. However, with 

the end of the war, large commercial and industrial interests brought terrific pressure to bear on the 

Government to remove controls. They found that they were not making as large profits with controls 

as they could make without them. You have seen the results. In five months the cost of living has 

increased drastically. Today the working man is caught in a squeeze. Prices are going up much faster 

than pay envelopes. That is the chief reason for the current meat packing strike.” 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is a portion of an address given before the Windsor Club, in October 1947 by the 

present Leader of the Opposition and Member for Morse Constituency. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to extend this a little further and indicate to you just how right the 

Leader of the Opposition was on that one specific point. In view of the fact that 95% of Canada‟s 

automobile industry is American owned and controlled, I believe the operation of one of these large 

companies should serve as a point of interest to all Canadians. I refer now to an article in “U.S. News 

and World Report,” November 14, 1960, which is entitled “Millions into Billions — The Dupont 

General Motor Story.” This is an account of an anti-trust suit, which was filed against Dupont who, in 

addition to owning a large chemical concern and various other interests, also controls 23% of General 

Motors stocks. For our review today, Mr. Speaker, the pertinent point is the fact that Dupont‟s total 

investment in General Motors was some $130 million. Now, the article goes on to say, that the 

automobile company split 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

103 

its stock repeatedly and each of the growing number of shares grew in market value and at the present 

time the original holding has gone up from an original $130 million to $3.5 billion and dividends have 

come to about $1.8 billion. This, Mr. Speaker, is the record of only 23% of the stock of one of the larger 

companies. 

 

Several years ago, Mr. Speaker, during a labour dispute it was shown before an arbitration board that 

this company, a manufacturer of farm trucks and automobiles, had taken out more the previous year in 

net profits than they had paid in wages. 

 

Another article to which I would call your attention, Mr. Speaker, appeared in “MacLean‟s Magazine” 

on March 12, 1960 and describes the operations of Sir Eric Bowater. He is the owner of the Bowater 

Paper Corporation in Newfoundland, and it states: 

 

“In 1959 Bowater made $50 million profit, an increase of $3 million over the preceding years profit.” 

 

The article also states that during Newfoundland‟s logging strike last year, Bowater‟s general manager, 

Albert Martin, sided openly with Premier Joseph Smallwood in his successful attempt to crush the 

International Woodworkers of America who were at that time asking for a 52 hour week. 

 

I wish at this time, Mr. Speaker, to call the attention also to an article, which appeared in “The Star 

Weekly” a short while ago entitled “Why are Drugs so Costly?” This article states, and I quote: 

 

“Canadians have learned that the high cost of being ill is a public scandal. Credit is due to U.S. 

Senator Kefauver, whose congressional subcommittee has revealed that some big-name companies are 

charging Americans and Canadians outlandish prices for new wonder drugs. In one case a mark up of 

10,000% was discovered on tranquilizers and cortisone derivatives. 

 

It is now known that Europeans are getting the same drugs for comparatively minor cost. A 

tranquilizer by the brand name of Largactil, which sells in France for 77¢ per 100 tablets, in the United 

States costs $5.50 and in Toronto $6.75. 



 

February 21, 1961 

 

 

104 

The U.S. senate subcommittee heard testimony that some mental patients released from institutions as 

a result of tranquilizer therapy could not afford to go on paying for this medication, so they are 

confined again in mental hospitals. 

 

From the evidence in Washington, and initial studies in Canada, it appears that some brand name 

drugs are being vigorously promoted among physicians and patients, while the opportunity to buy the 

drugs by their chemical name is being ignored. A drug, named by the brand name of Pen-Vee retails in 

Toronto for $50.62 per 100 tablets. The identical drug, under its chemical name phenoxymethyl 

penicillin, sells for $18 for 100 tablets. Similarly, hydrocortisone acetate tablets, in the 20 milligram 

size are sold in Toronto at $40.00 a 1000, but under their brand name of Hydrocortisone, they retail at 

$295 per thousand. In some cases the mark-up reaches 3,000%. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these are not isolated cases, but I believe, that they will serve to indicate what is 

happening under our so-called free enterprise system which the Opposition speaks of in such glowing 

terms. 

 

I believe, this also indicated, Mr. Speaker, why the Commission which is studying the causes of the 

problems of unemployment may not get within shooting distance of the real problem. 

 

As some Members may know, I am a member of a trade union organization and I am pleased to point 

this fact out to Members opposite and Members on this side of the House. I am also Secretary of Moose 

Jaw Lodge 521 Brotherhood Local Firemen and Enginemen, I have also spent ten years as a tenant 

farmer. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I must point out to the hon. Member that it is now 10 o‟clock. 

 

Mr. Dahlman: — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

The debate was, on motion of Mr. Dahlman, adjourned. 

 

The House adjourned at 10 o‟clock p.m. 


