



















































Hansard: February 13, 1961


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

FIRST SESSION — FOURTEENTH LEGISLATURE 

3rd Day 

 

Monday, February 13, 1961. 

 

The House met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

Before the Orders of the Day: 

 

QUESTION RE REPORT BY CONTINUING COMMITTEE 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, in view of the conflicting reports and rumours that 

emanate from this Continuing Committee, I would like to ask the Premier if he could tell this House 

what time we can look for the report from this Committee, and if it will be available before the 

by-election in Turtleford on the 22nd of February. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I can only give the hon. Member such information as I have. Twice 

during the month of January I wrote and asked if it would be possible to have the Committee‟s report in 

the hands of the Government before the House opened on the 9th of February. It was hoped we would 

have it, but I was informed by the Chairman it would not be possible to have it by the time the House 

opened. I am informed now that it should be available within the next couple of weeks, and just as soon 

as the Government receives it it will be made available to the Members and it will be printed, and 

general distribution will be made of the report. 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

Mr. Eiling Kramer (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, it is with pride and pleasure that I rise in this 

House today to move the Reply in the debate from the Speech from the Throne. I hope that I can do 

justice to the honour that is being bestowed upon the Battlefords, and to north-western Saskatchewan 

generally. I hope the people of the Battlefords Constituency will forgive me for not spending too much 

time on things pertaining to the Battlefords in this speech today, for I feel that my role as Mover, Mr. 

Speaker is 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

2 

to speak generally on behalf of all Saskatchewan. May I, however, at this time thank the people of the 

Battlefords for the confidence they have placed in me again on last June 8th, and I want to assure them 

through you, Mr. Speaker, that I will continue to do my best to be worthy of that confidence. I hope I 

may have an opportunity later in this Session to deal with matters more directly affected the Battlefords. 

 

May I at the outset, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my seconder, the hon. lady Member for Saskatoon (Mrs. 

Strum) congratulate you on your elevation to your high office, and may I also extend congratulations to 

all those newly elected Members and the Ministers who have received their portfolios. I would also pay 

tribute to the Ministers and the private Members who have retired. It is certain that they will be missed 

from this Assembly, and that each one in his own way, his own particularly contributions and his own 

particular abilities — each personality will stand as a monument to themselves for all time in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan goes forward in 1961 with a new Legislature. The Party for 

which I have the honour to speak today holds more than a two-to-one majority in the sitting members in 

this House. They have received another mandate from the people of Saskatchewan. I believe it is proper 

to consider some of the reasons why the C.C.F. party has been elected to office for the fifth time, and 

with a very substantial majority, such as I have mentioned. 

 

It is most interesting to look into the thinking and the reasoning that brought about this mass decision on 

the part of the voters on June 8th of last year. At this time they were given the most important task that a 

citizens of this province and this country can have — the task of choosing who shall govern them for the 

next four or five years. Did the people of Saskatchewan support the C.C.F. party because of its 

pioneering of a Hospitalization Plan, which eventually became a guide-post throughout the Dominion of 

Canada, to Governments that were Social Credit, Tory, Liberal? (All these various parties have accepted 

the original pioneering of this Hospitalization scheme and accepted it in principle.) Or did the people 

choose this Government and give it a mandate because of the outstanding feat of bringing power to even 

the remote parts of Saskatchewan — rural and urban alike? Each of these areas have seen the power 

lines come in across the prairies, through the bush, over hill and dale, wherever it was necessary to bring 

this beneficial and necessary service. Or was the backing of the people 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

3 

of the province given on account of the tremendous load that was lifted from the backs of the 

municipalities, both rural and urban, through the implementation of equalization grants, the remission of 

the public revenue tax, and the tremendous assistance to Social Welfare? 

 

It must be remembered that now in 1961, direct social aid is paid for by our provincial Government, 

when not too many years ago the responsibility was completely that of the municipalities. 

 

Or did the people of the rural areas support it because of the tremendous grid road program which is 

supported to the tune of 65% by the provincial Government throughout the province? These are all valid 

reasons, Sir, why the people of Saskatchewan may have made the wise decision they did on June 8th, 

and there are countless other reasons as to why they might have made this decision. I could enumerate 

such programs as provision of natural gas to towns and villages and cities; I could mention the 

tremendous parks program under Natural Resources. One of these has now expanded into one of our 

own areas, the Battlefords, which has certainly been appreciated by the people of north-western 

Saskatchewan, and the tremendous game and forest conservation programs which have been going on all 

over the province, best be borne out by the fact that we have game, fur and fish galore in this province 

which was almost depleted a number of years ago. 

 

The Department of Health has also led Canada in all fields. I could also mention the tremendous job 

which has been done in the field of education all the way from the rural schoolhouse to the University of 

Saskatchewan. This Government has chosen to double and triple the education grants throughout this 

province during the past 15 or 16 years, and, as well, they have given tremendous leadership in all fields 

of education. 

 

We live in a province that since its inception has been primarily agricultural. The programs of this 

Government have been designed to better the lot of the farmer as far as it has been possible for a 

provincial Government to do. I have mentioned the programs under health, welfare, municipal affairs 

and the Power Corporation. All of these have been of a real direct benefit to the farmer. I can also point 

out many other achievements, not the least of which will be the next great advance of trying to bring the 

standards of our residents in rural areas up to that of their urban cousins. 

 

A new program now well under way is that of bringing sewer and water to smaller communities and 

farms. Government assistance with this project which, combined with 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

4 

the universal power program, will do a great deal for the farmer to increase his efficiency and add 

comfort to farm living. Surely, Mr. Speaker, this then is another great step in the emancipation of farm 

women from the drudgery of the water-bucket and the slop-pail. 

 

While the farmer has benefited from such plans, I am sure the voters must have given some thought to 

the tremendous leadership that has been given to farming and ranching by the provincial Department of 

Agriculture, through its various services of the Agricultural Representatives, Conservation & 

Development Branch, the livestock development program and countless other forms of assistance 

available from this Department, under the bold and imaginative leadership that we have had in the field 

of agriculture for the past many years. 

 

But the C.C.F. party has not only been a party for the farmer. There are thousands of people in this 

province who have earned their living by the efforts of their hands and minds alone. I am sure that the 

voters must have given some thought to the fact that Saskatchewan is one of the few provinces in 

Canada that has a Department of Labour, and the people who comprise this vast group of wage-earners 

must have given a great deal of consideration to the fact that we have the fairest labour laws in the 

province of Saskatchewan that can be found anywhere on the North American continent. I am certain 

that the Trade Unionists did not heed the partisan cry that the farmer was their enemy because they knew 

that the legislation we have in this province was brought about by a Government which had a 

preponderance of farmer Members sitting in this Legislature. Certainly since we have now become a 

province on wheels, the voter must have given consideration to the enormous highway program that has 

gone on over the years, to bring the province of Saskatchewan out of the ruts and the mud-holes to the 

point where we are now fast becoming recognized throughout Canada and the United States as the grid 

roads province. 

 

North-western Saskatchewan has enjoyed seeing the entire highway construction program completed, as 

well as many miles of hard surface. I am confident, Sir, that the people of Saskatchewan are proud of the 

many new public buildings that have been erected throughout this province, and that they have given 

thought to the fact that this was not done by mortgaging the future of their children for the next 25 or 30 

years, as had been done in the past and is still being done by many other Governments throughout 

Canada. 

 

One of the most personal things we have in our 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

5 

homes and offices, Sir, is our telephone. The people of Saskatchewan have seen our telephone service 

broaden out, raising the standards with automatic devices, new techniques, etc., and they are 

undoubtedly pleased with this service. They certainly must have given some credit to the Government 

that is responsible for one of the provisions of one of the lowest cost services in the Dominion of Canada 

through this Crown Corporation. The people of the town of Battleford and surrounding rural areas are 

now enjoying dial service which has eliminated long distance costs between North Battleford and 

Battleford, and I would certainly be neglecting my duty, Mr. Speaker, if I did not mention their 

appreciation and mine at this time. 

 

The contribution of Crown Corporations has undoubtedly something to do with the decision of the voters 

to support this Government. The contribution of Crown Corporations to the economy of Saskatchewan 

has certainly been a noteworthy accomplishment. They have been and have in many instances, provided 

an impetus to the economy which would otherwise have been lacking. In others they have provided extra 

services to the people as a whole. For example, Government Insurance has meant a substantial saving to 

every man, woman and child in the province in their general and automobile insurance rates. There has 

been a general saving, Mr. Speaker, of some 12 million dollars to all the people of Saskatchewan, 

regardless of whether they bought their Government Insurance or whether they bought from a private 

company. Government Insurance has forced down its competitors to the substantial amount of $12 

million. This amount alone is enough to pay more than the direct hospitalization tax costs for almost a 

year and a half. It is small wonder that the Government has been re-elected for another term. It has 

earned the support of the farmer, of the labourer, the small business man, the young, the old, the ill and 

the well. It has truly been a Government for all the people. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Why has the C.C.F. party developed along this broad front? Why is it possible for it to 

be accepted by all people in all walks of life, in spite of the propagandists‟ cry that the C.C.F. is all for 

labour, and when it suits the same propagandists in other parts of the country to say the Saskatchewan 

C.C.F. is a farmer‟s party and therefore it must be against labour. Certainly I have always maintained 

that a well-paid farmer and a well-paid worker are the best insurance of a sound economy and against 

unemployment. If these two large consumer and producer groups have dollars in their jeans, the 

businessman 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

6 

has not a worry in the world. If, as some political propagandists claim, high wages and farm prices are 

the cause of our present recession, why were we not in an economic paradise in the „thirties‟ when we 

sold our cattle for one and two cents a pound, and men and women worked throughout this province for 

as low as 5¢ per month or less than two cents an hour, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Northwestern Saskatchewan is an area where we have small farms, and in many cases large families. I 

think the hon. Member from Moosomin will sympathize with this. To those that would split the farmer 

and the worker, I would suggest that the average farm family today, and this is true of the greater portion 

of Saskatchewan, can only hope to place one out of every three of these families on a farm. Therefore, it 

is obvious that two out of three of the present generation must seek employment off the farm. Should the 

Liberal party and any others who would seek to have the farmer fight against labour, expect to have any 

farm father fight against the interests of two of his sons and daughters for the questionable benefit he 

might have in protecting the other one? 

 

I repeat that the interest of the farmer and the worker are irrevocably tied together, and we must learn 

together in full co-operation in order to secure a sounder economy and a better way of life. I have 

pointed out many ways, Mr. Speaker, in which the C.C.F. party could have gained the very substantial 

support which it has. I suggest there is a fundamental guiding principle which has resulted in the overall 

broad confidence that the people have displayed in the C.C.F. I suggest that it is because that we have 

proven to be a party of fair play and integrity, and that we have always believed in a fair share of the 

economy for everyone, knowing that if we can improve the lot of the farmer, the labourer, the 

professional man and other groups, that this in fact must be good for the whole economy and for 

business generally. 

 

Four times this Government has gone to the people with a platform outlining what it proposes to do, and 

it has always done what it proposed. 

 

Opposition Members: — Oh, oh! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Last year it presented another program for progress. The Throne Speech has indicated 

the steps we are taking to begin the implementation of our pledge to the people. The people have come 

to know that this Government has integrity and consistency. The people have come to know also that this 

Government has a leader who has sincerity and integrity, and whose loyalty to the people have never 

waivered. 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

7 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that by no means least among the reasons for the support 

the C.C.F. received was the fact that this leader has won the respect, the confidence, and the hearts of the 

people of Saskatchewan — political friends and enemies alike. They know and trust our Premier, Mr. 

Speaker, because he has not waivered or flinched from the program that has been laid down for us by the 

people of Saskatchewan. He has refused to play petty politics and be a fair-weather sailor, and 

compromise his ideals. In short, he has been dedicated to the people of the province; he is loved by his 

friends, respected by his enemies. His words of yesterday reflect his actions of today. History will 

recognize him as the architect of the best decades Saskatchewan has thus far enjoyed. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — It is indeed gratifying, Mr. Speaker, that in spite of the tremendous forces of reaction 

that were aligned against us from every direction, that we were able to come through with one of the 

most satisfying mandates from the people of Saskatchewan. I believe there is one aspect, however, of the 

last election that could probably not have been considered too often in analyzing the outcome. The cry 

went out from the Opposition party that it was time for a change; others said they were sure there would 

be a change. The thing they overlooked, Mr. Speaker, was the fact that the C.C.F. party, by its very 

nature, construction, and constitution, is always conscious of change, always making progress towards 

more progressive policies. It is the only party that is constantly in touch with the rank and file, through 

its regular conventions, both on a provincial and a federal level. 

 

In reviewing our program it is singularly clear that we were the only party that was actually conscious of 

the need for change. It was surprising to political interests to note that a party, after 16 years in office, 

brought out such progressive and challenging election programs that those who were opposed had to 

retreat to the position of critics, because they did not have the imagination, foresight and courage to 

come forward themselves with a program of change. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Certainly, Sir, never before in the history of any provincial Government in Canada has 

a Government after 16 years in office, brought out such challenging planks in their platform as the 

Medical Care Program and the sewer and water program, as well as the 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

8 

many other progressive features of our last platform. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — More sewer than water! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — The people of Saskatchewan knew it was time for a change. Their vote indicated they 

wanted to make sure of that change by supporting a party that had always believed in true progress for 

the common man — a party that knows that nothing is constant except change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, having dealt with the reasons why our party has had the privilege of being the author of the 

document presented by His Honour, let me deal specifically with a few of the programs outlined therein. 

I note the Speech from the Throne indicates that, while the unemployment situation in Saskatchewan is 

serious, it is still well below the average taking Canada as a whole. Our winter works program supported 

by the provincial Government would seem to be at least moderately effective in combating the 

unemployment menace. 

 

Agricultural production was good throughout Saskatchewan last year, and I congratulate the farmers and 

ranchers and the Department of Agriculture in their efforts in encouraging better farm practice through 

the Agricultural Representatives and the University of Saskatchewan. Fodder and 4-h production is 

increasing. This is good, because we must go into more mixed farming. Much of this is due to the 

continued encouragement from the Department of Agriculture, both through education and financial 

politicise, I must repeat, however, that I am truly sorry that the Federal Government has brought in no 

major policy to relieve the drastic agricultural price structure of our grain economy. 

 

While it is true, Mr. Speaker, that the suggestion has been made that a tree-planting program is going to 

take agriculture out of the wilderness, I can only suggest that there has been no better example of 

wooden-headed policies. It certainly indicates that this administration, like the previous Liberal 

administration, cannot see the forest because of the trees. Our farm organizations, Mr. Speaker, have 

given clear-cut recommendations to the Federal Government, backed by labour and businessmen from 

western Canada, and also by the Canadian Labour Congress. They asked for deficiency payments as a 

temporary measure, and parity prices for a long-term program, as well as a domestic price for wheat. 

This, I maintain, is still the only reasonable solution that has been put forward to solve the agricultural 

price problem. Obviously our present Federal Government, like its predecessor, lacks the imagination 

and the ability to cope with this problem, and this proves beyond a doubt that they do not deserve the 

support given them when they elected almost a full slate of candidates across western Canada. 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

9 

The appreciation by farmers in rural areas of our sewer and water development has been indicated by the 

wide acceptance of this matter. The Speech from the Throne shows that 700 new systems have already 

been installed, and 1,500 plans prepared for new systems to be installed this year. We are glad to see that 

the program is being accompanied by a study of water resources. It is obviously necessary that many 

areas in Saskatchewan are going to need new sources of water supply before they can even contemplate 

participation in this plan. 

 

While many of us had misgivings regarding the cost of an all-risk crop insurance plan, and while I 

personally feel that the federal Government should have participated in this plan to a greater extent than 

the proposed 20 per cent, it is gratifying to note that many municipalities applied, and are prepared to 

give the insurance plan a fair trial. 

 

I was also pleased with the progress report outlined in the Throne Speech regarding the South 

Saskatchewan River Project. While the cost of this undertaking is staggering to this province, it is well to 

realize that it will bring tremendous new advantages to the people of Saskatchewan and Canada for 

many years to come. It is most significant that our provincial Government continue to do everything 

possible to point up the inequalities of transportation costs throughout the country. I certainly want to 

congratulate our Minister of Municipal Affairs at this time on the tremendous amount of work that he 

has done in presenting the western freight problems to the various commissions that have sat over the 

years. The brief from the Royal Commission of Canada‟s Automotive Industry stressed the importance 

of low-cost motor vehicles to our provincial economy. Any artificial restriction on trade with the United 

Kingdom and European countries who are good customers for the prairie provinces can only serve to 

hurt our Saskatchewan economy — first in the loss of markets, for these countries can only buy our 

product when in turn we take theirs, and secondly in increased cost of production. 

 

It is also heartening to note that our oil and mineral production has maintained a steady upward trend 

with yet another 11% increase in production this year. I think it is worthy to note to say that seventeen 

million dollars from oil and gas alone have accrued to the Saskatchewan Treasury during the past five 

years. It is a tremendous boost in an otherwise agricultural province. The commanding construction 

program of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation in all areas is indeed an indication of the progress we 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

10 

are enjoying and will continue to enjoy. To those who would suggest that we are not moving rapidly 

forward on all fronts, I would like to ask why then is there such a need for a multi-million dollar 

expansion program in the service industries such as power, telephones, and gas? I would like to have our 

critics tell us who is using this double and triple supply of power, telephone and gas, if we are in truth a 

stagnant province as they would have people believe? 

 

Last year we saw 3,500 additional farms served with power. This year a clean-up operation of power to 

rural Saskatchewan will see another 1,400 connected. This is a prime example, Sir, of how the 

Government keeps faith. We said we would bring power to rural Saskatchewan; we are now in the final 

stages of the program. 

 

Another pleasing aspect of The Speech from the Throne is the indication that this year‟s program will 

make great strides in the field of education. This is an important department, Sir, and it is necessary that 

a great deal of work continue to be done. Besides the tremendous grants that have been paid out in 

University grants, student loans, etc., millions of dollars in increased grants have been paid out to our 

larger school units and to urban schools and unorganized areas as well. The large number of new school 

houses that have been built throughout my area over the years, high schools and so on, could not 

possibly have been built without these grants. As far as I am concerned I know that grants to the 

municipality in which I am a rate-payer amounted to an equivalent of 47 mills last year. I know that the 

people in that municipality (it is not a municipality that has a lot of good land) would not be able to 

afford 47 mills — another 47 mills. If it were not for these grants their educational costs, Sir, would be a 

terrific problem there. The system of grants where the needy get a great deal more than the higher 

assessed areas is certainly good one and has certainly been a tremendously appreciated program in 

education. Scholarship funds, interest free student loans, the new Technical Institute in Moose Jaw, all of 

these things indicate the positive approach that our Department of Education has taken to our 

educational problems. I certainly believe, Sir, that the education and the training of our youth to the 

highest possible degree is the best investment that we can make as citizens to our own future. 

 

I indicated earlier today that the party I represent can claim honour of pioneering a hospitalization plan 

that has been adopted throughout Canada. The Speech from the Throne indicated again that we have 

faith in the pioneering spirit of the people of Saskatchewan, by proceeding to devise a plan of prepaid 

medical care to be available to all Saskatchewan citizens at the end of this year. It is unfortunate that so 

much 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

11 

ill-considered criticism and outright misrepresentation of this suggested plan was carried out by certain 

people before the June 8th election, and to a lesser extent in still being carried on. I would challenge the 

right of any individual to deny citizens the right to pay for their health needs in any manner they may 

choose. I predict that when this medical care program comes into being it will, like the hospitalization 

plan, be a model for the rest of Canada in our march of progress to a better and more secure way of life. 

 

Our provincial park program is to be recommended. We in north-western Saskatchewan are particularly 

pleased with the development being made in our area on Jackfish Lake and the plans further north for 

Meadow Lake. The Department of Natural Resources is to be congratulated on its consistent work done, 

not only through the game, fish, fur and timber maintenance and conservation, but also for their work in 

opening up the northern access roads to that tourist paradise which is northern Saskatchewan. 

 

We in Saskatchewan are proud of our highway system, and our annual highway program in the Throne 

Speech denotes that travel on provincial highways has increased in 1960 over 1959 by another 6%, so 

that now we have 2,500 miles of dust-free roads. While this may still be a long way from our ultimate 

goal in dust-free miles, it should be noted that this 2,500 miles of dust-free roads is somewhere near the 

equivalent of the entire highway system of Manitoba. It is also interesting to note that our total highway 

mileage is about equal, probably a little better than equal, to that of Manitoba and Alberta combined. The 

combined budgets of our sister provinces, however, are four times greater than ours. This shows the 

creditable job that this Department has done with the limited budget at their disposal. 

 

The completion of the Prince Albert bridge will do much to make travel to the north easier. I would like 

to congratulate the Department of Highways on behalf of the people of my Constituency and 

north-western Saskatchewan for the commencement of yet another bridge link, the important and much 

needed Petrofka Bridge. This will indeed by another boon to the further development of the vast area of 

north-western Saskatchewan. 

 

Not only is the sewer and water program making an impact on the farm life of this province, but it is 

gratifying to note from the Throne Speech that nine smaller urban communities proceeded with the 

installation of water and sewage disposal facilities in 1960, with the assistance of the provincial 

Government, through the Department of 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

12 

Municipal Affairs, and that many more are planning to do so in 1961. Millions of dollars will be spent 

by this Government on these projects during the next few years. 

 

It was also good, Mr. Speaker, to see the evidence of the development and progress of the co-operative 

movement in this province. The new co-operative feeder program, and we have two or three of them up 

in my Constituency, should be a tremendous boon to the cattle industry. The continued expansion of 

credit unions throughout the province will give people even greater control over their own financial 

problems, and the expansion of the credit unions is certainly a very necessary one. We are also pleased 

that the co-operative services in the northland are continuing to expand, and have already to a large 

extent broken the monopolies that used to exist in the far north. 

 

It was of special interest, Mr. Speaker, to note and hear the reference in the Throne Speech to the new 

Saskatchewan Savings Bonds that will be sold exclusively to the people of this province. They should do 

much to provide local residents with an opportunity to invest their savings at a good rate of interest and 

be able to participate in yet another indication that the Government is still looking for and coming up 

with ideas for continually bettering provincial economy. 

 

There has been a great deal said, Sir, throughout the country and at public meetings concerning the 

report of the Continuing Committee on Local Government. I can speak on this subject, not only as an 

M.L.A., but as a ratepayer in a rural municipality. I attended the meeting held by the representatives of 

the Continuing Committee last fall in North Battleford. It was obvious that a good deal of work had been 

done by this Committee, and I want to congratulate them on the diligent work they have done and their 

presentation to the people of north-western Saskatchewan. I know three of the members from the 

north-western part of our province personally. They are Jim Maher, former mayor of our city, and a 

former member of the Opposition in this House. He is also representing the urban municipalities in this 

Committee. Bill Irvine, is the Reeve of Douglas Municipality in my Constituency. He is one of the rural 

municipal representatives. Ben McKinnon, is secretary of the North Battleford larger unit. He represents 

school secretaries. I know these men to be men of integrity, and am confident that they have the best 

interests of the local government at heart, and I am looking forward to reviewing the final 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

13 

report of this committee, as a Member of the Legislature, so that I may give careful study and 

consideration to their proposals. I am sorry that some people and some politicians have sought to gain 

twenty-four hour glory by denying courtesy to the committee in making its final report. Statements made 

by irresponsible people are a disservice to the people of Saskatchewan, and an insult to the members of 

the Committee who were appointed to represent the various local government organizations. 

 

Speaking as an M.L.A. I certainly have no knowledge as to what the decision of the Government will be 

after receiving the report from the Continuing Committee. The Government has given assurance in the 

Throne Speech that further study will be undertaken before the implementation of the Committee‟s 

recommendations. I for one will give a great deal of thought to the report in order that I may be in a 

position, when the times comes, to do what I feel is in the best interests of local government in my 

province. The C.C.F. Government has always been prepared to implement progressive changes that the 

people of the province have desired. We on this side of the House recognize the continual need for 

change to improve the lot of the people of the province. The people of Saskatchewan have a long history 

of championing new ideas and new programs, but always after careful study, thought, and consideration, 

and actual demonstration. We have never been a people opposed to change. The first idea of a 

co-operative market scheme through a purchaser-owned agency was born and originated in this 

province, and again after all the facts were known and clearly outlined and understood. Out of this grew 

the tremendous wheat pool structure that we have today, and that at least most of the people of 

Saskatchewan are proud of. 

 

The larger school unit, today recognized and accepted, came about after a great deal of study and 

practical demonstration. About the only thing we can thank some of the people opposite for was the fact 

that they had the temerity to put the larger unit legislation in when they were in office. Our people expect 

government to govern and to lead, but only at a pace they can follow and fully understand, and I am 

pleased, Sir, that the Throne Speech indicates that the recommendations of the Continuing Committee 

will not be acted upon at this Session, and that the Government proposes to give a great deal of study, as 

well as conduct further discussions with the governing bodies before any decision is made. 

 

Again, Sir, I want to congratulate the Government 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

14 

for bringing out this tremendous program for 1961. The fact that we in Saskatchewan are able to proceed 

with such a program, a program of such magnitude, in the fact of the economic difficulties prevailing at 

the present time, is a tribute to what has been accomplished over the past 16 years. The resources of a 

provincial Government and its access to tax revenues are limited. We must always gear our budgets and 

do our housekeeping with the entire national economic picture in mind. I have made this statement 

before, Sir, and once more I reiterate, that the ten provinces of Canada are like members of a family and 

the overall welfare of that family depends on the head of the house, and if he is a poor provider, is 

careless and remiss in his duties to the family, then every member of that family must suffer, and it may 

be that there shall be no icing on the cake, no cream on the porridge or no bacon and eggs for breakfast. 

Our federal Government has not given the necessary leadership to provide a buoyant national economy. 

 

While this statement may gladden the hearts of those members sitting on your left, Mr. Speaker, let me 

point out that the economic situation in which we find ourselves today was brought about by the 

carelessness, negligence and lack of foresight on the part of the previous federal Government. The only 

thing, Sir, that we can blame the present Tory Government for, is the fact that they have done too little to 

clean up the mess that they inherited from their predecessors. Our Government is showing a tremendous 

courage in the program they have outlined in the Speech from the Throne, when you consider that the 

Dominion-Provincial tax agreement is at present in jeopardy. A change in the Dominion-Provincial tax 

payment could result in a loss of millions of dollars yearly if the Federal Government chooses to 

capitulate to the powerful interests in Ontario. I sincerely hope, Sir, that there will be no change made in 

this agreement that would jeopardize the interests of provinces such as Saskatchewan, Manitoba and the 

Maritimes. 

 

The fact that we are proceeding with this broad program in spite of an economic recession throughout 

Canada, and worst of all what amounts to a depression in our grain economy, is another indication of the 

faith that this Government has in the province of Saskatchewan. It is indeed fortunate that development 

over the past 16 years has taken Saskatchewan away from the position of a single phase economy. It 

would be impossible for us to proceed along these lines if we were in the same economic position as we 

were 16 years ago, when 80% of our gross income depended entirely on agriculture. The fact that last 

year‟s experience and present trends indicate that industry and business are providing more and more of 

our gross 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

15 

income to the point where last year only 35% of our gross income was attributable to agriculture, and 

65% from business and industrial sources. This showed the broadening of our economic feats in spite of 

the fact that production is greater than ever from the farmers, and with considerably less manpower. 

 

I am confident, Sir, that this diversification will continue. I am sure in spite of the traitorous statements 

that have been made by irresponsible people concerning the future of business and industry in this 

province, our future will continue to brighten as the years go by. I noted in a recent edition of the 

„Saskatoon Star Phoenix‟ that Saskatchewan had less business failures than any other province in the 

Dominion of Canada in 1960. This was a statement by . . . 

 

Opposition Member: — There were no businesses to fail. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — . . . This was a statement by a representative of Dunn and Bradstreet. He stated that out 

of over 2,000 business failures throughout Canada only 11 occurred in Saskatchewan. This was an 

indication of the initiative of the business men and the stability of business men in Saskatchewan, and 

business generally. I maintain, Sir, that the people who would drag us back to these dark ages and refuse 

to face reality, that the sooner they crawl into their deserved pit of oblivion the better it will be for the 

whole country. 

 

The C.C.F. party, which has been given a mandate once again by the people of Saskatchewan, is not 

controlled and never will be controlled by any one group of people, as in the history of the past. Because 

this is true and it has been able to give the kind of Government which was re-elected on June 8th, and it 

has been the thinking of the people behind the C.C.F. party that has brought about the program outlined 

in the Speech from the Throne, which was presented by His Honour in the House last Thursday. I am 

sure that the pioneering spirit of Saskatchewan continues to be strong, and we will continue to move 

forward to an ever-more prosperous and balanced economy. I am satisfied, Sir, that this speech indicates, 

through the various programs outlined that we are proceeding to implement our election platform and, 

therefore, I consider it a privilege to move, seconded by Mrs. Strum, the hon. lady Member from 

Saskatoon: 

 

That a humble Address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 

To His Honour, The Honourable Frank Lindsay Bastedo, Lieutenant Governor of the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

16 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty‟s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, in Session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious Speech which Your 

Honour has been pleased to address to us at the opening of the present Session. 

 

Mrs. Gladys Strum (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, on rising to second the Address-in-Reply, I 

wish on behalf of the people of Saskatoon to express my appreciation of this privilege, and to accept on 

their behalf this honour on this historic occasion. Parliamentary usages are rich in history; they represent 

hard won struggles and great moral victories. As part of this ceremony, which has grown up around the 

announcement by the Government of its program for the Session, in this ceremony which has both 

significance and dignity, the mover and seconder are singularly honoured, and through them the 

Constituencies they represent. The tremendous program of development in this province has opened new 

frontiers in the north and makes it especially appropriate that the City of Saskatoon and the Constituency 

of The Battlefords be recognized on this occasion. 

 

In the late autumn I was present at the opening of the bridge at Prince Albert. This great structure, the 

finest in the province, marks the gateway to the north, and is the jumping-off place of the roads to 

resources, which will eventually provide an outlet for the timber and mining developments of the area. 

One has only to fly over this land of muskeg, rock and water in its further extremities to see what an 

undertaking this represents. But not only our Saskatchewan Government but our Federal Government 

too shares in the belief that this is vital to our economic future. We in Saskatoon are pleased that the 

Petrofka Bridge was moved forward as a highway and construction project last fall. Owing to the 

unusually fine weather and the urgent need for public investment in the work and wages program, the 

Government acted wisely. 

 

I am pleased to note that our province this year is undertaking the biggest highway program in its 

history, and these great bridges over our rivers are part of our program of expansion and permanent 

development. Some of our highway program will have to be undertaken to replace roads inundated by 

flooding in association with the South Saskatchewan River Project. I am sure that no one in this House, 

or in this province, will object to any slight dislocations caused by so important and far reaching a 

project as the South Saskatchewan River Dam. The expenditures on highways are of the most vital 

importance, not only for comfort and convenience, but they are the veins and arteries of modern 

commerce. This year the hon. Member for Cannington will see the closing of a very old and very 

necessary branch railway of the C.P.R. that connects the town of Wolseley with Reston, Manitoba. Were 

it not 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

17 

for No. 16 highway which joins No. 1 from Brandon and proceeds to Regina, we would be cut off with 

no means of access. It is bad enough to drop the town and ignore the stores and banks and grain 

elevators, and the cattle loading pens, but we still have a good highway that will no doubt be 

hard-surfaced in the not too distant future. We still have truck and bus service and an access road to the 

nearest city. The Standford Report reinforces our defence of our highway program as an economic factor 

in our new industrial revolution. 

 

It says on page 105: 

 

“Transportation is a major factor in industrial location, both in terms of cost and of services. More than 

any other area in North America, the prairie provinces, and Saskatchewan in particular, have been 

aware of the disadvantage of their geographic location in relation to market and sources of 

manufactured goods, and consequently of the vital importance of an effective transportation system to 

their economic development.” 

 

With this preface the report goes on to stress the value of highways to an area so situated. It says: 

 

“It is, therefore, not surprising to find that there has been a remarkably heavy investment in 

transportation facilities. For instance in 1957 Saskatchewan had almost 20% of Canada‟s single track 

railway mileage, and more than 15% of Canada‟s surfaced roads; Almost 4 times as much railway 

trackage and 3 times as many surfaced roads per capita as the average for all of Canada.” 

 

Speaking of further railway extension it said, “That the only likely significant extensions would arise 

from the development of the north.” Again pursuing the argument it says, “In the 10 years from 1947 to 

1957 bituminous surfaced highways have increased almost fourfold, from 367 miles to one thousand, 

three hundred and fifty-six miles, so that all principal centres in the province are now linked by high 

quality all weather roads.” I might add that since this report was written the figure has mounted to well 

over 2,000 miles. 

 

Speaking of the development of trucking services it points out, 

 

“Development of all weather highways has sparked a sharp increase in trucking services, so that for 

the first time in Saskatchewan history there are now two 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

18 

competitive modes of transportation by which goods may be shipped. Undoubtedly this places industry 

in a more favourable position than it has ever been.” 

 

And speaking of bus service, it adds, 

 

“The provincially owned Saskatchewan Transportation Company operates a fleet of 52 buses serving 

all the cities and many of the towns daily, as well as providing less frequent services to other centres. 

This service supplements express deliveries and in some cases supplants the railways as far as 

passenger and mail service is concerned, and links to interprovincial and trans-continental bus service, 

are provided, by Greyhound lines of Canada.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this imaginative and economically sound policy of over-all development is of the greatest 

importance not only in highway construction, but in the network of grid roads that supports agriculture 

in its needs to run trucks to carry the grain and livestock to shipping point, and as a means of providing 

the school buses with all weather roads. I am very pleased to note that by the end of 1960 one half of the 

12,000 mile, ten year grid road program was completed, and a program of regravelling of already 

established grid roads, was commenced during the past season. 

 

I am pleased to see, Mr. Speaker, in scanning the Journals of the last Session, that my brined the hon. 

Member for Cannington supported the Bill to bring running water and bathroom necessities to the farm 

families of Saskatchewan. He and I will recall that I ran twice in his constituency in opposition to the 

then Premier, and that I missed my seat in the first C.C.F. administration by six votes. It was one of 

Premier Patterson‟s best platform jokes that I thought the farmers needed a bath. Mr. Speaker, the 

farmers have always not only needed, but deserved, the best plumbing that money can buy. I advocated a 

program that would bring running water to Saskatchewan farms. But before a pressure system can be put 

in, one must have power for pumping water. In this instance I might add that when we put in a large 

wind charger unit on our farm we paid, not just $500.00, but over a thousand dollars and we had to put 

out $400.00 or $500.00 every few years for batteries. Then when you went to buy a fridge, or an iron, 

you paid far more for an appliance of this type, because the turnover was low. A fridge was so hard on 

batteries that we finally got a kerosene-burning one. One of the most thrilling sights I have ever seen 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

19 

was the first time I flew over Saskatchewan from Edmonton, and saw the province lit up by our 

Saskatchewan Power program. 

 

The lovely part of our power pattern is that not just the larger centres, but even the towns, hamlets, and 

farms, can have, and do have, refrigerators and television sets and power for washing and ironing. The 

“Sad” iron of my memory was well named. I was one of a family of five girls, and on Saturday, in 

Manitoba, with the gleaming hydro towers running past our doors, we stood by a wood burning stove in 

the heat of summer, and ironed all day Saturday, getting the flounced white dresses and petticoats ready 

for the Sunday church parade. Mr. Speaker, as one of the pioneers of the party which I have the honour 

to represent in this House, nothing gives me greater satisfaction than the distribution of power, which 

makes the development of the Farm Improvement Plan possible. 

 

Although I now have the honour to represent the beautiful University City of Saskatoon, I also represent 

the farm families of this province. We still operate a farm. 

 

I also am proud to represent the teachers of this province, a hard-working group second to none in 

importance in the life of our province, indeed, to the future of the world. The scientists, the engineers, 

the explorers in medical science, the philosophers and statesmen of the future, are sitting in a classroom 

today. The teachers create the environment which either deadens or sharpens their moral and intellectual 

awareness. Make no mistake, here is the cradle of culture, the hatching-nest of civilization. 

 

I was delighted, Mr. Speaker, that it was education that got the headline in the Leader Post on Thursday 

evening after the Throne Speech was read in the House. But what is education? Education has been 

defined by John Dewey as that process whereby the new-born catches up to the race. The growing child 

must be helped to accelerate the learning process, because every generation adds to the store of the 

accumulated experience of the race. In a primitive society the tribe indoctrinates the child in its ancient 

customs, but in a modern highly developed culture in addition to this family teaching we must impose on 

the child an artificial, speeded-up learning process to help him to catch up to his parents. The school 

spans centuries of trial and error. It interprets what the race, and what other races, have deemed worthy 

to remember. In turn the child makes his contribution, but this child 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

20 

must start with a blank book, and an empty mind, and only the gift of intelligence and potential 

development. 

 

We know how the pace accelerates. To teach science, mathematics, social studies, to name just a few of 

the important areas of instruction, a teacher must continually be a student also. So fast does the area of 

knowledge grow, that even the teacher does not stay educated. 

 

I must commend the previous Minister of Education, now Provincial Treasurer, for his foresight in 

initiating scholarships for teachers to assist them in attending University in their efforts to obtain 

profession certificates. Only a teacher engaged in this pursuit knows what it means to attend night 

classes after an exhausting day in the classroom. I know that again this year, because I am one of them, 

teachers are driving to Regina College from as far away as Moosomin, Whitewood, and no doubt from 

centres equally distant from Saskatoon, to night classes in required subjects. A bus load comes from 

Moose Jaw. They will do this every teaching week from October until April, and drive home again after 

a two hour class. They will be at their desks at nine a.m. the next morning, some are burning midnight 

oil doing correspondence courses, or they will give up summer holidays for five years in order to do five 

classes, the equivalent of a year‟s work at University. The shortage of teachers is now in the high school 

classrooms. This scholarship program, now in its second year, will help in a way that will assist and 

speed up that supply. 

 

I wish to commend the present Minister of Education in his support for the program established by his 

predecessor, the Hon. Mr. Lloyd. Mr. Lloyd achieved the impossible, not only in the public and high 

schools, but at University level at well. I wish, on behalf of the city I have the honour to represent, to 

express our delight and pride in the beautiful new Arts Building, which would do credit to any campus, 

and for the completion of the Biology Building. Saskatchewan research in basic science has contributed 

to the wealth of the world: Thatcher wheat, (and I hope its matching number in the Opposition will live 

up to the high standard of the wheat plant), and also alkali-resistant cement and the cobalt bomb, to name 

only a random few. I trust that a new building for the badly overcrowded College of Education will not 

be long delayed. 

 

The province is deeply interested in the new university campus now rapidly progressing at Regina. This 

will fill a long felt need in better distributing the facilities for advanced courses. 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

21 

Also the Government is to be congratulated that, in addition to a new branch of the University in Regina, 

and its $60,000.00 scholarships for advanced study for teachers, it has increased school grants, and is 

continuing with its program of student scholarships and loans, I speak of the interest free loans which 

now number close to 5,000. 

 

I wish to point out that the whole program of legislation this year, as in every other year, is directed 

toward a sound policy that is justifiable on two fronts: It respects human need. It develops economic 

resources as a basis for human betterment. 

 

I wish for a moment to digress and prove that this is not only a wonderfully imaginative and 

humanitarian concept, but that it is sound in the best and most highly reputable, economic sense. 

 

Let us take a quick look at our economic position. It is not difficult to follow the analysis of the 

economist in a point by point breakdown. This is what we find: The raising of Tariffs reduces trade; As a 

result, it becomes more difficult to arrange deals to take our wheat; The outcome of this slowing down, 

results in delayed spending, or a cutback in sales; Total spending gives us our retail sales picture; 

Reduced sales mean a cutback in not only consumer goods, but employment figures, and in investment, 

which indicates the growth of the economy. This all adds up to the shrinking of the gross national 

product. 

 

Now as industries slow down, or fail to expand, other industries are affected. As income from wages is 

replaced by unemployment insurance, or if uninsured, by social aid, this too, adds to the cycle, or 

downturn. 

 

The only solution in this situation is planned spending by Governments. When exports, investments and 

normal spending fail, then Governments must step in and support a sagging economy by assuming the 

responsibility for human welfare and social need. 

 

In a United States survey of Government spending, an initial outlay of forty billion dollars creating jobs 

and incomes and supporting industry, resulted, not in a forty billion dollar increase, but in the normal 

process of business turnover. The forty billion put in by Government came out a 100 billion dollar total. 

In reverse order, a withdrawal of forty billion would result in a loss of business, not of forty billion, but a 

drop of 100 billion in jobs, incomes, and industries. 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

22 

How serious the situation in Canada presently is, we can only guess by noting that in the worst years of 

the depression, the number of unemployed workers in Canadian industry stood at 10%. The figure is 

very close to that again today. I believe it is estimated that before spring one in every ten workers in 

Canada, or 10% of our labour force, who need to work, and want to work, will be denied the right to 

work. On behalf of the fine people of the city I represent, the working people, those unable to find work, 

and the business firms who suffer in a slack period, I commend the Government for its courageous 

program of spending to increase jobs, wages and business in this emergency. 

 

This spending is predicated on the basis of the need to put money into circulation. I congratulate the 

Government on its far-sighted policy, not only in spending to support the economy, but spending for 

projects that can be defended in their own right as being necessary, and useful and which add to our 

productive potential, our permanent development policy, and social capital. 

 

These items, to name just a few, include the largest highway construction program in the history of the 

province. The Squaw Rapids Power site is being pushed to its completion; the South Saskatchewan 

River Dam project; the construction of a home for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, which will 

bring together under one roof the presently dismembered body now scattered over the city in rented 

places. 

 

In addition to the undertakings just mentioned I am proud to refer to those projects undertaken by 

industries that are not owned by the Government but that are backed by them in their initial stages. 

These new and useful enterprises are assisted by the Industrial Development Fund. They receive the 

benefit of research services. The need has to be justified in terms of market, and all aspects of consumer 

demand, process, price and financial feasibility are considered. When all the criteria have been 

established and satisfied, the Government underwrites the enterprise, and if capital is supplied, it is 

repaid over a period of time. 

 

The most recent example of this far-sighted policy, is the new Federated Co-operative Chemical Industry 

which will eventually expand to a capitalization of 6 million dollars. Less recently we have seen cement, 

Prairie Pipe, and Interprovincial Steel developed. 

 

This is a very useful development in Government 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

23 

policy, and it is in no way incompatible with C.C.F. philosophy. As our Premier has so often pointed out, 

many endeavours are appropriate to private initiative. Those fields which are appropriate to co-operative 

enterprise are being encouraged, while in the fields natural to public enterprise, the Government has 

taken the initiative. 

 

There is another field where federal, provincial, and municipal Governments jointly undertake to provide 

services. I am very happy that in the past year we have seen two such projects undertaken. They are 

outstanding examples of joint enterprise by the three levels of Government: municipal, provincial and 

federal. In Moose Jaw the federal Government assisted with a grant for the new Technological Institute. 

This is the most effective answer to the job future of an age threatened by automation. Whether the 

advance of science and engineering becomes a blessing or a curse depends on the intelligence of our 

response. This new training school for industry represents a far-sighted and wise adaptation to the new 

Industrial Revolution of our day. 

 

The second example of this happy partnership is the 109 low rental housing units recently completed in 

Regina. I hope that before this year is out Saskatoon will have a matching development. Will the 

Provincial Treasurer please take note? 

 

In addition there are many things we could do in this province to add to our historical and cultural assets. 

There are fast disappearing historic sites that have not only disappeared as a physical landmark, but will 

die in the living memories of those pioneers who might help us reconstruct them. These pioneers may 

not be with us much longer. The Golden Jubilee Year was a splendid example of how this may be done. 

 

Our Canadian Centennial as a nation is coming up in 1967. We should be laying plans now so that we 

could recreate old trails, old forts, old trading posts, on the Saskatchewan River particularly. We should 

be getting together the accoutrements for a flotilla of fur-laden canoes, and an old sidewheeler to float 

down our original highways, the might rivers that brought the explorers, the missionaries, and the traders 

in contact with the natives. Our pageants and plays must be written. We must give our historians the 

resources. The Industrial Development Museum has accumulated the remarkable collection on a very 

limited budget. They must be assisted properly to house and display this very valuable historical exhibit. 

Last year‟s attendance figure for the show that Pion-era puts on, was 80,000 visitors. These visitors 

come from all 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

24 

parts of Canada and the States. It is unique in its historical character; It is valuable as a means of 

educating our youth to appreciate our beginnings as a province. 

 

I hope that before the century has passed into history we will have righted some of the wrongs done to 

our native population. A few years ago I spent a few months in New Zealand. I tried to find at first hand 

how they handled their native problem. The Maoris are of Polynesian origin, and share the same cultural 

heritage as the Hawaiians. They were originally cannibals. I heard a Maori high church official express 

the startling view at a Caledonian banquet that he owed his Scottish blood to the fact that his grandfather 

had eaten a Presbyterian missionary. New Zealand met its native problem by reserving four seats for 

Maori candidates, so that there are always four members in their House represented and elected by 

Maoris. One of the four has a cabinet post by statutory right. They proudly recall that one of their best 

ministers of Health was a native son. I do not suggest that this is our answer, but I do insist that we must 

find a better answer than the one we have permitted to blight the lives of our native people. 

 

We recognize that all growing children must be prepared to enter fully into life of the community. We 

prepare them for this be a process of integration that starts with the family, takes in the school, the 

church, the community and finally the labour force. We recognize that education is the instrument which 

shapes the child for participation. Further we believe that no one can attain to self respect, nor can he 

commend the respect of his fellows unless he is self supporting. No young person regardless of origin, 

can today hope to find a place in society unless he has been prepared by training appropriate to his latent 

capacity. 

 

Those of us in this House have seen heat and power pass from a wood and straw-fired, steam-driven 

engine, to a gas or diesel burning unit. In our homes we have gone through the fuel cycle that started 

with wood, advanced to coal, then added oil, and now we enjoy the economy and comfort of automatic 

gas furnaces. 

 

In industry we have reached atomic energy. In Great Britain power plants driven by atomic energy are 

not uncommon. We are considering solar energy. It may be that in our laboratories even now some 

young person is experimenting with a new process that will represent a great and revolutionary 

break-through. There is no doubt 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

25 

that intelligence, skill and aptitudes are distributed throughout all branches of the human family. There is 

no superior race, there are only underprivileged areas. The greatest waste in our society is the waste 

represented by the denial of the gifted to use their talents to the optimum. Witty, in his hook, “The Gifted 

Child”, points out: 

 

“Experience shows that the scientist of the future may be found in large or small cities, or in crowded 

areas and on the farms. Good schools and inspiring teachers develop latent abilities, but in the great 

stream of humanity the ability to think, to perform, and to discover is widely distributed. It is our great 

responsibility to find this talent and to give it opportunity. Such talent may then help to remake 

continuously the world and promote the welfare and happiness of oncoming generations.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I take great pleasure in second the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. Ross Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this Throne 

Debate, I think perhaps I should first like to congratulate you as is traditional on your appointment. 

Certainly in our British system of Government the Speaker, as the first commoner, has a very major and 

important role to play. He must see of course that the debates are conducted with dignity and decorum. 

He must also make certain that any decisions made interpreting the rules are made with fairness and with 

impartiality. I must say that Members on this side of the House, Her Majesty‟s Loyal Opposition, are 

quite confident that you will do your utmost to see that this task is carried out. We wish you well in the 

months ahead. 

 

Now on behalf of the Liberal Party this afternoon also, I should like to congratulate the mover and the 

seconder of the motion in reply to the Speech from the Throne. While the Members on this side of the 

House of course disagreed with a good deal of what was said, we realize that in view of the weak case 

that these Members have to develop, it‟s a pretty tough job. In these circumstances we think they 

performed their task ably and well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the first comments I would like to make in this House, is to express appreciation 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

26 

to the Premier and the Minister of Public Works, for one act which they performed for the Opposition. 

Facilities in this House are quite different than they are in the House of Commons. I don‟t mind telling 

you that when I came to Regina and found the facilities which were provided for Opposition Members, I 

received quite a shock. I found for example that last year our male M.L.A.‟s had only one office for the 

Leader. All the rest of them had just the lounge with no desks. If my memory serves me, they had one 

secretary between them to do their correspondence. Now, regardless of politics, I think all of us would 

agree that good Government either in a province or in a country requires an effective opposition. If 

Opposition Members are to perform the duties required of them, I believe they should have proper 

facilities. Running the Government in Saskatchewan is perhaps the biggest business in this province, and 

if our M.L.A.‟s lack facilities, I believe they cannot carry out their tasks properly. Now when I drew this 

matter to the attention of the Premier and the Minister of Public Works, after discussing the matter, they 

provided me with an office, and our other M.L.A.‟s, seventeen of them, with three rooms. We have five 

or six to a room, but each M.L.A. has a desk and I can tell you that the older M.L.A.‟s certainly tell me 

that the facilities are much better than they were in the last House. In addition we have been provided 

with three secretaries. 

 

Now I want to, as I say, express our thanks. We still think perhaps we should go a little further. The 

Government has 15 Cabinet Ministers and of course each Cabinet Minister naturally has a research 

worker, his own staff, and perhaps his own speechwriter in there somewhere. We would therefore like to 

have some kind of research facilities on the Opposition. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — You could use a couple of speechwriters. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Certainly your office is one, Sir, that has not got a speechwriter but maybe you can 

get one. We do believe if the Opposition was provided with research facilities that we could go through 

the Public Accounts and Estimates more thoroughly and efficiently and that the taxpayer in the long run 

would benefit. However, I understand that a special committee is being set up for that purpose and we 

shall look forward to having our say on that committee. 

 

Now I would like to say a word or so about the speeches that were made this afternoon. It was a great 

pleasure to hear the Member for Saskatoon once again. I 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

27 

had the privilege for a period of time in sitting in the House of Commons with her. I would say she has 

mellowed quite a bit. Her speech today was not quite as fiery as it used to be in those old days, but then 

most socialists do mellow with age, and I suppose that is natural. There is one comment she made that 

perhaps I should comment on. She suggested that great progress has been made in the province of 

Saskatchewan in bringing power to the farm, and how she as a housewife appreciated that fact. No 

Liberal would deny that there has been great progress made in this field in the last 15 years, but why 

shouldn‟t there be? Every other province has made almost the same or greater progress. As far as 

Manitoba is concerned we think maybe there is even a little more progress than in Saskatchewan. In the 

first place, they have given the farmer considerable cheaper rates than our own Power Corporation does. 

They put power in the yard without the $500.00 or $550.00 down payment. So I would just point out to 

the Member for Saskatoon that all M.L.A.‟s, all Governments, since the war have had considerable 

power development. 

 

I turn to the speech the Member for the Battlefords made. There are two or three points perhaps I should 

comment on. He started with remarks by boasting of the great confidence which the people of 

Saskatchewan gave the C.C.F. Party in the last election by returning them with a 2 to 1 majority in this 

House. But I want to remind the hon. Member that I believe eight years ago or perhaps it was 12 but not 

too long ago anyway, the C.C.F. Party got 54% of the votes in this province. In the last election they 

slipped down to 41%. 59% of the people of Saskatchewan voted against this Government in the last 

election. I suggest we are representing that 59%, as my hon. friend will find out in Turtleford on 

February 22nd. Only a split vote saved them the last time, and of course that will change in three years. 

If the C.C.F. Party is such a wonderful organization, why are all Members dropping away? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — They are throwing it out the window? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — During the last election the C.C.F. Party campaigned on a program of abundant 

living. “Abundant Living,” they said; “Elect the socialists and we give you abundant living.” Three 

weeks later they raised the Hospitalization Tax 37%. Not long after that the telephone rates went up; 

insurance rates, and other tax increases. I suggest that instead of giving the taxpayer . . . 



 

February 13, 1961 

 

 

28 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege. When did the insurance rates go up? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well, Sir, your insurance manager announced in a speech in North Battleford that 

they would be going up shortly if they have not already gone up. 

 

Premier Douglas: — He did nothing of the sort. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — He certainly did. And something else, Sir, today I had a gentleman phone me from the 

license office down in the city of Regina. He said “I must leave this province and I want to get a new 

automobile license. I asked for a new application form. There won‟t be any available till next March the 

first.” Now what does that mean? Does it mean automobile license taxes are going up? Usually, I am 

informed, these forms are available by this date. It seems to me that all this bad news is being held until 

after Turtleford. Well now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to suggest that instead of abundant living this 

Government has given the people of Saskatchewan the highest taxes they have had in history. I feat it is 

just beginning. Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn this debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned.) 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:00 o‟clock p.m. 


