



















































Hansard: October 27, 1961


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

13th Day 

 

Friday, October 27th, 1961. 

 

Question re: CONSTITUTIONAL CONFERENCE 

 

Mr. Eldon A. Johnson (Kerrobert-Kindersley):  Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are 

proceeded with I would like to ask the government the following question. Is it true that a constitutional 

conference will be held in Ottawa in the near future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker:  Mr. Speaker, I want to express my appreciation to the hon. member for having 

given me a few minutes notice of this question so that I could carefully draft a reply. It is as follows: It is 

true that a constitutional conference will be held in Ottawa, Thursday and Friday, November 2nd and 

3rd. This conference will not involve the Attorneys General. The dominion and the provinces will be 

represented by experts concerned with drafting of the text for future consideration on the policy levels. 

Participation in this conference by the province does not in any sense imply that the province has 

receded in any degree from its former position that the new constitution must be flexible to the highest 

degree. The government considers itself bound by the resolution of the legislature, unanimously adopted 

at the last session, and at the very earliest opportunity will take steps to test public opinion regarding 

proposals which would pass an inflexible constitution on Canada, making change or progress very 

difficult, if not impossible. 

 

Question re: THE RECORDING OF EVIDENCE BY SOUND RECORDING MACHINE ACT. 

 

Mr. Franklin E. Foley:  Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are proceeded with, I note in the 

Saskatchewan Gazette of October 13, 1961 a notice with respect to the matter of recording of evidence 

by sound recording machines, act of 1958, whereby the Attorney General does rule that such evidence is 

now admissible. My first question is why was this notice necessary at this time since the act was passed 

in 1958, and secondly does the government intend to bring in to the legislature any amendments to the 

act with regard to this matter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker:  The act was passed, as the hon. member pointed out three years ago, 



 

October 27, 1961 

 

 

2 

and it provided that any machine designated by order-in-council would be acceptable for the recording 

and transcribing of evidence. During the three year period, extensive experiments have been undertaken 

to test all makes and models of machines, and it wasn’t until last month that we were able to select a 

machine which was ultimately chosen. Now this has been selected, this notice that my hon. friend 

referred to has been published, formally adopting that machine as the official mode of transcribing 

evidence. 

 

I may say that when the act was originally passed, there was no provision in the criminal code for use of 

sound recording machines in criminal proceedings. As a result of representations which we made to the 

government at Ottawa, they passed an amendment at the last session of parliament stating that any 

machine that is acceptable for the purpose of provincial courts, would be acceptable also in criminal 

courts. So it wasn’t until that change was made in the criminal code that we could have used a sound 

recording machine in any even in our magistrate’s courts. Now the amendment has been made to the 

criminal code, we are not bringing our provisions into line, so that we can use a machine for transcribing 

evidence, particularly in the magistrate’s courts, where the magistrates have to tour the province and 

hold hearings in places where court reporters are not ordinarily available. 

 

Mr. Foley:  There will be no further amendments to the act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker:  No further amendment to the act will be necessary as a result of that. 

 

The Assembly then resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole. 

 

MOTION RE HOUSE ADJOURNMENT 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Provincial Treasurer):  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. Mr. Douglas, I want to 

move the resolution which appears on the order paper. The resolution is self explanatory and suggests 

that when the House adjourns today, it will stand adjourned until Monday, November 13 at 2:30 p.m. 

May I say, Mr. Speaker, that the government does not wish, and does not intend to be put in the position 

of having pressure on the legislature in dealing with these very important matters that are before us. We 

do 



 

October 27, 1961 

 

 

3 

wish and we do have the need, which I am sure will be respected, to adjourn for next week, or a good 

part of next seek, and this proposal has been placed on the order paper. It may be that there are some 

alternative suggestions which arise in the course of discussion, Mr. Speaker, but I would move on behalf 

of Premier Douglas the following resolution as it appears. That when this House adjourns on Friday, 

October 27, it shall stand adjourned until Monday, November 13, at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

Mr. W. Ross Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition):  Mr. Speaker, the opposition, to say the least is 

somewhat surprised that a motion of this kind should be introduced at this time. Because for at least two 

weeks now we’ve heard repeated charges made on that side of the House that the opposition was using 

stall tactics to hold up the medical bill. Now we have a motion in front of us by which the government 

suggests that we leave here and hold everything up for two weeks. Why is it proposing that the House 

should adjourn at 5:00 o’clock for two weeks. Is it in the interests of the health of the people? I don’t 

think so. It is so that my hon. friends can go to a political convention. We don’t even take exception to 

that, Mr. Speaker. We don’t mind them adjourning for three days to go to their convention, but we don’t 

see why they need another week in addition. This bill in front of us, has been described repeatedly as the 

most important bill ever to come in front of this legislature. The Premier himself told us that unless it 

was passed reasonably soon they might not be able to bring it into effect. I wish there to propose an 

amendment, Mr. Speaker, seconded by Mr. McDonald: 

 

That the words “November 13th,” be deleted, and the words “November 6th” be substituted therefore. 

 

The amendment having been proposed by Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank (Minister of Mineral Resources):  Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a word or 

two in regard to the amendment. The Leader of the Opposition mentioned the delay. Really, Mr. 

Speaker, it has been quite evident, during the last two weeks, that there isn’t anybody here in this House, 

or not very many that don’t think we have lots of time. We have lots of time. We’ll get this thing done… 

 

Mr. Thatcher:  Why are you accusing us of stalling then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  Well I am not going to discuss the stalling question on this resolution. 



 

October 27, 1961 

 

 

4 

I have very decided opinions about that and I certainly could make a good case for it, but I don’t want to 

interject it into this particular debate. 

 

There has been some discussion, I understand, between members on both sides of the House, about the 

possibility of sitting Saturday, Monday and Tuesday, instead of passing this motion or amendment. Now 

if that has no attraction for the people in the House, I am not particularly interested in it, in what might 

be a faint and forlorn hope that we might finish by Tuesday night, finish the session. I think there would 

be a willingness on the part of the government members to try that out if the opposition wanted to try it. 

But to come back on the 6th, my hon. friends know what takes place at this convention. This doesn’t 

happen very often. A new leader will be elected and I think he deserves the courtesy of the members of 

the legislature in giving him time to get his cabinet organized to meet the House. The Premier has stated 

that in the House before, and I think it is quite legitimate. 

 

I can appreciate the interest of the Leader of the Opposition in trying to set the date when the House will 

meet. This effort may be the closest he will ever come to it, I don’t know. I couldn’t accept the sixth and 

I don’t think the government could accept the sixth as the date for meeting. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin):  Mr. Speaker, I for one would not want to place myself in the 

position of saying that by some faint and forlorn hope that this House could finish its business by 

Tuesday next, irrespective of what days we might sit or what hours we might sit in the interval. I believe 

that we came in to this session to do a specific job and I think that we should take whatever time is 

necessary to do that job. I am opposed wholeheartedly to setting some target date of attempting to finish. 

 

Now as the Leader of the Opposition has mentioned, we are prepared to give the party that sits opposite 

the opportunity to attend the leadership convention, and the decision as to what happens at that 

leadership convention of course is in the hands of the people who sit opposite and their supporters. But, 

Mr. Speaker, the government set the date that this House was to open, and the opposition has nothing to 

do with that, and they must have known when they set the date that they were going to hold the 

convention, and they must have expected that certain things would happen 



 

October 27, 1961 

 

 

5 

at that convention. Now that was the time that consideration should have been given, as to the time that 

would be necessary following that convention for a new leader, who I will expect will be the Premier, to 

select his cabinet and to prepare himself to face the House. This is a decision that we in the opposition 

surely couldn’t be responsible for. This is a decision that the government are responsible for and the 

opposition, I don’t think, should be called upon to extend a courtesy or otherwise. The government got 

themselves in this box, now let them get themselves out of it. The thing is this. We have members in this 

House that it costs considerable money, every day, for them to be here, and one good example is the 

school teachers. Mr. Speaker, I think there is no better example than our school teachers. In order for a 

school teach to come into a session it is necessary for them to have a replacement, and as I understand it 

they have to pay the replacement’s salary. Now are they supposed to go home, tonight or tomorrow and 

say to their replacement — now I won’t need your services for the next two weeks, but at the end of two 

weeks will you come back. I can imagine what the substitute is going to say to the teacher. And there are 

other people. I can think of salaried people, whose salary is cut off while they are in the session, and I 

think we must consider these people. I know of farmer members who have hired help on the farms. Are 

they supposed to go home and discharge that man tomorrow and say will you come back on the 13th. I 

honestly believe that the opposition are being fair when they say to the government — all right you can 

have your convention, and take the next three or four days to prepare yourself, but come back here the 

following week. I think we are being generous and fair in agreeing to giving the government and their 

party a week to mend their fences and prepare themselves to face this House. I can see no reason for this 

House to adjourn for two weeks. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd:  The member for Moosomin has closed his remarks by saying that the opposition 

was being generous and fair in giving to the government, if I could quote a remark this morning — some 

people are always generous and fair at giving that which they don’t have to give. Now Mr. Speaker, I 

don’t really believe that there is much to be added to the remarks of my colleague, the Minister of 

Mineral Resources in regard to the reasons of the government. I think these reasons are good and ample 

and they are reasons which I submit should receive the respect and the consideration of the opposition. 

The government, it has been suggested, made the error, in not calling the session earlier. The 

government’s problem in this regard was that it was not possible to call the session for this purpose prior 

to having received some time before the report of the advisory committee, and this was what determined 



 

October 27, 1961 

 

 

6 

the opening date of the session. It wouldn’t have been possible for us to come here without that report 

having been in our hands for some time, the report on which the major business of this particular session 

was based. We allowed what was thought to be, and what most of us will still think to be a reasonable 

amount of time between the calling of the session and the convention which we knew was coming up to 

deal with the matters which the government was putting before this legislature and the people of the 

province. For that decision we have no apology to make, nor do we make any for the resolution which is 

presently standing before us. 

 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek):  Mr. Speaker, I would just point out to the Minister of Mineral 

Resources and to the Provincial Treasurer that the reasoning basically is sound. If there was need for a 

new Premier to take over he would have to have time to reorganize his cabinet is correct. I don’t think 

we should forget that the CCF if they so wish it may choose a new leader, but that doesn’t necessarily 

follow that he must become the Premier the next day. I noticed that in Ontario, the government members 

there chose a new leader, and yet the Premier in that province is still carrying on. According to press 

reports he intends to carry on for some months if not a year. So I would say to you, choose a new leader 

if you like, but I can’t follow the reasoning that says that the Premier must leave immediately a new 

leader is chosen. 

 

I would think that the Premier would show some courtesy to the legislature and to the people of 

Saskatchewan and remain here at his duties and at his post until such time as this session had come to an 

end. Then he can relinquish his responsibility. There is no reason in the world why the Premier can’t 

continue to be Premier of the province until this session prorogues. That is not a valid reason. We are 

prepared to commission-operate. It is only common courtesy that we give the members an opportunity to 

attend this convention and no one is objecting to that, but I don’t think you can justify that we have to 

give additional time for the so called new Premier to organize his cabinet, because I think the Premier 

should remain at his post until this session is adjourned. For that reason I am going to support the 

amendment that a week’s recess is sufficiently long. 

 

Mrs. Mary Batten (Humboldt):  Mr. Speaker, I have only one remark. I was quite amazed to hear the 

hon. Provincial Treasurer say that he had no apologies to make to this House. I certainly think that we 

do need an apology because after all we are the representatives of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, we are 



 

October 27, 1961 

 

 

7 

the legislature, and we feel that when we come here to do the business of this province, at cost to 

ourselves, at a financial loss to ourselves, we want to stay here until that business is completed. 

 

Now, the calling of the legislature is completely in the hands of the government, Mr. Speaker. 

Completely. The government could have called the session at any time. They knew they were going to 

have a new leader. They could have had their provincial convention at any time. They could have 

postponed the calling of this House until after they had a new leader and a new cabinet, which could 

have put in this legislation. Why in the world should we start off with one government and half way 

through have a new Minister of Health and a new Premier to finish off this work. Maybe they made such 

a mess of it that they have to do that, but if they did that is their responsibility, not the responsibility of 

this House. I certainly don’t think it is necessary that we should be sent home like naughty little children 

for two weeks, to cool our heels and wait until the government is good and ready to call us back, 

because they are going to have a new cabinet to finish off this work that the old cabinet started and 

couldn’t finish. I don’t see any need for it whatsoever, and I for one resent it, not only on behalf of this 

House, but on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan who have to wait for two weeks for a political 

party to manoeuvre itself into a more enviable position before we can go ahead with the business of this 

province. 

 

The question being put on the proposed amendment it was negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS  18 
Messieurs 

 

Thatcher Cameron Klein 

Batten (Mrs.) McFarlane Horsman 

McCarthy Gardiner Coderre 

Barrie Foley MacDougall 

McDonald Guy Snedker 

Danielson Boldt Gallagher 

 

NAYS  30 
Messieurs 

 

Dewhurst Thurston Thiessen 

Brockelbank Erb Snyder 

Lloyd Nicholson Stevens 



 

October 27, 1961 

 

 

8 

NAYS (continued) 

 

Walker Turnbull Kluzak 

Nollet Stone Dahlman 

Cooper (Mrs.) Whelan Michayluk 

Strum (Mrs.) Thibault Semchuk 

Davies Berezowsky Perkins 

Willis Johnson Peterson 

Brown Meakes Broten 

 

The question being put on the motion it was agreed to. 

 

The Assembly again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 


