



















































Hansard: November 14, 1961


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

15th Day 

 

Tuesday, November 14th, 1961. 

 

The House met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

 

Before the Orders of the Day: 

 

QUESTION RE GRAIN FOR FEED 

 

Mr. W. Ross Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition):  Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are 

called, I should like to direct a question to the Minister of Agriculture. Is the provincial government 

making any effort to encourage the importation of oats or corn or other feed grains from the United 

States? Is there any way that some of the cattle liners which are going out of Moose Jaw almost daily, 

filled with cattle, down to cities like Sioux City could bring grain back to the area where there is a feed 

shortage? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture):  There has been no movement of corn. They can do it if 

they wish. We did say to the truckers who are going from here to the States with cattle and truckers who 

are coming from the States for cattle here, that we would pay up to 75 per cent of the transportation 

costs on the movement of fodder from the United States to here, but the responsibility for acquiring the 

fodder and disposing of it would be the truckers. This rather simplified it. We did give them the 

transportation assistance up to $12.00 a ton. 

 

Mr. Thatcher:  Is there no program in connection with feed grain? If there is not, I wonder if the 

minister would give some consideration to looking into this matter. When the trucks are down there 

anyway I would think we could get some cheap feed back into Saskatchewan, where it is very urgently 

needed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  It is doubtful if we could get corn. There has been some come up as I say but if it 

comes from Minnesota and Iowa I don’t think 



 

November 14, 1961 

 

 

2 

it would be quite competitive with what we can get here, considering transportation costs. 

 

QUESTION RE MEDICAL HEALTH OFFICER 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville):  Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I would like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Health, and if it doesn’t fall within his jurisdiction, possibly one of the other 

ministers might be able to give an answer. There has been a certain request within the last few weeks for 

the appointment of the medical health officer under the Emergency Measures Program and I am 

wondering whether the government is prepared to announce now or in the very near future such an 

appointment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb:  Mr. Speaker, we will be able to announce the appointment of a medical health officer 

in the near future. 

 

STATEMENT RE PAMPHLET 

 

Mr. Ian H. MacDougall (Estevan):  Before the orders of the day, I would like to draw to the attention 

of the members a pamphlet which I had distributed last evening, put out by the Estevan chamber of 

Commerce advertising our very fine and wonderful city down there. I would recommend it to their 

reading. 

 

QUESTION RE WEYBURN FIRE 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin):  Before the orders of the day are proceeded with I would like to 

ask the Minister of Health if any action has been taken at the mental institution in Weyburn to remove 

the fire hazard as claimed by the commission that is investigating the recent fire there. I made definite 

reference to mattresses and pillows made of foam rubber and other combustible material. 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb:  The use of all foam rubber mattresses has been discontinued in the institution. 



 

November 14, 1961 

 

 

3 

QUESTION RE ESTEVAN BRICK PLANT 

 

Mr. Ian H. MacDougall (Estevan):  Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I would like to make 

reference to a statement by the Minister of Mineral Resources some two weeks ago, regarding the layoff 

at the Estevan brick plant. He informed us that there would be no lay-offs and they would be working on 

in the future. I would like to ask him how many employees have been laid off as of last week-end? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank (Minister of Mineral Resources):  Mr. Speaker, at the time I made that 

statement I said there was no arrangement made at that time for a lay-off, but there might very well, in 

the future, be a shut-down for the winter season. I imagine that has taken place. I haven’t heard directly 

but I am not surprised if it has taken place at this time. 

 

Mr. MacDougall:  There were 14 last week-end. There will be 15 this week and . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! The member may ask a question, but he is not in a position to give information. 

 

QUESTION RE FREIGHT AND FODDER POLICY 

 

Mr. Douglas T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley):  Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are 

called, I wonder if the Minister of Agriculture can give this House any confirmation of the request made 

by the association of rural municipalities asking that the free freight and fodder policy be extended 

beyond December 1 — by that I mean the sharing of the transportation by the railways and by the 

federal government and by the provincial government. Will that be extended beyond December 1? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture):  Mr. Speaker, we’ve had it under consideration for some 

time and insofar as the railways are concerned — and we’ve made our representation to Ottawa — they 

were able to have the freight assistance provided by the railways — the one-third reduction in freight 

rates, extended from October 31st to November 30th, and we have also considered, 



 

November 14, 1961 

 

 

4 

in view of the fact that many farmers have difficulty in financing the purchase of fodder and feed 

supplies, particularly smaller farmers, we’ve decided to extend the freight assistance, both trucking and 

rail, to January 31 and the municipalities are being notified to that effect. 

 

Mr. McFarlane:  This is a supplementary question. Maybe he didn’t understand me correctly. Is the 

railway still sharing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  I doubt it very much. I don’t think, and I can’t speak for the railways, but at the 

present time they’ve extended their contribution to December 1st, or November 30th, whichever date 

you wish to take. I don’t know if they will go beyond that or not. I rather doubt it. 

 

STATEMENT RE CRESCENT DAIRIES 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville):  Mr. Speaker, I noticed the Attorney-General is not here, but possibly 

the Premier could pass on the question to him. In the early part of the session I directed a question to the 

minister with regard to the securities commission investigations and to the operations of Crescent 

Dairies Limited, in particular in the Melville area, and since receipt of the answer to that question 

shareholders have told me that at no time were there any investigators from the securities commission 

out to enquire from them about the operations of Crescent Dairies in the Melville area. I would like to 

request the government, through the Attorney-General, to review the investigation that was made 

because of complaints that are coming to me from shareholders in Crescent Dairies Limited in the 

Melville area. 

 

ESTEVAN BRICK PLANT 

 

Mr. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg):  Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are proceeded with, I 

would like to direct a question to the Minister of Labour. He, not being around, I was wondering 

whether another minister would answer it. I was wondering whether he was aware that 36 men have 

been laid-off at the Estevan plant without the one weeks’ written notice which is required under the 

labour code? 



 

November 14, 1961 

 

 

5 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  Mr. Speaker, on a point of order again the hon. member was giving 

information, not asking a question. I think it might be his information is incorrect, as usual. We have a 

union down there and they wouldn’t stand for that. 

 

The Assembly then resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o’clock p.m. 


