



















































Hansard: March 21, 1961


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

29th Day 

 

Tuesday, March 21, 1961. 

 

The House met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I would like to draw to the attention 

of the hon. Members the invitations laid on their desks in regard to the Commonwealth Parliamentary 

Association Dinner to be held on Thursday evening at 6:00 o‟clock. Not all have been turned in — I 

understand that nearly half of them have not been turned in — and it would greatly facilitate those who 

are handling the catering in regard to this dinner, if notice could be left with the Legislative Assembly 

Office no later than tonight. 

 

MOTION RE EXEMPTIONS OF THE CANADIAN WHEAT BOARD ACT 

 

Mr. Frank Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, the resolution that I am moving this afternoon, 

seconded by Mr. Kramer is: 

 

“That this Assembly, recording its full support for the principle of Wheat Board marketing, regrets the 

Federal Government‟s decision to exempt feed mills from the quota and price provisions of the 

Canadian Wheat Board Act, requests that these exemptions be rescinded at the end of the current crop 

year and that in co-operation with the Provincial Governments concerned, a more practical solution be 

found to any problem that may be involved.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, before moving the motion that I have on the Order Paper, there are just a few things that I 

would like to say in regard to it, to bring up a little history as to what caused me to put this motion on 

the 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

2 

 

Order Paper. On November 30, 1960, the Canadian Wheat Board announced a new policy in regard to 

the selling of grain to feed mills. This policy provided for the exemption of permit holders from the 

delivery quota regulations insofar as they apply to their deliveries of feed grains to feed mills designated 

by the Wheat Board, as non-quota mills. This means that farmers may sell their grain without regard to 

quota in any designated feed mill, designated by the Wheat Board within the province. 

 

Mr. Hamilton, the Minister for Agriculture said, when this was brought into the House of Commons, 

that the reason that it was being brought in was on the advice of the agricultural committee of the House 

of Commons which had studied this in 1959, and had suggested that this policy should be reviewed. 

Again in 1960 the agricultural committee of the House of Commons recommended this and Mr. 

Hamilton said that he was bringing this in due to the advice of the agricultural committee. 

 

I don‟t think it would hurt, Mr. Speaker, just for a minute or two to review the history of the Wheat 

Board, to review the history of the farmers of western Canada in trying to get stability in their sales of 

grain. Through the years 1910 to 1920 many farmers were feeling that there should be some stability in 

the price of grain, and by 1918 right after the war there was a great surplus of grain on hand, and the 

Government of that day brought in a Wheat Board to dispose of this surplus of grain. After a year or so 

this surplus was disposed of, and in 1921 the futures and the Grain Exchange, and the Grain Futures 

were reopened. At that time, again many farmers felt that this was not good, and they would have 

wished to have kept the Wheat Board in operation, but the Government of that day decided otherwise. 

Then the farmers of western Canada in 1922, 1923, 1924 organized the Wheat Pools, and I don‟t have to 

relate to this House the financial difficulties that the Wheat Pools got into in the late 20s, and how 

Governments including the Government of Saskatchewan had to lend money to the Wheat Pools when 

they had got into financial trouble. 

 

Then in 1935 the Government of that day brought in the Wheat Board again. This time it was optional, a 

farmer could decide to sell to the Wheat Board or sell to the open market. During the last world war, in 

1943, the Government decided that wheat should be handled by the Wheat Board only. Then in 1948, 

the policy of the Government in Ottawa was changed, so that oats and barley 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

3 

 

must be handled by only the Wheat Board. In 1950 the feed mills were brought under jurisdiction of the 

Wheat Board, and the Government of the day asked that the three prairie provinces bring in 

complementary legislation. Now in 1957 the Manitoba feed mill was prosecuted for buying grain from 

farmers without proper regulations, and again in 1958 this same thing happened in Alberta. In both cases 

the companies were found guilty and in both cases the case was appealed to a higher court, and in both 

cases in 1959 an appeal court ruled that the feed mills were guilty of an offence of buying this grain 

without proper authority from the Wheat Board. 

 

I would like to deal with what happened in the committee on agriculture in Ottawa, and also of the 

announcement of the change in policy. On November 29th, 1960, Mr. Jorgenson, parliamentary 

secretary to the Minister of Agriculture rose in the House of Commons and made a statement which 

changed the policy. And, I‟m not going to read it all, but I would just like to read one or two excerpts 

from it: 

 

“In 1957 a Manitoba feed mill appealed a conviction for violating Board delivery quota regulations. A 

similar case arose in Alberta in 1958. In both cases the appeal courts in 1959 upheld the power of the 

Board to regulate deliveries to feed mills. While the Board‟s authority was sustained there was a 

period of slightly over two years, from 1957 until late 1959 when the Board was unable to enforce 

delivery quotas to feed mills, because its power to do so were before the courts.” 

 

Then he goes on and he states the reasons, and his main reason is that the agricultural committee of the 

House of Commons had so advised. 

 

The same day that Mr. Jorgenson arose, Mr. Argue arose and commented on the policy, and again I 

won‟t quote all of it, but I would like to read two or three excerpts from it: 

 

“The Canadian Wheat Board, as the parliamentary secretary has said appeared before the agricultural 

committee a year ago, but the Canadian Wheat Board very strongly protested the very policy that has 

been annunciated today. This policy will weaken beyond question the quota regulations that have been 

provided by the Wheat Board.” 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

4 

 

Further on it says: 

 

“What will happen now is that it will be legal for feed grain mills to go out and buy grain from 

producers within that province, at as low a price as they can obtain it. This means under-cutting of the 

Wheat Board price. This means lower prices to the grain producers, and I‟m afraid that it‟s just the 

thin edge of the wedge in the undermining and destroying of the quota system that has been built up 

over the years.” 

 

In regard to the Saskatchewan Grain Marketing Control Act, that was passed by this Government, and 

for which our Provincial Minister of Agriculture worked hard, and Saskatchewan was the first province 

to pass it, I think it was quite a bit through his persuasive ability that Manitoba and Alberta also passed 

complementary legislation. What happens now? Suddenly the Wheat Board, by the authority of the 

House of Commons announces this change without asking the Provincial Governments to change their 

legislation, and the Minister of Agriculture tells me that we have not been requested to change this 

legislation as yet. 

 

I would like to deal, Mr. Speaker, for just a moment on who has opposed this and who has fought for it. 

First of all amongst the organizations that opposed this was the Farmers Union of Western Canada. I 

have here a submission to the Standing Committee on Agriculture and Colonization by the 

Inter-provincial Farm Union Council, dated May 13th, 1960. I would just like to read in part. 

 

Farm Unions were discussing the brief that had been presented to the committee by the feed 

manufacturers trading section of the Winnipeg Chamber of Commerce. Farm Unions have this to say: 

 

“The three provincial divisions of the Canadian Manufacturing Association who submit this 

presentation, now firmly request that existing regulations, whether statutory or administrative, be 

amended so as to permit feed manufacturers or processors of feed grain to purchase feed grains 

directly from the producers, free of quota restrictions, and at prevailing prices on a basis of supply and 

demand for processing and resale within the provinces in which the grain is grown. When questioned 

on the manner on which 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

5 

 

they would decide on the price to be paid for grain, which they proposed to purchase direct from 

producers, we were only able to get an answer that they wished to purchase at „competitive prices‟. 

The only conclusion that we could come to was that these people desired to create a situation which 

would exploit conditions of surplus grain supplies, and have producers competing with one another for 

sales at any price. 

 

We submit that this is not a desirable circumstance. This committee is aware that farmers of western 

Canada, rather than asking for lower prices for their grain, have been seeking to persuade 

Governments to give them a higher price. We have in fact requested that the price of wheat going into 

domestic consumption in Canada should be higher than for export. It seems entirely illogical, 

therefore, that feed mills should purchase grain cheaper than we sell it to our export customers. 

 

Then the Farmers Union, further on in summing up say this: 

 

“We do not believe that any purpose would be served by relaxing Canadian Wheat Board quota 

regulations. Rather it should be the purpose of the Wheat Board to enforce present quota regulations.” 

 

Then in a brief made by the Saskatchewan Farmers Union to the Government of Saskatchewan, on 

January 16th, 1961, they deal with one paragraph on this same subject. Under the heading of the 

Canadian Wheat Board they say: 

 

“We are greatly disturbed by the recently ordered exemption of the western feed mills from the quota 

and price and regulations of the Canadian Wheat Board, permitting western feed mills to buy wheat, 

oats and barley for processing into commercial feed, directly from producers at negotiated prices 

which are considerably below Wheat Board prices. We consider these regulations as fundamental to 

the whole system of orderly marketing for western grains. We trust that your Government will 

maintain present provincial legislation designating the Canadian Wheat Board as the sole marketing 

agency for western grains.” 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

6 

 

Now, there has been some misconception, some statements have been made as to where the Western 

Conference and the Federation of Agriculture stood. Again, I am quoting from the official mouthpiece 

of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, on the editorial page of “Western Producer”, February 23rd, 1961, 

they say in part: 

 

“The truth, of course, is that the Western Agricultural Conference did not support the new regulations. 

It voted down a resolution calling for immediate action to bring about the rescinding of the order. It 

faced up to the fact, Agricultural Minister Hamilton has stated in no uncertain terms, that the new 

regulations will be enforced on a trial basis until the end of the crop year July 31st, 1961, and passed a 

resolution which charges every member organization of the Western Conference to maintain a watch, 

and be prepared to recommend changes that may seem desirable at the end of the year.” 

 

Further on it says: 

 

“Mr. Hamilton was in error when he remarked the other day that most farm organizations were in 

favour of the change.” 

 

Then, another Saskatchewan organization that has opposed this change is the Federated Co-ops, and 

again, I wasn‟t there, but those who were delegates at the annual meeting of Federated in January will 

tell you that Mr. Wilson who is the head of Federated Feed Plant who had apparently supported this 

brief was raked over the coals. But, certainly during that convention the delegates at the annual meeting 

passed a motion proposing changes to the new regulation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in closing, I just want to point out what I think are the reasons that we should support 

this motion. I think one reason is that you will see there has been a downward trend in prices that the 

feed mills are paying in Saskatchewan. I have here a quotation from the Regina “Leader-Post,” February 

28th, dealing with this subject. It said that: 

 

“Mr. Hamilton says that it is true in general across the prairie provinces that there had been no 

decrease in price, except for certain areas like Regina, Moose Jaw, and Saskatoon.” 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

7 

 

I submit, that they are the three main centres of this province, and we, I think should look at this very 

closely. Then the paper quotes the Saskatoon mill prices: No. 5 Wheat was paying 80¢: — the feed mills 

were paying, where the market price on that day was 90½¢ — they were paying 55¢ for barley, the 

market price that day was 71 7/8ths ¢. 

 

Last week I was talking to Mr. Gleave the president of the Farmers Union, and he said he had checked 

last week, and that No. 5 or better was selling in Saskatoon at 85¢ instead of 90¼¢ . I noticed what Mr. 

Gleave had said — No. 5 or better. There is very little No. 5 wheat in the country; there were probably 

some farmers who were selling No. 3 and No. 2 wheat at the fine price of 85¢. 

 

Another thing I think we should worry about is that although presently the trade between feed mills and 

the farmer is restricted to a provincial basis, I feel that this might be a step inside the door, as it were, 

where it won‟t be long before some feed mill say in Manitoba, might make a deal with a farmer in 

Regina. That is what they‟ll be pressing for, and trying to get legislation for, in my mind. Then they‟ll be 

able to buy wheat out of the province, and again pressure the price down. 

 

But, most of all Mr. Speaker, I feel that this is the foot in the door, this may be the first step in 

endeavouring to break down the orderly marketing that the farmers of western Canada have struggled 

for over fifty years of more. It is interesting to know too, who are the Canadian Feed Manufacturers 

Association of western Canada. I have here a brief that was presented to the Agricultural Committee by 

the Alberta division and the Manitoba division and the Saskatchewan division, and I‟m not going to 

burden you with all the memberships in those three organizations. Looking down over the regional 

members, there is Canada Packers, the Early Seed and Feed, Intercontinental Packers, the McCabe Grain 

Co., United Grain Growers Co., the Ogilvie Mills Co., the Quaker Oats, and so on down the line. It 

seems to me that this list of companies is a sign that it is not the farmers who would ask for this. I am 

personally convinced that this was a detrimental move that was made last November when the Wheat 

Board made these regulations. 

 

For these reasons I hope this resolution gets full support by Members of this House. 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

8 

 

Hon Olaf A. Turnbull (Minister of Co-operation and Co-operative Development): — Mr. Speaker, 

before the vote, I would like to comment on the motion. I had hoped to see the Opposition make some 

sort of a stand on this issue, but they‟ve been rather busy in silence, and I don‟t know whether this 

means that they are or are not in favour, but of course, when they vote, we‟ll find this out. 

 

The one point that I‟d like to make on this policy of releasing the feed mills, is the way in which it has 

been done so that they can scalp off any farmer that may have some surplus grains. This, to me, 

indicates not only as Mr. Meakes has said, a backward step, but it represents a flaw in the fundamental 

approach to the whole question of agricultural policy. I have endeavoured to put to this House before, 

that the approach to the agricultural problem must be on three fronts, and that is production and pricing 

and marketing. Our Federal Governments up to this point have been unable to move past this one point 

of greater efficiency in production. By concentrating on greater efficiency in production, apparently they 

believe that they can solve the problems that lie at the foot of the agricultural industry. 

 

We, for our part, have endeavoured from time to time to put the point forward that this will not solve the 

basic problems that lie within the agricultural industry, and the effect of this feed mill regulation is 

simply to transfer the assets of the grain producers into the hands of the larger feed operators. I am not 

talking about the feed mills now, Mr. Speaker, I am talking about the individuals who by one means or 

another have been able to establish a rather large and significant feeder operation. 

 

There are some substantial types of operations in this province, Mr. Speaker, and some of them are 

running herds of up to about 1,000 head. Now it is these people who are going to benefit in the main, 

other than the mills themselves, from this type of a policy. The average farmer will not benefit in any 

way particularly, because he in the main will feed his own grain that he raises. I do believe, therefore, 

that what this policy has done is to let the mills first of all capitalize on a particular situation, and it has 

played directly into the larger feeder operators that are in western Canada. 

 

Now you might argue that this is a desirable step from the point of view of integration, and 

diversification 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

9 

 

I don‟t believe that this is necessarily so. If you are going to diversify I think you have to be very careful 

on two fronts, and that is first of all, the rate at which you diversify, and second, that most farmers may 

have an opportunity to have some diversification. Now, once you get into the new modern factory type 

of production, particularly if it is integrated with a feed mill, I do not believe, that the average farmer is 

going to stand much of a chance, anymore than the average person who is raising eggs can stand up 

against the integrated egg producer who by his connections with the private trade and by methods of 

financing is able to establish an egg producing plant of 20,000 or 30,000 hens and produce hundreds of 

thousands of dozens of eggs each year. 

 

Basically this goes back to one question again. What type of an agricultural economy should we have in 

this nation? This is the fundamental issue that interested me. There are two types that we can move 

towards. It is either that we attempt to maintain the family-farm type of operation, and by this I mean the 

type of a unit where the management is provided by the farmer-owner, where most of the labour is 

provided by the farmer-owner, where the capital is controlled by the farmer-owner, and the 

decision-making process is in the hands of the man who is operating the plant, or towards the factory 

farm. We can either have the family type of an agricultural economy, which is a diversified type of an 

industry, thinking of terms of where the units are located, or else we can move into a highly centralized 

and highly integrated type of an agricultural economy of which I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, this feed 

mill policy is a part. It seems to me that this type of an approach is a move away from the family-farm 

type of economy and more into the factory-farm type of production. If we continue to move in this 

direction, I think we will be successful in producing large volumes of food, there is no question of this. I 

am not suggesting to you that we can produce them any more efficiently nor in any greater volume, 

however, than the family-farm unit, I am not aware of that point at all. One thing I am perfectly sure of, 

and that is most of the agricultural income is going to fall into the hands of relatively few of the 

operators, as we progress towards the factory-farm type unit. It seems to me, by following this type of 

policy, that the Federal Government is now proposing to us, that we can have large segments of our 

agricultural economy on a subsistence basis, where the farmers` levels of income will be low, where the 

amount 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

10 

 

of capital they control is low, and where they will subsist mainly in terms of what they can grow on their 

farms, and what family allowance may be coming in, and by what other off-farm income they may earn. 

It is this type of an agricultural economy that I think is undesirable for ourselves as a nation, undesirable 

for Canada, I don‟t think it will be any better for the consumer when the thing finally runs through, Mr. 

Speaker, because, if the control of food production falls into the hands of the large integrated operators, 

whether they be the men who are on the production side or the distribution side, I think ultimately the 

consumer will then be put in the position where he will be forced to pay a much higher price for no 

better quality of product than the family-farm type of unit can produce. 

 

Therefore, I for one, am wholeheartedly in favour of the resolution, and absolutely opposed to the type 

of policy which benefits only the larger operator, whether he be a feed mill operator, or just simply the 

larger farmer. This to me is a backward step, it will do nothing for the consumer; it will do nothing for 

our agricultural industry as a whole. 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that no one else is going to 

participate in the debate, but I think I ought to make reference to some of the aspects and circumstances 

under which the enabling legislation was passed by this House. As everyone knows, the Federal 

Government has stated to us that in order to make it possible to bring coarse grains under the Wheat 

Board, all three prairie governments would have to pass complementary legislation. The farm 

organizations approached their respective Provincial Governments in an endeavour to have them pass 

the complementary legislation. The Alberta Government was reluctant to do so, and refused the 

representations of the farm organizations. Similarly the Government of Manitoba refused. Subsequently 

there were two conferences held in Regina between the Premiers of the adjoining provinces and some of 

the Cabinet Ministers and our own Premier and myself here in Regina with the farm organizations. They 

were very determined that the respective Provincial Governments ought to pass this legislation. 

 

I‟ve seen a good deal of squirming in my day, Mr. Speaker, but I never saw the type of squirming that 

took place at this conference, on the part of the Provincial Social Credit Government representatives 

from Alberta, and the Liberal-Conservative representatives 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

11 

 

from the province of Manitoba. I remember Premier Campbell, at the conference was very hesitant, and 

I still remember the farm organization representatives saying to them, “We want this, and we have 

changed Governments before and we can do it again.” And, it was under those circumstances, Mr. 

Speaker, that the legislation was finally agreed to in the Province of Alberta, but in the Province of 

Manitoba they decided to have a plebiscite. But the farmers there overwhelmingly supported the 

principle of complementary provincial legislation to bring coarse grains under the jurisdiction of the 

Wheat Board by an overwhelming majority, if I remember correctly something in the neighbourhood of 

75%, which is a wonderfully conclusive vote. 

 

Now, this Legislature passed this legislation as I recall, unanimously. When the recent move was made 

by the Federal Government, we were not consulted in that matter, whatever. We were not consulted as to 

what the problems were that might be involved, if any, before the exemptions were made. It should be 

understood that they were made on a trial basis, but it is my understanding that the province of Manitoba 

will be required to amend their legislation, and possibly the province of Alberta. We will not be required 

to amend our legislation here. But, if the legislation is amended in the provinces of Alberta and 

Manitoba, it is going to be very difficult at the next Sessions of their Legislatures to have the 

amendment repealed again, if the trial period doesn‟t work out. So it is in regard to this particular aspect 

that the farm organizations feel that this is a danger and a threat to the Wheat Board system of 

marketing. 

 

In principle, I‟m convinced that you either have a marketing plan, or you don‟t have a marketing plan. 

Either all of the farmer‟s products ought to be marketed through that plan in order to assure a stable 

price, and also in the case of the Wheat Board, in order to afford equitable marketing opportunities at 

that price. Both of these conditions have been removed as a result of the Federal Government‟s action, 

and I must agree with the hon. Minister for Co-operation, that this will not only favour the large milling 

concerns but the large feed lot operators. This will not in any benefit the small livestock producer. In 

fact he will be put at a disadvantage in competing with the large feed lot operators that find themselves 

conveniently located to a feed mill. 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

12 

 

People can talk about price as they wish, the facts are, and I have evidence by correspondence, that 

farmers have sold their grain far below Wheat Board prices. This is inevitable under the operation of this 

so-called free enterprise law of supply and demand. We‟ve had a surplus of coarse grains, and we will 

continue to have a surplus, and farmers will endeavour to get rid of that grain at most any price to get 

cash to meet pressing obligations. This is the free enterprise system of marketing that the farm 

organizations wanted to get away from when they asked the Federal Government and their respective 

prairie governments to provide the necessary legislation that would make it possible for bringing coarse 

grains under the Wheat Board. Now by one fell swoop, the Federal Government has ignored the 

expressed viewpoint of this Assembly as a result of the passage of the legislation by this House, and has 

to a great extent made ineffective the intended purpose of the legislation by this Legislature in the 

Session, I believe it was of 1949. 

 

I thought hon. Members ought to be brought up to date on these points. I think this was an affront on the 

part of the Federal Government, in that they did not consult us before taking this action. Now, there may 

have been problems, and this motion makes it clear, that even though we believe that all coarse grains 

ought to be marketed to the feed mills, that if there are any problems then we ought to sit down and 

discuss them with the federal authorities and work out what I consider would be a more practical answer 

to any problem that may have been involved. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I had not intended to take part in this discussion, 

but because large feed lots have been referred to, and I happen to be associated with one of them, I think 

the record should be made clear that as far as our operation is concerned, it makes absolutely no 

difference to us whether we must buy our grain through the Wheat Board or not. As a matter of fact all 

of our grain is processed on the property and as a matter of fact we do custom work for farmers as well. 

If they deliver their grain to us, we process it for a set price per bushel, and they can take it home and 

feed it to their own cattle. 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

13 

 

In addition to that, I think some Members and perhaps the Minister of Co-operatives has a 

misinterpretation of what is going on in some of these larger feed operations in the province. It is not 

easy for every farmer to provide himself with the necessary facilities to feed cattle, hogs, sheep, or any 

other livestock competitively today. It has been the experience of many farmers that if they take the 

advantage that is now being made available to them of feeding their own grain to their own livestock in 

a custom feed lot, in many instances they find that the profits are greater. Because an operation is large, 

it does not necessarily mean that all of the profits of that operation are going to one or two or half a 

dozen individuals. In many cases, and I know of one very large operation in the province of Alberta 

where they are feeding approximately 3500 head at the moment, the people who own the feed lot do not 

own any of the cattle. The cattle belong to small ranchers and small farmers scattered throughout the 

province of Alberta. I want to repeat that they have, through experience, learned that there is greater 

profit for them to combine their efforts and to come up with a joint enterprise than to endeavour to build 

small set-ups on each local farm. 

 

It is quite true that there have been some complaints, and I think all of us have heard it from time to 

time, with regard to the marketing of all grains through the Wheat Board. I see nothing wrong with the 

resolution in that this resolution gives those people concerned the opportunity to present their case to the 

Federal Government and the governments of the prairie provinces, the Provincial Governments, to sit 

down and to thrash out these particular problems. I thin it is a good resolution and as far as I know, the 

Minister of Agriculture‟s statement is absolutely correct, that this legislation was brought into being 

without consultation with Provincial Governments concerned, and I think consultation should have been 

held, but now all this resolution asks is that at the end of this trial period this program be discontinued 

and if there are people who feel that there could be changes made to benefit agriculture in general, then 

those people would have the opportunity to sit down with the Governments concerned, provincial and 

federal, and endeavour to work out a solution that would be satisfactory to all. 

 

As far as I‟m concerned I would be perfectly happy to support this resolution, and I think my colleagues 

will. Because, apart from feeding a little grain through livestock, we still have quite a lot to 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

14 

 

sell, and I, like most farmers, like to get all I can for it, and sometimes one is tempted to sell his grains a 

little cheaper in order to dispose of it, but I suppose in the long run that has a depressing effect on the 

market. For those reasons I would be more than happy to support it and I am sure my colleagues will as 

well. 

 

Hon Mr. Turnbull: — I was fully aware of this type of operation, and I would like to know what your 

area of operations is, what is the maximum haul that these farmers can bring their cattle in and still 

compete 

 

Mr. McDonald: — One hundred and fifty miles or so. 

 

Mr. Douglas T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to take up too 

much time of the House at present on this subject. However, I suggest, this is one subject and one topic 

wherein a person can do a great deal of research. The more research you do on this topic, the more 

organizations and the more farmers you contact, you find that everyone realizes the difference of 

opinions of the people in the provinces concerned. I think that what the hon. Members across the way 

this afternoon have forgotten most of all is the trend and the pattern of livestock feeding in this province, 

insofar as future programmes are concerned. I think we all must realize, whether we want to or not, 

whether we are large-scale operators or whether we operate on the family farm basis, the trend in the 

future is going to be more and more toward the use of prepared livestock feeds. I believe that this has 

been borne out, and has been demonstrated, to us by the results of feeding programs, not by large 

corporations but by individual farmers, and I can best indicate results of this to you by the fact that the 

annual milk and butterfat production of dairy cattle has increased tremendously, not only over the past 

fifty years, but over the past five years. Each year more and more new world production records are 

being set by dairy cows. Year after year more production records are being set by poultry raisers, and 

hog raisers are getting their hogs on to the market at market weights, taking fewer and fewer pounds of 

feed per pound of gain and even this winter some of my neighbors haven been able to finish off feeder 

steers using prepared mill feeds with anti-biotics and supplements along with their grain attaining a 

weight gain of about three lbs. a day. Thus not only to the farmers 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

15 

 

on large scale operations but also to the farmers on smaller scale operations mill prepared feeds are 

becoming very important in regard to the livestock feeding program. 

 

Another point that has not been mentioned or discussed this afternoon is the request of some of the grain 

companies for action of the type referred to in the federal Order in Council. Not that they were trying to 

ruin the principle of the Wheat Board marketing, but to try and have ironed out some of the 

discrepancies that have taken place up to the present time. And I would indicate that the eldest and 

first-established, farmer-controlled grain company in western Canada submitted a brief to the Federal 

Government asking that something be done to correct these inequalities. I think that what is being 

missed by the hon. Members on the opposite side of the House is the definition of a feed mill as 

designated by the Wheat Board Act. Any company who is in business, such as elevator companies, must 

buy the feed grain at wheat board prices, and in turn, they must abide by the regulations of the Wheat 

Board Act. But the independent feed mill operator can buy his grain, not at wheat board prices, but he 

can buy it cheaper if he can get it cheaper or he can buy it at higher prices, if he cares to do so. But he 

doesn‟t have to comply, as a feed company, under the provision of the Wheat Board Act. 

 

I think that possibly one of the reasons why this type of federal legislation was brought in was because 

of the request of some of our farmer-owned and operated elevator companies, because of the inequalities 

involved. The fact that the Members opposite only pointed out two organizations in favour of this type 

of resolution doesn‟t indicate the general feeling in the country. Because, in all sincerity, there can be 

justifiable differences of opinion. We must admit that some of the livestock associations seem to be, at 

the present time, in favour of the regulation. Elevator companies, the one in Alberta and the one in 

Saskatchewan, plus the different livestock organizations as well. And I think that the farmers are going 

to use more and more of this type of feed - - - 

 

Mr. Kramer: —  . . . he gets too far from order. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: —  . . . because of the fact that the feed mills can buy anti-biotics and supplements in 

bulk much cheaper than the individual can because of volume, and can buy the necessary equipment to 

properly mix the formulated feeds cheaper than an individual can. I know of an instance where a farm 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

16 

 

unit has been showing and winning the grand championships at the local feeder shows year after year 

after year. Their coarse grain is sent to be milled to a feed mill and brought back to the farm in the form 

of prepared feed. This grain is processed and brought back to the farmer and done cheaper than they, the 

operators, can buy the protein, mineral and vitamin supplements and anti-biotics and mix them at home. 

So I suggest that these are all factors, to be perfectly honest, that we ought to be looking at in the 

interests of the people of the province. We must assess all those conditions, see what is going to be in 

their best interests in the year under review, and then I think we could support this motion. And if we are 

willing to sit down at the end of the year, taking all these factors into consideration, then I think we will 

be prepared to recommend to the proper authorities, or to the Wheat Board, what we think could be done 

and what we think should be done to make the situation more fair to all concerned and give to the 

individuals, regardless of whether they operate on a large scale or on a smaller scale, the benefits of any 

policy that we think would help. Because, after all, we must realize that only two-thirds of our grain 

produced annually is being disposed of by the Wheat Board principle of marketing. But figures indicate 

in the three prairie provinces alone there are still not sufficient markets for certain grains, and grades of 

grains, produced by the farmer. 

 

Farming as I am, if I can fill my quota of coarse grains and my quota of wheat and have extra grain left 

over which I am unable to market and I want to turn that extra grain into a more profitable form of feed 

thereby increasing the disposition of grain as the net result, this, I think, is my personal business. 

 

I am convinced that given favourable conditions we could still produce more grain than the farmers are 

able to dispose of and so I think that there is a great deal of room for discussion on the subject; and a 

subject about which we are going to have to take a serious and hard look at in the future. 

 

I will support this motion only because of the fact that perhaps at the end of the year we will all be 

prepared to sit down and try and work out improvements or assess conditions at this point to see that we 

are working to the benefit of those directly concerned. So for these reasons I will support the motion. 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

17 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Co-operation asked a question a 

moment ago and I didn‟t give him the right answer. I gave him the figure of one hundred and fifty miles, 

I should have given the figure of three hundred and fifty miles. We have some cattle from about three 

hundred and fifty miles. 

 

Hon Mr. Turnbull: — I wonder if I could have a subsequent question to that one. On what margin do 

you charge the feeding, because transportation will run you 1¢ for a hundred miles, alright, a seven 

hundred pound animal — three hundred feeder — $6.00 both ways — three hundred miles $18.00 — 

well I don‟t know where your margin is left over. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Well what happens is cattle move from west to east to the market, and fortunately 

our operation is east of the large ranches in western Canada, and the cattle are brought that far, and then 

when they are finished, of course, they don‟t go back west they go on east. It goes to the market in either 

Winnipeg or Ontario. 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — I would like to ask the hon. Member for Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley if 

he sees any reason why the independent feed mill could not be an agent of the Canadian Wheat Board? 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — It is not for me to decide. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Certainly this should have been done a long time ago. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to. 

 

NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mrs. Strum regarding nuclear 

disarmament. 

 

Hon. Mr. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, when I began speaking on this 

motion, before I adjourned it, I was unaware that I was 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

18 

 

inviting a potential danger perhaps not quite equal to an atomic explosion, but certainly a danger that all 

men dread. I did not realize that I would incur the wrath of the hon. lady Member for Saskatoon who 

was so well prepared for, and momentarily deterred from closing the debate. All of which goes to prove, 

Mr. Speaker, that the dangers of retaliatory action are not a deterrent to what people or nations might do 

under certain circumstances. 

 

When I adjourned the debate on this motion, I mentioned that I had not expected to participate in this 

debate, however, in conscience I felt duty bound to give my contribution to the debate on this motion, 

because I sincerely believe that this major problem transcends all other problems facing humanity 

throughout the world. Unless nations, regardless of race, color, political, or spiritual philosophy, 

collectively renounce violence as a means of settling international differences, there is little hope for 

human survival. Everyone agrees with this, but few are prepared to lay aside their carefully cultivated 

suspicions, fears, and prejudices in order to achieve this worthy objective. 

 

The real issue is often lost sight of in the flurry of cross accusations. I often feel that those who engage 

in this unworthy and now dangerous sport might give heed to the simple warning contained n the 

Testament. “Let he who is without sin, cast the first stone.” 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that the future destiny of all mankind hangs in the balance. We will either 

have a wonderful new world providing opportunity to mankind for still greater achievements, materially, 

intellectually, and spiritually, or we face almost certain doom. It is this, Mr. Speaker, that makes the past 

concepts of defence difference from what our concepts ought to be today. 

 

I noted a T.V. program the other evening, maybe some of the hon. Members looked at it. It‟s a program 

put on by the Prudential Life Insurance Company, “Twentieth Century”, and in this program they 

depicted the new and powerful weapon that had been successfully launched, called the Minute-Man. It is 

a solid fuel weapon, and it illustrated too, that these weapons could be dispersed underground, in what 

they term “silos,” throughout the United States, and that these weapons could be conveyed by rail from 

point to point in the United States and 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

19 

 

launched from a railroad carriage as well. A good deal of the technical aspects involved were explained 

in brief on this program, but the thing that impressed me more than anything else was that here one great 

nation, and perhaps similarly another great nation, is preparing mass death on a large scale, and all of 

these stations are linked together by communications to the point, Mr. Speaker, that one dreads the 

possibility of war not by deliberate action, but war by accident. This can very easily happen. 

 

It is hard for me to comprehend the minds of people who will not protest this type of defence in the kind 

of world we live in. They still talk about 1939. They still talk about 1914. Yes, we were unprepared for 

war, it is true, we were unprepared, but happily, Mr. Speaker, we won. We won, because we hadn‟t 

dissipated all our resources in mighty prior military efforts, as our opponents had. We won, and I think 

too, perhaps, there was something to the majesty of having right on our side in this issue. 

 

But all of this has now been changed. There is no more survival. There is no more defence. In those days 

wars, as we believe, were fought because of rugged competition between nations. The next war that we 

speak of is an ideological war, and I will defy anyone to draw a bead on an idea. You can‟t shoot it; you 

can‟t see it. But still, we propose to meet this challenge on a huge modern military scale. I cannot agree 

with this point of view. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, and I wish to draw the attention of the House to the fact that the nations 

attending the recent Commonwealth Conference went on record as in favour of disarmament. Everyone 

agrees with this today. Everyone sees the potential dangers in the present situation. I noticed, Mr. 

Speaker, that some of the previous speakers in this debate stated some of the reasons why we ought to 

continue as we‟re going, to ultimate destruction. One of the reasons was we can‟t trust the other side. 

 

Well, this is not a new reason. This reason has been advanced since the dawn of history, where people 

had differences. Obviously people will not trust their enemy until you can somehow reconcile the 

differences of opinion, or the apparent differences of opinion between enemies. We have this same 

feeling emerge in this House occasionally, when people get so wrought in temper that they feel they 

can‟t trust anyone anymore. But a few words in exchange of viewpoints in the corridor usually dissipate 

any suspicions and fears that we‟ve had. And 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

20 

 

nations are not any different than people. 

 

I can see the hon. Member for Humboldt smiling, but I hope what I have to say will at least to some 

extent illustrate what perhaps is close to her line of thinking on a very important subject. 

 

I also noticed some conflict in the opinions expressed by other Members. The hon. Member for 

Moosomin stated that he supported the proposal, that China should be admitted to the United Nations, as 

he put it, to bring China under the rule of law. Everyone is in agreement with this too. Now, the hon. 

Member for Souris-Estevan, however, took exception. He took the viewpoint that the admission of 

China to the U.N. would not be a move towards peace. Certainly it wouldn‟t be a move towards war, but 

the practical facts are that here is a nation of 600 million people that can not long remain isolated 

without growing danger. At some stage these 600 million people have a right to representation in the 

councils of nations of the world, and this they can‟t be denied. Whether we agree with their philosophy 

or not, and the best way to drive them in a contrary direction, which we consider to be evil, is to try to 

isolate them. This is impractical and it‟s impossible, Mr. Speaker. It is for that reason that the United 

Kingdom and Canada have taken some leadership in this regard. 

 

I don‟t know why the United States opposes this, unless they have set themselves up as being the 

guardians and protectors of all other people. I think this too, is a right that belongs to the United Nations, 

and this is a power and authority that ought to be vested only in the United Nations, if we‟re going to 

have a United Nations that is strong and effective. 

 

The hon. Member for Souris-Estevan stated that we should not ally ourselves to peace fronts, and the 

obvious reason given was that to do so is promoting the interests of the Communists who, he says, are 

deliberately setting out in a plan of propaganda that would make us weak by becoming defenceless. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I am inclined to think that human beings are pretty much the same, no matter where 

they live or under what ideology they live, certainly no one wants to be atomized. We all have this fear 

of death, and the desire for survival. This is part of human nature, and I think that they are just as much 

afraid as we are, and it is this fear and suspicion, unrestrained and encouraged fear and suspicion that is 

driving us to the very thing that we are all afraid of, Mr. Speaker. 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

21 

 

I am trying to be logical in my arguments. I‟m trying to be logical; two and two make four, but the hon. 

Member for Humboldt would have them make five. I‟ll have a few more things to say to her. I hold to 

the same religious persuasion. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — I would like to draw your attention to the fact that I haven‟t been drawn into this 

debate. I haven‟t spoken on this at all. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, a lady doesn‟t need to speak, her smiles and her laugh will tell you a 

lot more than words. I‟ve learned that by sad experience over the years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I must draw the hon. Member‟s attention to the fact that I cannot give a ruling 

on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — What I‟m trying to point out is that the reasons advanced for continuation of 

nuclear armament are not valid reasons anymore. We are told that Russia is out for world domination, in 

terms of ideology particularly, and that co-existence on a peaceful basis would be to her advantage. Mr. 

Speaker, I don‟t want to admit that. I will never want to admit defeat by saying that we are unable 

successfully to compete with Soviet ideology in a peaceful atmosphere. It is in this particular direction 

that I think we‟re going to be successful. We can‟t achieve our objective through war, there is therefore 

only one alternative left, and it is for that reason that I stated at the outset, that we cannot hope to find a 

solution in war, that we can only hope to find a solution in peace. 

 

The other fact is, Mr. Speaker, we at one time enjoyed complete domination in terms of nuclear power. 

Since then, as everyone knows, the Soviet Union has caught up, in fact they put vehicles of greater 

tonnage into space requiring greater power than we do. We must accept the fact that they have similar 

striking power. We were the first to adopt the policy of containment by military force, by military effort, 

and I submit it hasn‟t worked. Communism continues to spread. More and more people fall under this 

influence. People who view us and our activities here, and who are ready to appraise the workings of our 

own democracy in terms of the greatest good to the greatest numbers and also to appraise our sincerity 

or otherwise, in trying to help them to 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

22 

 

better their circumstances. It is not good enough, Mr. Speaker, to help other nations, because we‟re 

afraid of Communism. When we do so on this basis we merely adapt our fears against Communism as 

the reason for feeding hungry people. Well, hungry people are intelligent, and they can very well 

appreciate this deception. 

 

I am arguing that we must be absolutely sincere in our motives. I think that the day has long gone when 

one can get rid of the devil by cussing the devil, or that we can make people better by constantly talking 

about the devil and his evils. We must talk about good things to make the people better, and certainly 

you cannot meet an evil by a counter-evil. It can‟t be done. You can‟t change a wicked man by 

threatening him with some retaliatory measure as a punishment. You make people good by your own 

example, and also by your relationships with them. If we do that, sincerely and honestly, we need have 

no fear. 

 

The hon. Member for Gravelbourg stated that we now have all the more reason for military deterrents, 

and his reason was this — that if we did not have this terrible deterrent force, a deterrent force far 

beyond the deterrent force of our adversary, that we would not survive to do good. Well, he‟s 

forecasting a long time ahead and I must agree. Personally I would rather live to do good than to use a 

deterrent that is going to destroy my adversary and myself in the process. He mentioned fighting fire 

with fire, but I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that we‟re not playing just with fire under modern circumstances; 

we‟re talking about life and death for all humanity. 

 

The view I am expressing are the patriotic views of sound, reasonable, and intelligent people and are 

well accepted by millions of people throughout the world who have great concern regarding the future 

and present trends in world affairs. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that a reasoned and sensible approach to these matters has for some reason 

been held up as being unpatriotic, or the people who express this viewpoint are somehow associated 

with the other side. Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve given some reasons why this isn‟t correct. As far as I am 

concerned, I want to align myself clearly on the side of conscience and reason in order that we might 

avoid mutual destruction. 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

23 

 

The hon. Member for Gravelbourg said we could not help underprivileged people if we were destroyed. 

I mentioned that already. This is quite correct, and this is the reason that I think a new approach to these 

problems is necessary, and above all a more constructive rather than negative approach. 

 

The simple facts are no one can win the next war. Above all else, you cannot restrict a bad idea or 

promote a good one by using atomic bombs or any other weapons. There is no target for these weapons 

other than human targets by the millions, and these millions of God-created people, to my mind, 

represent humanity‟s and God‟s hope for the future. We have no right, Mr. Speaker, to assume unto 

ourselves the powers that all of us agree rest with Divine Providence alone. I have confidence, Mr. 

Speaker, that since Divine Providence has presided over the destiny of man since the dawn of creation, 

he will continue to do so in the future. 

 

This is not the first time that the world has been torn to pieces by conflicting ideology under which 

people were prepared to destroy one another. It is not many years ago, Mr. Speaker, when Christians 

were at one another, and very recently indeed. And, when the so-called Infidels overran Europe, and 

when the Romans put the first Christians to death, and why? Because, these Christians believed in a 

Gospel of human love, and human brotherhood, and the Romans didn‟t believe in that. They believed in 

settling issues by strife, by violence. They didn‟t like these kind of people so they put them to death, and 

never in the history of Christendom was Christianity at a higher level than in that period, and under 

those circumstances, and it survived. The ideals and philosophies of Christianity survived wars, survived 

corrupting influences for centuries, and it is here to-day for man‟s continued guidance and survival. 

 

It seems, Mr. Speaker, therefore, that we have no choice other than to provide constructive and reasoned 

alternative deterrents. I don‟t want to admit that we of the Christian belief are unable to compete with 

Communism, on the basis of peaceful co-existence. To say we can‟t do so is in fact a sign of weakness. 

Surely, we have enough faith in our way of life and the principles for which we stand to put them to the 

test. If we wish to put this question on the basis of winning over communism, we can better win the 

fight, as I said, in peace rather than in war, and the weapons will not 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

24 

 

be military. All arguments for military instruments of defence are predicated on the fact that war is 

inevitable, unavoidable, and that this is the only weapon of defence against the spread of Communism. 

With this, in my remarks, I take issue Mr. Speaker. As I have mentioned there are other weapons that we 

haven‟t as yet considered. The fact is, as I mentioned before, we are losing on this basis. It is time, I 

think, that we consider a new approach to these problems. 

 

I can recall, Mr. Speaker, during the last World War, and previous to it we were told that the Japanese 

were atheists steeped in emperor-worship, sun-worship, and that they committed hari-kari as a way out, 

and we also ridiculed the Japanese militarists for glorifying hari-kari as a normal way out of shame and 

disgrace, and that this was the highest expression of patriotism to country and loyalty to the Emperor. 

We held to the view that this ideology was unchristian, that we should not sit in judgment on ourselves 

to the extent of taking our own life, that this was God‟s prerogative, that this was suicide, because in our 

belief God created life, and only he could pass judgment on matters of life and death. 

 

Imagine someone saying, Mr. Speaker, “I hate so and so‟s ideals so much, that I am prepared to use 

violence to get rid of him, and his ideas, even if it means getting rid of myself as well in the process.” 

This is almost what we‟re asking our people to do. We‟re asking them, that in the hope of survival they 

crawl in a little hole in the ground, and close their eyes, hoping that they will be the fortunate ones to 

escape. I think scientists have pretty well disapproved any possibility of escape, shortly after, or for any 

great length of time after. Everyone is concerned now with radiation effects throughout the world as a 

result of the tests. All we need to do is wake up to the fact that if an actual war took place, an atomic 

war, then what would the situation be in terms of radioactivity. This is the kind of future that is in 

prospect, Mr. Speaker, for humanity. We must have something more hopeful than this. 

 

I think that there are millions of people throughout the world who believe that we can find answers to 

the problems. You and I, Mr. Speaker, and indeed all people who still have faith in the golden rule of 

Christianity as a way out, should have the moral courage to put our beliefs into practice in a positive and 

very 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

25 

 

practical manner. Of course, I mentioned that a good deal would depend on our approach. If we are 

prepared as a nation to sincerely assist the underdeveloped countries in achieving a higher living 

standard, we will not only be doing ourselves a favour, we will be doing all humanity a favour, and 

certainly at the same time we must make democracy work at home in justice and equity to all our people 

within our own realm of jurisdiction, and thus prove conclusively that these principles of democracy and 

our entire philosophy and outlook on humanity is something that can be trusted and depended upon. I 

think it is on this basis, Mr. Speaker, that we must find an answer to the terrible calamity that is in the 

offing. 

 

Determined and constructive measures must be taken to stop these trends. I submit that the greatest 

deterrent we can muster would be to first of all, allay fear and suspicion, and then without saying we 

can‟t come to any agreement on disarmament, because we can‟t trust you, and for other similar reasons, 

but it is a must, and we should not argue over the technicalities of inspection and implementation etc. 

The first thing is to agree that this is going to be done in principle, and then follow through. I believe 

that it can be done, and if this is achieved, this twentieth century can be saved and can be one of the 

greatest centuries in human history for the benefit of humanity. We have all of the scientific and 

technical know-how to make this world a truly God-like world in which to live in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. Member a question? I was sending over a message, but 

he didn‟t receive me, so apparently our means of communication wasn‟t working all the time. I would 

like to ask the hon. Member if he is suggesting, and I‟m not clear on this point, is he suggesting, that we 

should disarm even if the Communist countries do not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — No one could by any stretch of the imagination take that meaning out of anything I 

said. No. Disarmament must be mutually arranged. One of the problems, Mr. Speaker, has been that 

when we approach the disarmament table something always seems to happen, because someone said 

something or did something that created additional fear and any proposals submitted are called off. I 

would suggest this, Mr. 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

26 

 

Speaker that we forget the career diplomats, and that people get together at the top level and come to an 

agreement in principle and then let the career diplomats work out the details. 

 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I am certainly ill-prepared to take part in this 

debate, because I wasn‟t intending to do so. But, I had interested myself in reading some of the 

viewpoints of outstanding leaders in the world, in regard to this problem of nuclear war and 

disarmament. I just finished reading a book by Henri Paul Spaak, who was the head of NATO, one of 

the great statesmen of the day, and one of the greatest socialists in the world. I was rather interested in 

the view that he took in this whole matter, and it was brought to mind when the Minister of Agriculture 

said that the policy of containment has not worked out. 

 

Now Henri Paul Spaak takes an entirely different view. He points out that after the last war the countries 

of Europe, as they always did, went home, attempted to disarm themselves, release their men from 

uniform, and to put themselves to work in rebuilding their country. He goes on to say that they had 

worked with Russia in war, and they had hoped to co-operate with Russia in peace. Then he goes on to 

say, that Russia had other ideas, and they found it was impossible to do so. Then he traces this history 

from the end of the war, and he said that Russia refused to co-operate with the free nations of Europe 

because she had other things in mind, and then he traces how the first step was to annex the Baltic states, 

part of Finland, part of Poland, and Czechoslovakia, and part of Roumania and part of Germany. Then 

he said, “By 1947 the movement had gathered momentum, in that Russia had seized power in Hungary, 

and in Bulgaria.” 

 

Then he goes on, “By 1948 one half of Europe had fallen to slavery,” and he said, “Faving this block 

and this massive threat to Europe, was the western world which had hastily disarmed since the armistice 

in 1945,” and he said, “It became clear to them that if they were to preserve liberty and security against 

the Soviet Union in her determination to overrun Europe, there was only one thing to do, and that was 

unite the nations of Europe in some defensive alliance.” 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

27 

 

He points out that when the United Nations was formed, it was thought advisable at that time to be 

realistic, to grant the five principal powers of the United Nations in the Security Council the right and 

the decision to veto. And, he pointed out that in thirty vetoes in the Security Council, that Soviet Russia 

was successful in preventing every move of the United Nations to preserve peace. So, as a result of this, 

there was no alternative, but to call these free nations of Europe together, small and insecure as they 

were, to form a defensive alliance against the onslaught of Russian Communism throughout Europe. 

 

He talked about the Brussels Treaty that was signed, where the United Kingdom and France and the 

Benelux countries decided to band together in a defensive alliance, weak and dismantled as they were. 

After having done this, they knew that they were in no position with their forces and their arms to 

contain this advance of Russia. The only logical thing then to do was to appeal to the strongest nation in 

the world, to the United States. He says that in 1949, upon appeal to the United States, asking her to join 

this European alliance, that the United States assumed her responsibility as a free power of the world, 

and she joined in with these weak nations of Europe to form a defensive alliance, and that in the 

Washington Treaty when the United States came in, Canada came in likewise and also Italy, Iceland, 

Denmark, Norway, Portugal. This became the most powerful defense alliance that the world had ever 

known. This alliance was based on “the basic principle of life — of the inherent right of self defense.” 

That is why the NATO alliance was formed. 

 

It was necessary to have this deterrent along the border facing Russian. For twelve years NATO has 

been successful in preserving peace in the world for the free nations. Now, that is Mr. Spaak‟s 

statement, and that that has been the only thing that has saved the world during these twelve years from 

complete domination and overrunning by Communists. 

 

Then he spoke of the necessity of having these nations combined together in groups of forces to form a 

defensive shield bordering the iron curtain countries. He said, “One of the essentials of this defensive 

alliance, the shield force, is that we must put at their disposal every modern equipment of warfare that is 

known.” 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

28 

 

He says that it is absolutely essential that this force have the access and the right to use nuclear 

armaments. 

 

Now then, this resolution says that we should refuse to permit nuclear weapons on Canadian soil. I think 

there is something to that, and I think it is a good step, but I can‟t agree with the section that says, “and 

forbid the Canadian forces to use nuclear arms anywhere.” Because, our Canadian forces are committed 

to NATO, and it would be a very sordid duty for Canada, if, taking their share of responsibility in 

protecting us along this iron border, that they should not have the protection of the same modern 

weapons as their neighboring countries have, right alongside of them, and in the event of attack they 

would be slaughtered before they had a chance to defend themselves. These are some of the 

responsibilities that we must look at. It is all right to preach these idealistic points of view, but I‟ve 

heard people preach about the world that we should have, in which little children can go arm in arm with 

the most vicious beast, because they have all come to realize the love and the understanding of each 

other. Well, I‟ve seen too many little children in the national parks, feeding a harmless, playful-looking 

little bear, the most innocent-looking thing in the world, and yet to find that within a second of the turn 

of the head, that their arm is missing. I think Henri Paul Spaak, realizes that this is exactly the situation 

here. 

 

He said that we must realize these idealistic things as we would like to see them, people are carried 

away, and he said further that as for this talk and these resolutions about banning the atomic bomb, 

banning all nuclear warfare, the net result is only to weaken the will of the people to resist, and once you 

do that you‟ve weakened the hand of the Government in meeting its commitments to keep this protective 

alliance going. We must realize that we live in an imperfect world, and so long as the world is imperfect, 

we must exercise an inalienable right of self defense. The fact that we have NATO, and the fact that we 

have NORAD is not an indication that we are war-mongers, or that we are going to be wreckless in 

getting alarmed, and as someone suggested, that a flight of geese up in the heavens somewhere could 

trigger off a nuclear war. 

 

He says that the first step to negotiations is that we must meet the Communist threat by being equally as 

powerful as they are, and the only way that you can talk to them is on an equal status. Once we get 

ourselves in a position where we have neutrality, where we say our 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

29 

 

intentions are good we don‟t want any war with anyone, where we want to help all that we can, then he 

says we‟ve weakened the nation to this effect, that any nation intent on conquering another or 

conquering the world, will not respect the signpost of neutrality, and that they will be the first to suffer 

as the result of that neutrality. Those are very strong words, and he says, “Neutrality is synonymous with 

extinction.” That is his thinking on it. 

 

Are we in favour of banning nuclear arms? Yes! Are we in favour of getting rid of the atomic bomb? 

Yes! Are we in favour of stopping all testing of atomic bombs? Yes! But, only on condition that it will 

not be piecemeal, in which we will agree to a ban on nuclear arms, as Russia is suggesting, simply to get 

these forces disarmed along the iron curtain and to take away from them their nuclear weapons. It isn‟t 

sufficient only to have nuclear disarmament, we must have conventional disarmament every step of the 

way with it, because our forces are weak in conventional arms as well. 

 

It is all right to say that we should accept the Russian proposal of nuclear disarmament, but, we must 

insist that hand in hand with nuclear disarmament must come conventional disarmament. I think that the 

recent conference of the Commonwealth, outlined the principles of disarmament in a concise and 

forthright manner, and I think it is the only way that we can proceed. Sometimes I get a little nauseated 

at all of this fine talk about how much we could do because our hearts are pure and our will is there. I 

recall again to the words of Henri Paul Spaak, “We live in an imperfect world, and first and foremost we 

must take the necessary steps to defend ourselves,” and at the same time to go forward and do all that we 

can do in the interests of peace and in the interests of disarmament, as equals, letting anyone who would 

attempt to devour us realize that he will meet first a formidable force. The only way that you can talk to 

a nation as determined as Russia is tin world domination, is to be able to say to her first, “If you should 

be foolish enough to begin anything, you will find a force equally as strong to oppose you.” We must 

form these alliances to prevent war, or else we will find ourselves forming an alliance afterwards to win 

a war. 

 

I want to read what was said in the House of Commons in the debates, when they were discussing the 

admission of Germany to NATO. I was studying that some weeks ago, and I happened to copy it down 

for my own 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

30 

 

reference, and it struck me as being rather good. This chap was quoting Malensky from Russia, and he 

says that at one time he was head of the Comintern, and was the man who betrayed the Ukraine, and led 

that nation into a trap, and this is what he quotes Malensky as having said: 

 

“War to the hilt between Communism and capitalism is inevitable. Today, of course, we are not strong 

enough to attack. Our time will come in twenty or thirty years.” 

 

And he says that time is fast approaching. Then he quotes this as the Communist statement at the 

Comintern: 

 

“To win, we shall need the element of surprise. The bourgeoisie will have to be put to sleep, so we 

shall begin by launching the most spectacular peace movement on record. There will be electrifying 

overtures, and unheard of concessions. The capitalist countries, stupid and decadent, will rejoice to 

co-operate in their own destruction. They will leap at another chance to be friends, and as soon as their 

guard is down, we shall smash them with our clenched fists.” 

 

That is what Mr. Henri Spaak recognized today too, and that is why I say I get nauseated at all of this 

biased talk about leading the way in nuclear disarmament . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — You talk like a pied piper  . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Like who? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — A pied piper. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Well, I‟m glad I have good company, because 95% of what I‟ve said has been Henri 

Paul Spaak‟s, not my thinking at all. 

 

But, I‟m very interested to think that you, Mr. Minister, think that Henri Paul Spaak has done nothing 

but be another pied piper. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! I would appreciate it if the hon. Members would address the Chair, and 

not each other across the floor. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I think these resolutions are worthy of more consideration than remarks of that nature 

from the Minister, Mr. Speaker. 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

31 

 

In closing, I just want to say this: I don‟t think there is a person in this Chamber, there isn‟t a mother or 

a father, or a son or a daughter in the province of Saskatchewan, or the Dominion of Canada that doesn‟t 

want peace, that wouldn‟t do everything possible to bring around peace, but surely, just because the 

burning desire is there, we shouldn‟t fall into these traps of these great peace movements without being 

sure that peace will be guaranteed by proper disarmament steps being taken, and in the meantime be 

sure, that in the event of attack, be prepared to defend ourselves. 

 

Now, the Minister made much of the statement that you should fight fire by fire, and tried to twist and 

misinterpret it. The town I live in together with the city of Regina, and everyone else spend considerable 

amounts of money on fire brigades and fire equipment, and yet it is generally understood that pretty well 

every fire could be prevented, and so if every fire could be prevented and we appeal to our people not to 

start a fire and to use caution to prevent it, then logically we should disband our fire brigade, because we 

have asked the people to be careful and not to light a fire and let fire get out of control. The reasoning to 

me seems just about as simple and just about as foolish. Simply because we have a good fire brigade, 

ready to go into action at a minute‟s notice in defense of anyone in the town, is no indication that the fire 

department is anxious for a fire just so they can go to it and test out the equipment. This is the type of 

reasoning here from the lady Member who spoke. She would lead us to believe that if we are armed to 

the hilt, some trigger-happy general is going to pull the hammer just to see what may happen, and for 

that reason we should condemn armaments, and we should condemn the United States for having 

dropped the first atomic bomb. We should have a repentant heart; we should be prepared now, to say to 

Russia, and to the other nations of the world, we regret what we have done. We‟ve seen the error of our 

way. We‟re prepared to put our loving arm of friendship around you and walk arm and arm in this great 

vision of peace and happiness and contentment. When we do that, let us be sure that he doesn‟t snap our 

arm off like the bear in the park. 

 

I could go along with a good number of the resolutions here, but I can‟t go along with the section that 

says, that our boys in the armed forces shouldn‟t 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

32 

 

be permitted nuclear weapons anywhere in the world. I think the time is coming when we must 

recognize that if we are going to work toward disarmament and for peace in the world, that somewhere 

along the line, China must be brought in to the discussions, if we are to succeed in bringing in the major 

power. Whether we should go so far as recognition of Red China‟s admission to the United Nations, 

those are problems I think, for the well versed statesmen to decide, nor for me. While we have a burning 

desire for peace, we‟re not going to be foolish enough not to recognize that we live in an imperfect 

world, and first we must protect for ourselves that inalienable right of self-defense, and then leave no 

stone unturned in negotiating with the major nations of the world for some successful formula for 

disarmament. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I make no apology to the House for continuing this debate or in 

prolonging the discussion because I think the subject matter which is now before us is probably the most 

important question which faces the human race today. I want to compliment all the Members who have 

taken part in the debate. I think it has been held on a very high level. I think Members have advanced 

their views with sincerity and with clarity, and I think this discussion has been worthwhile. The mover 

and seconder are to be congratulated on having placed it before us. 

 

I hadn‟t intended speaking on the resolution, but I was impelled to do so by some of the things which 

were said by some of those who took part in the debate. I was particularly interested in some of the 

comments made by the Member for Souris-Estevan, and I hope I am not misinterpreting his statements. 

He began his speech by saying that the speech of the lady Member for Regina, and the speech of the 

lady Member for Saskatoon would certainly give comfort and solace to the Soviet Union, and that if 

they had been trying to make a speech that would weaken people‟s power to resist, this is just the kind 

of speech that they would want to have made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think we serve any useful purpose by trying to attribute motives. I think it would be 

quite wrong to say too, that those who oppose this resolution are war-mongers. I think it is equally as 

wrong to say that those who are proposing this resolution 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

33 

 

are crypto-communists. I think we ought to discuss the thing on its merits without imputing any motives, 

because if one wants to get into imputing motives on the whole question of international relations there 

is a long record one can go back to. I, and the group with which I have been associated, had a record 

through the 1930s of trying in our own small way to focus public attention in Canada, on supporting the 

League of Nations in both economic and military sanctions. We tried to prevent oil going to Italy in 

1935 and 1936 when the Ethiopian Campaign started. We all recall that our Canadian Government 

withdrew its Canadian representative at Geneva, Dr. Riddell, because he dared to support the idea of 

economic sanctions against Mussolini. 

 

Some of us tried hard to get economic sanctions against military supplies and war materials to Japan all 

through the 1930s. I am one of the few public men in Canada, who was vilified a good deal in 1943, and 

1944, when I opposed the pacts at Teheran and Yalta. Those were the days when we had in Canada the 

Anglo-Soviet Friendship League. When some of us opposed the Yalta and Teheran pacts we were 

called, by those on the right, doctrinaire socialists, and by those on the left social-fascists, because we 

took the position that the great powers had no right to sit down at Yalta or Teheran and divide the world 

up like a pie. This violated the whole principle of the right of self-determination of small nations. 

Nobody had the right to say where Poland‟s borders would be, or where anyone else‟s borders should 

be. This should have been left to an international organization which would sponsor plebiscites in the 

respective countries and let the people themselves decide what type of Government they wanted, and 

under what jurisdiction they would come. 

 

If we are going to start imputing motives, there is a very long history to recall. I was particularly 

surprised that anyone who would even suggest, and I am not saying the hon. Member suggested it, but I 

certainly got that implication in his remarks, that those who are making proposals along the line 

contained in this resolution were doing so because they had pro-communist ideas. I would remind you, 

Mr. Speaker, of the speech made by the national leader of the Liberal Party, at a Liberal rally just a few 

short weeks ago. This speech repudiated many of the things that he has stood for in the past. I think it 

was a courageous speech. He suggested that Canada should get out of NORAD except for the warning 

system. This has been derisively called by the Government Members in Ottawa, „a bird-watching 

program.‟ If one listened to the Prime Minister the other night, one could 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

34 

 

certainly gather that the Prime Minister wouldn‟t mind fighting the next election in Canada on his 

foreign policy or a stronger NORAD and nuclear weapons in Canada, as opposed to the foreign policy 

and the defence policy outlined by Mr. Pearson. 

 

If one is going to criticize some of the views expressed in this resolution as being pro-communist, one 

would have to look again at the views which Mr. Pearson has expressed. I noticed that the Prime 

Minister the other day in winding up the Tory conference in Toronto said that now there was just one 

big issue in an election. His party was the free-enterprise party. The Liberal Party had moved so far to 

the left that they were with the socialists. I would like to welcome the comrades into the fold. 

 

Let‟s not approach it on this line. Let‟s approach it on the assumption that we are all sincerely desirous 

of peace, and we differ as to the best means of bringing it about, and we are trying to debate and to argue 

out what is the best course for Canada as a nation to follow. 

 

The Member for Souris-Estevan began his speech by talking about the fact that this resolution was an 

insult to our national pride. He stated that we must maintain our national status and maintain our 

national pride. Before he‟d gone very far he was saying that we mustn‟t do anything to offend our big 

neighbour to the south. You can‟t maintain your national pride, and at the same time do everything that 

the big neighbour tells you to do. As a matter of act, Members opposite ought to remember that the 

present Prime Minister of Canada got a lot of votes back in 1957 by telling the people of Canada that the 

Canadian Government of that day had sold out completely to the Americans. Since coming into office 

today he has virtually handed over the power of deciding whether or not Canada will be at war to a 

military commander in the United States. This doesn‟t look much like national pride. When we talk 

about offending the big neighbour to the south, I have no anti-American feeling; I went to university in 

the United States; I like the American people. The fact that you like people doesn‟t mean that you want 

them make all of your decisions for you. Nor do you want to be a tail on somebody‟s dog. The fact is, of 

course, that our American friends haven‟t always been equally careful about offending us. 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

35 

 

The Member for Athabasca has a resolution on the Order Paper about conditions in Uranium City. The 

reason that conditions in Uranium City are as they are, is that United States at one time asked the 

Canadian Government, and Canadian industry, to get busy and produce uranium. They agreed to buy it, 

and took out an option to purchase more uranium after 1962. When they found uranium of their own, 

they simply said they were not going to exercise the option. The same thing happened during the Korean 

War. They said that they would take all the copper and zinc we could produce, and great sums of money 

were invested in order to produce uranium and copper. When the time came that their own vested 

interests began to apply pressure in Congress, the American Congress imposed quotas on copper and 

quotas on oil. There have been tariffs against Canadian goods when it suited them. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I believe a question of order is being raised, but I do think that the hon. Premier 

is quoting another debate by way of illustration in this one, and I think possibly that can be done. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I am not disputing the resolution. I am dealing now with the question of offending 

people. I am simply saying that our American friends have acted in their own best interests as they saw 

it when the occasion suited them. I am not denying their right to do it. I am simply saying that we too, 

with a sense of national pride, must act as we think best in any given situation in the interest of the 

Canadian people. 

 

The member for Souris-Estevan and some of the other speakers pointed out that if you follow the 

purpose of this resolution, we‟ll have no defence. Mr. Speaker, let‟s face the fact that some of the best 

military minds in Canada are telling us today that we have no defence now. The defence mechanism that 

we have built up was designed to meet long-range bomber attack. Today, the likelihood of long-range 

bomber attack is almost completely removed. We now face the danger of the inter-continental ballistic 

missile which changes the whole picture, and against which we have no defence, as some of the best 

military experts, (I‟ll quote some of them later,) have demonstrated. 

 

I was in Ottawa attending the Federal-Provincial Conference on Fiscal Arrangements when the Member 

for 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

36 

 

Moosomin spoke, so I didn‟t hear his speech, but I read it very carefully. I always have a high regard for 

what he says on this subject. He has a very distinguished war record, and I agreed with a great many of 

the things which he said in this speech. But he talked about total war, and said that if we are forced into 

a war it has to be total war. I just ask Members to stop and think what we‟re talking about when we talk 

of total war. War, as veterans of the last war experienced it, and war as it would be today is completely 

different. Since 1945 there have been two technological revolutions. The first has been the atomic bomb 

and the hydrogen bomb. These have been given explosive power far beyond anything that was ever 

dreamed of. Today one hydrogen bomb, we are told, has the explosive power of 20 million tons of 

T.N.T. This is greater than all the bombs dropped on Germany and Japan in the last war. Norman 

Cousins, editor of the “Saturday Literary Review,” is one of the authorities on the subject. He has spent 

the last fifteen years making a special study of this question. He says there now is in the United States 

and the Soviet Union alone, the equivalent of 60 billion, 60 thousand million tons of T.N.T. in nuclear 

bombs which they have stock-piled. This represents twenty tons of T.N.T. for every person on the face 

of the earth. 

 

Not only has there been a technological revolution in explosive power, but there has been also a 

revolution in capacity to deliver. This is even more serious. Before we talked about bombing planes; 

now we are faced with missiles, missiles which can be sent half way around the world. The latest 

Russian move was to have one of their satellites drop out a small rocket which landed near a ship and 

was picked up. It looks as though the day is not too far distant when satellites orbiting the earth will be 

able to deliver atomic bombs. Today, when we talk about total war, we‟re not talking about war in the 

ordinary sense; we are talking about human annihilation! 

 

In addition to this, one can also keep in mind that tremendous research has been going on in what is 

commonly called C.B. and R., which is Chemical, Bacteriological and Radiological Warfare. If one 

reads some of the reports before the American Congressional Committee, one will be stunned at the 

devastating destruction which can be produced from chemical and bacteriological and radiological 

isotopes. The power to destroy mankind is now easily within our grasp. It is true that back in 1926 many 

of the nations signed the Geneva-Protocol which forbade the use of gas, chemical, and bacteriological 

weapons. But it should be remembered that the United States did not ratify this. Canada signed it, but 

the United States 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

37 

 

didn‟t ratify it. The Soviet Union signed it with proviso — that this would not limit her in using this kind 

of weapon against other nations who had not signed the Protocol, or against the allies of such a nation. 

So this leaves open, not only atomic and hydrogen bombs, but the horrible possibility of chemical, 

bacteriological and radiological warfare. 

 

What I am saying, Mr. Speaker, is that I think we have to face one bold fact, and that is that total war 

means the virtual annihilation of the human race. Military men, at least a great bulk of them are now 

convinced that there is no effective defence because the powers of destruction exceed anything which 

has ever been contemplated by mankind. For not only do we face destruction from deliberate bombing, 

or the dropping of missiles on a target, but we know now that fallout will effect a tremendous area. It is 

estimated now that an atomic bomb can create destruction for a radius of eighty-five miles, but this is a 

small part compared to the fallout which could cover many hundreds of miles. As a matter of fact, in the 

brief which was submitted to the nations of the world by over nine hundred scientists, sixty-four of 

whom were Nobel prize winners, they pointed out that even the small tests we‟ve had are probably 

going to be responsible for thirty to sixty thousand deaths because of the production of Strontium 90, 

Cesium 137, and Iodine 131, all of which is taken into the human system through milk and vegetables 

and meat. Already, we‟re endangering genetically the whole process of life. In an actual war, the fallout 

would undoubtedly have disastrous effects, even for the people who were not in the actual area where 

the war was taking place. 

 

Now, it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that one has to start from the promise that war now means 

annihilation. We have to accept the principle which was enunciated here a few days ago by a great 

soldier of the last war, Gerald Foulkes. I had the privilege of visiting with him and I spent some time at 

his headquarters in 1945 when he was stationed in Germany. While he was here he addressed the 

Institute of International Affairs. One of the things he said was that, “Force is now obsolete as an 

instrument of national policy. We have now made such technological advances that man must find some 

other way to settle his disputes.” I agree with the member for Maple Creek that it‟s not easy, and that 

you don‟t settle this just by pious phrases. But neither am I prepared to accept the fatalistic attitude that 

the Russians have got a lot of weapons, and therefore, we‟ve got to have a lot of weapons, and then 

they‟ll get more weapons, and we‟ve got to get more weapons. The whole history of the human race is 

that armament build-ups eventually have 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

38 

 

led to war. In this case, if it leads to war, it can lead to the destruction of mankind. 

 

It is not enough, it seems to me, to say that we live in an imperfect world. If we‟re not careful, we will 

not live in any world at all. We have got to do something to improve it. We‟re not going to do something 

to improve it merely by sitting still, and saying, that it is the Russians who are all at fault. I haven‟t had 

the privilege of reading Henri Spaak‟s book, although I‟ve had the privilege of listening to him a number 

of times, and met him at one or two conferences. I don‟t know whether he outlined the historical resume 

as my hon. friend gave it, but it is not quite right to portray the picture of the Soviet Union grabbing 

more land, while the rest of us sat still until finally in 1949 the nations of Europe pleaded with the 

United States to take some action. I don‟t condone for a moment the aggression of the Soviet Union in 

eastern Europe, and the many nations that today she holds in subjugation. I think this is to be 

condemned. But let us not forget the fact that from 1945 on the United States had the atomic bomb, and 

later had the hydrogen bomb. This gave her tremendous military superiority. Let‟s not forget that 

between 1945 and 1949 according to their own white papers, the Americans had something over two 

hundred air bases, almost completely surrounding the Soviet Union, from any one of which it was 

possible at that time, to have long-range bombers take off with either an atomic bomb, or a hydrogen 

bomb. No nation is going to feel very comfortable under those circumstances. I am not saying that the 

United States is all to blame, but what I am saying is that there has been on both sides growing 

suspicions and growing armaments. We have come to the place now where there is a virtual deadlock, 

where both of these great powers have got the capacity not only to destroy each other but to destroy the 

rest of us. In a situation like this we must try to find some answer. 

 

How is it possible to settle disputes without resort to force? I agree with the Member for Maple Creek 

that it is not enough to just say when everybody gets to be good and kindly and brotherly, we‟ll all live 

together and the lion and the lamb will lie down together. Sometimes the lamb ends up inside the lion, 

and that is not the best way to lie down together. I have never myself personally accepted the pacifist 

position. I have great admiration for pacifists. Some of my best friends 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

39 

 

have been pacifists, and I have nothing but admiration for their courage, where they are genuine 

pacifists, but I have never been able to accept the basic doctrine of pacifism. My reading of history has 

taught me, and my own experience in life has taught me that there always have been bullies. There 

always have been vandals, and there have always been people who want to use their superior power to 

take advantage of other people. There are always those who want to destroy things just for the sheer love 

of destroying. 

 

When I was a boy, I was smaller than other boys, and I never quite got over that even when I grew up. It 

didn‟t take me long to learn that the best way to keep from being bullied, wasn‟t to go around telling 

people you wouldn‟t fight and you couldn‟t fight. As a matter of fact there are some bullies who leave 

you alone the minute they find that you are willing to fight, and that you are able to fight. 

 

You can‟t have peace in the world it seems to me, by just sitting and saying, we won‟t resist. The 

moment you do that you put all of humanity at the mercy of that people or nation which is least 

amenable to the moral laws. It seems to me that the way you keep peace in the world is the same way 

you keep peace in a community. On these western plains, particularly in the United States in the last 

century, when the country was being settled, every man was his own judge, jury, and executioner, and 

he carried a gun. In spite of all the movies that show us the good guys always beating the bad guys, this 

wasn‟t true. There were bullies who terrorized communities. It wasn‟t until law and order were 

established, and until the authority was delegated to certain men to enforce the law, and to punish those 

who broke the law, that we finally got a settled community and a settled country. I‟m convinced that 

there can be no peace in the world until we establish a world authority with full disciplinary powers to 

deal with nations which insist on resorting to force as an instrument of national policy. This means that 

we must have a world authority which will be a combination of a world parliament, a world police force, 

and a world court, that will have the necessary military and economic power to effect either military or 

economic sanctions, (a) against any nation which insists on resorting to force, and (b) as a means of 

enforcing gradual disarmament and the necessary inspection and control that goes with disarmament. 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

40 

 

In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, the real danger to the world is not so much the atomic bomb, but rather the 

outmoded idea that you can retain national sovereignty in an age when there is no security whatsoever, 

apart from a world authority armed with the full power to establish and maintain the rule of law among 

the nations of the world. It is not enough for nations to say we‟re willing to refer this or that to the 

United Nations. We need to clothe the United Nations with the power to act promptly and effectively 

whether the nations affected want them to or not. Until we establish such a world authority, this build-up 

of armaments is going to continue, and the danger of war is going to come closer and closer. 

 

What can Canada do in a situation like this? It is true that Canada can‟t reconstruct the United Nations, 

but it is true that Canada as a middle power, with no geographical appetites, and no desire for 

aggrandizement, could give leadership to the middle powers, and particularly to the nations of Africa 

and Asia. I submit that we can‟t do this if we are merely looked upon as a military satellite of the United 

States. 

 

For instance, Poland made a very good suggestion which Mr. Eisenhower in one of his press 

conferences approved of and then later had to take back because Mr. Dulles didn‟t like it, Poland made 

the suggestion that we do through the centre of Europe, what we‟ve already done in Austria — have the 

troops withdrawn from both sides. The main reason why it was turned down was because Poland was 

looked upon as what she probably is, a military satellite of the Soviet Union. I think that far from trying 

to offend our neighbours to the south, we could serve our neighbours to the south, and we could serve 

our own best interests, and above all we could serve the interests of humanity, if we had the courage and 

the vision to take an independent stand in the international field. 

 

One of the things we could do for instance is withdraw from NORAD. To some people this is a heretical 

suggestion. But, I want to point out in the first place, that we got into NORAD without any great 

consultation with the people of Canada. The Government of Mr. St. Laurent had carried on the 

negotiations but hadn‟t signed the agreement. When General Pearkes came in as the new Minister of 

Defence he signed the agreement. I am very glad to see that Mr. Pearson now thinks that we ought to get 

out of all except operating the warning system. It 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

41 

 

was designed to meet a situation which no longer exists. It was designed to meet the threat of the 

long-range strategic bomber. 

 

Most Members know of the military prowess of General W.H.S. Macklin and probably read the articles 

which he wrote in the Regina “Leader-Post” of December 17th, and December 19th, and I‟m not going 

to weary the Members by reading a lot of it, but just let me give you a few excerpts from his article on 

“Why we should leave NORAD.” General Macklin says: 

 

“In 1949 Russia exploded a nuclear bomb, and the grim truth is that in that blast of that device, the 

long, comfortable military immunity of the North American continent was swept away. 

 

It was gone and gone forever, but the colossal error that our Defence Department has made is to 

assume that somehow, anyhow, we can get that immunity back, if we just spend enough money on 

such things as jet interceptors, radar chains, anti-aircraft missiles like the Bomarc and the fire control 

system such as Sage. 

 

It is in accordance with this illusion that we have lavished billions upon billions on what have been 

wrongfully and deceitfully called our air defences.” 

 

Then he goes on to deal with it in detail. Let me just read the last part of what he says: 

 

“All this leads to the obvious conclusion that Canada should get out of NORAD. 

 

Withdrawal from NORAD does not in any way imply neutralism. It has nothing to do with our 

abandonment of NATO, which I never would advocate. 

 

We should toss NORAD out simply and solely because it is an impotent military instrument, and also 

unnecessary even assuming it had any military effectiveness. 

 

This action would strengthen the alliance with the United States because NORAD is merely a futile 

drain on our resources. It would save us vast sums of money to devote to other and more fruitful 

projects in the national welfare.” 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

42 

 

I submit that we would be more effective in the United Nations in trying to get the United Nations 

clothed with military and economic power, if we could come before the United Nations, not as a military 

satellite, but as a nation which has no axe to grind, but which is seeking to avert the great catastrophe 

that faces mankind. 

 

I think of another thing Canada could do. Canada could ask for a complete reappraisal of NATO. It will 

be remembered, and it is to Canada‟s credit, that Article 2 of the NATO agreement was put there at 

Canada‟s insistence. It was the part of the agreement which said that a military alliance is not enough, 

and that we must also adopt those economic and technological measures that will help to raise the living 

standards of people, and will help to give democracy some meaning in under-developed nations. We 

have to face the fact, of course, that Article 2 has never been touched. It is a dead letter insofar as NATO 

is concerned. NATO has been used purely as a military alliance between the United States and 

ourselves, Great Britain and countries of western Europe. The fact that France has refused to allow 

atomic weapons to be put on her soil has weakened her somewhat. 

 

But, what is the picture? It may be that NATO served a very useful purpose in the days when the Soviet 

Union was overrunning western Europe. But, what we have now are simply two great military alliances 

facing each other across Europe, and facing each other with the power to destroy, not only Europe, but 

the North American continent as well. 

 

I think Canada could first of all insist that NATO become part of the world authority by vesting it in the 

United Nations. I think that Canada should be prepared to say to the United Nations, that we will supply 

whatever type of forces and whatever type of weapons are wanted to help enforce peace. We should be 

prepared to put planes or troops or naval ships and personnel at the disposal of a world authority, and all 

the military powers contained in NATO should be vested in the world authority. It seems to me that this 

would put the Soviet Union in a very serious position. She would be completely isolated if she were not 

prepared to place the Warsaw Pact on the same footing. This would show to the nations of Africa and 

Asia where we stood, and where the other NATO powers stood, and would make the Soviet Union 

either say no, we‟re going to cling to an outmoded military alliance or say, yes, we‟re prepared to put the 

powers of the Warsaw Pact also under this world authority. 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

43 

 

This would give the world authority the money, the personnel, the weapons, the power, and above all the 

authority to maintain peace in the world and to take whatever economic or military action may be 

necessary against a nation which resorts to force. 

 

I think the second thing Canada can do is say that Article 2 of NATO should now become an important 

instrument in foreign policy. The nations have now set up the organization know as O.E.C.D. the Office 

for Economic Co-operation and Development, and this may eventually do the kind of thing which 

Article 2 of NATO was designed for. Let us make no mistake about this. With the United States and the 

Soviet Union each having stock-piled today sufficient nuclear missiles to destroy their enemies and the 

rest of the world, we‟ll probably come to the place where the trend of the cold war is going to change. 

 

I don‟t think we in the west have paid enough attention to the great debate that has been going on 

between the Soviet Union and China, or the very serious rift that has taken place there. It has taken place 

between two great powers, one of whom, represented by Mr. Kruschev is saying that the powers of 

destruction are so terrible that war is no longer a means of settling our disputes. He says this not 

necessarily because he wants to, but because he knows that he can‟t win a war. Nobody can win a war. 

All we can do is destroy someone else and be destroyed. His argument with China is that we must now 

fight an ideological and an economic war. The Chinese are not convinced of this. China has come only 

recently into the international picture, and there are those in China apparently who still think that they 

can follow the Marxian and Leninist doctrines of world conquest. This is why I for one, would be glad 

to see them in the United Nations and accepting the rule of law. I‟m not sure that they‟ll be willing to 

come. I think it will be one thing to invite them and another to persuade them to come in, but certainly 

we don‟t serve any useful purpose by voting each year not to let them in even if they want to come. 

 

I think they have to be brought in. I think the significant thing about this debate is that Mr. Kruschev and 

the Russians are now talking about co-existence. That doesn‟t mean they‟ve given up their idea of 

spreading communism over the world. They‟ve given up their idea of world conquest by military means 

because they know that this would destroy them. I think in the long run the chances are that the Soviet 

Government is in a much shakier and a more precarious position that we think it is. If their cities were 

bombed, their capacity to 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

44 

 

hold their people in subjection would be destroyed, and their Government might not last too long. I 

don‟t think they want to get into that kind of situation. I‟m convinced, unless China goes off on a 

tangent, that the real test of the next twenty-five years is going to be an economic and ideological 

contest. It is going to be a struggle for markets. It is going to be a struggle of production. It is going to a 

struggle to see who can win over the uncommitted and under-developed nations. It is going to be a 

struggle to see whether or not people are prepared to accept the Soviet position, which is that if you take 

a dictatorship and oppress people and lower their standard of living, you can produce more and you can 

use that increased production for capital investment, and for social capital, and move forward by great 

hydro-electric projects, and do the kind of things which the Soviet Union has done. Over against this is 

the democratic position, which is that it is possible to have bread and freedom both. It is possible to 

build up increased wealth of production. It is possible to develop social security within a nation without 

destroying political freedom. 

 

These two ideas will have to battle it out in the under-developed and uncommitted nations. I agree with 

the Minister of Agriculture that in this kind of battle I am not afraid. I‟m convinced that if the western 

world could mobilize its resources, (and no man has fought for this more than Henri Spaak,) it would 

help the under-developed people of the world much in the way we have helped India. We haven‟t helped 

her enough. But we can demonstrate to the rest of the world that without surrendering one iota of 

freedom, political freedom, we can also build economic freedom. It is possible for people not only to 

have freedom from oppression and freedom from tyranny, but it is also possible to have freedom from 

fear, and freedom from want. People shouldn‟t have to be asked to choose between bread and freedom. 

Only in a democratic society can you have both. I think in this kind of contest the western world can 

win. I don‟t think anybody can win in a war of atomic power. 

 

This is the great role that Canada could play. She could play a role first by saying that we‟re out of 

NORAD; that we want the NATO alliance to become part of a world authority; and that we‟re prepared 

to make whatever sacrifices are necessary and supply whatever personnel and equipment are necessary 

to a world police force; and that we‟re prepared to place at the disposal of such a world authority our 

economic resources, our food stuffs, and our technical personnel to help to raise the standard of living in 

various parts of the world and win these people for the things in which we believe. 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

45 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the kind of world in which we live today, this is no time to talk about national pride. 

This is a time to talk about human survival. This and nothing less is what is at stake in the world today. 

The responsibility for meeting this situation doesn‟t lie with statesmen alone, and that is why I was 

surprised when the Member for Maple Creek said something about the trap of peace movements. I know 

that there are always those who are prepared to use peace movements or anything else that has a good 

name for their own devious ends. But let us not condemn peace movements. As I said earlier over nine 

hundred of the greatest scientists of the world have pleaded with the nations of the world and the 

Governments of the world to do something to prevent total war. Millions of people are concerned about 

this matter, and ought to be concerned about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if a total war takes place it will take place for only one reason, and that is because there 

haven‟t been enough men and women in the world who were prepared to concern themselves and to act 

to prevent a world war taking place. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — Let us not condemn the people who are agitating to do something about this. They 

may be ill-advised. They may, as the Member for Maple Creek says, indulge in pious phrases, and it 

may bother him a great deal that they should do so. Mr. Speaker, people are naturally concerned, and it 

seems to me that it is the duty of this Legislature and of Governments and of men and women in public 

life to give some leadership as to how we‟re going to meet this very critical situation in the world‟s 

history. This desire for peace is not something which is new. It is as old as man himself. It goes back to 

the days when Isaiah and Micah dreamed of a time when men would beat their swords into plowshares 

and their spears into pruning hooks, and would learn the art of war no more, when every man would sit 

beneath his own vine tree and none would make him afraid. Men dreamed of this, four and five thousand 

years ago, Mr. Speaker. At that time it was only a dream; today it is a necessity. Today we either must 

find a way of living together, or face the prospect of not living at all. Because I think that some of the 

suggestions in this resolution are a move in that direction, I will support the motion. 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

46 

 

The debate was adjourned by Mrs. Batten. 

 

RESOLUTION ON UNEMPLOYMENT 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Whelan regarding 

unemployment 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, it is not my intention to prolong this debate. Most 

of the things that I‟ve said during our little discussion, as to whether you would consider our amendment 

in order or not, were the remarks that I wanted to make on the debate. I am pleased to see that you did 

see fit to rule our amendment in order, despite the fact that we have lost that amendment since. 

 

I want to say again, Mr. Speaker, that I‟m even more convinced now that I was at that time, it will no 

longer be possible for our senior government to do what we are asking the Government of Canada to do 

by herself. If the proposals that have been made by the present Prime Minister and the Federal 

Government are carried out, that is giving certain taxing powers back to the province, that will make it 

impossible for the Government of Canada to control our economy to the extent that I think they should 

control it, if we are to have full employment and prosperity throughout our lifetime. I would like to have 

seen the amendment passed. I would like to have seen co-operation between the provinces and the 

Federal Government to bring about these desired results. But I want to repeat that I do not believe that if 

the suggestion that has been made by the Prime Minister is carried out then the Government of Canada 

is no longer in this position. I think they have given part of their taxing powers to the provinces that they 

ought not to have given to the provinces, if they had a desire in their own heart to control Canada‟s 

economy. The suggestion has been made that this should be done, and I have no doubt in my own heart 

that it will be done over a period of time. I think that all Members of this Legislature are in favour of the 

Government of Canada going as far as they can to carry out part (a) of the resolution. 

 

I had an opportunity of attending a national gathering in Ottawa in January, and a discussion on this 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

47 

 

particular subject took place at that convention. People in all parts of Canada feel that this is the proper 

approach in order to bring about full employment and to see that equal facilities are made available to 

the people across Canada. But I cannot agree entirely with the resolution as it stands and I will have to 

vote against it, but I will do so Mr. Speaker, with the understanding that it is my belief that the 

Government of Canada will no longer have the power to do what this resolution asks them to do. 

 

I want to repeat that I‟m convinced in my own mind that had we passed the amendment, then we could 

have joined with Ottawa and the other provinces of Canada to bring about the proper conditions that this 

resolution is seeking for all of Canada. 

 

Mr. Ed Whelan (Regina City): — Mr. Speaker, this debate has indicated that a very serious problem 

exists. The problem is a threat to our social and economic structure. The problem will also destroy our 

neighbors‟ self-respect. We are faced with a hardship in our communities, and the hardship becomes 

more acute each day that the problem is not accepted as a national economic and social problem. The 

situation deserves and expects urgent attention. Even my hon. friends opposite I‟m sure will agree that 

action is necessary and is necessary immediately. 

 

In the House of Commons recently, we witnessed or heard of the Members, particularly on the 

Government side, discussing a $25.00 fee paid to a Mr. Exelby for his very realistic presentation on the 

television program “Close-Up”, regarding unemployment. I suggest to the Members of the Legislature, 

that this discussion did not solve Mr. Exelby‟s problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! I would like to point out to the hon. Member that his privilege of reply 

is regarded as a reply. He is not entitled to bring in new material. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps the discussion that we are having in this Legislature 

will in some way call attention 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

48 

 

to the House of Commons the seriousness of the situation that exists across Canada. 

 

I do not think that further debate is necessary, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be repetitious. As a 

Legislature let us unanimously endorse the resolution and advise the Ottawa Government forthwith. 

 

I shall support the motion. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to. 

 

MOTION RE CROW’S NEST PASS 

 

Hon Mr. Brockelbank (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, the resolution that I am 

moving this afternoon, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Nicholson is: 

 

“That this Assembly strongly endorses the Submissions of the Government of Saskatchewan to the 

Royal Commission on Transportation and urges the Royal Commission to give most favourable 

consideration to the circumstances set forth in those Submissions and to the proposals made therein; 

and, further, this Assembly is of the opinion that the Crow‟s Nest Pass rates on grain and flour moving 

into export positions should be retained under the protection of Parliament and maintained in their 

present form and at their present level without any change.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the submission which I tabled in the House the other day, has been prepared by the 

Economic and Technical Committee on Transportation and Freight Rates, for the province of 

Saskatchewan. I would like first of all to tell the hon. Members a little about that committee and its 

work. The Chairman of the committee is Dr. George E. Britnell of the University of Saskatchewan, who 

is very well known in Saskatchewan and in Canada and beyond its borders. Dr. Vernon C. Fowke, also 

of the University of Saskatchewan, is Vice-Chairman and has in his own right a reputation as a 

well-known author. Dr. B.N. Arnason, the Deputy Minister of the Department of Co-operatives, who has 

been in the Government service for many years, and also, George Oliver, a civil servant of long standing 

are members. 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

49 

 

Besides being a member of the committee the latter is Secretary of the committee. My seat-mate, the 

Hon. L.F. McIntosh, is a member of the committee, and due to his illness I was substituting for him on 

that committee. 

 

The staff of the committee also had a rather important part to play, and I would like to mention Mr. J.S. 

Carmichael, who was the assistant secretary, and did a great deal of work with regard to the preparation 

of material, and the editing and so forth. Mr. E.J. Jones, is a specialist in the details of freight rates, and 

has been with the Government for some considerable time. And I think also, Mr. Speaker, some mention 

should be made of the solicitor for the committee, Mr. Roger Carter Q.C. of Saskatoon, who was with 

the members of the committee to make the presentation to the Royal Commission. Dr. Britnell deserves 

special mention because of his part as the chief witness for the province of Saskatchewan before the 

Royal Commission. I had the privilege of attending a part of the Saskatchewan presentation before the 

Commission in Ottawa when Dr. Britnell was on the witness stand, and he certainly did Saskatchewan 

proud in the manner in which he presented the case to the Royal Commission. Of course, Dr. Britnell is 

also an author in his own right, and had a good deal to do with the putting together and writing of the 

parts of the submission. Dr. Fowke deserves special mention because of his work on what we call the 

Crow Brief: this one with the long title, “An Historical Analysis of the Crow‟s Nest Pass Agreement and 

Grain Rates: a study in National Transportation Policies.” That involved a lot of research into history 

and a good deal of planning and putting it together. George Oliver, a member of the committee and 

secretary of the committee, had a good deal to do with the writing of large parts of the main submission. 

I‟ve already mentioned the staff and the Solicitor. 

 

The submission is divided into three main parts. Part one deals with the history of railways, the history 

of settlement, and the history of agricultural development on the prairies. It deals with Saskatchewan‟s 

economy, both agricultural and non-agricultural. This is the volume that builds up a background so that 

the importance of rail transportation, through history and at the present time, can be properly 

emphasized. 

 

Part two of the submission deals with the railways themselves and national policies. Part two points out 

the amount of public assistance given to the railways in the past. It emphasizes the national policies 

which 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

50 

 

were put into effect since Confederation, the effect that these national policies had on the direction of 

trade, and deals also with the national policy in regard to protective tariffs. This part is very important, 

because it must be recognized that the trans-continental railways themselves are instruments of national 

policy, they are not something that was just built as an ordinary enterprise to serve a particular area, but 

were certainly very definitely created to provide for the carrying out of the national policy. 

 

Part three of the main submission deals with the cost of the service and the value of the service given. It 

deals with competitive factors, other modes of transportation, the question of equalization of freight 

rates, the effect of horizontal increases, many of which we have had since the last war, and it also deals 

with the question of a redistribution of the burden of transportation costs, to see if there is not a more 

equitable method of paying for those costs. I can certainly recommend all parts of this submission, as 

not only very informative reading, but also very interesting reading because all of the volumes are full of 

a lot of very interesting history. 

 

The Crow's Nest Pass Agreement, which is dealt with in this special submission, is also an extremely 

interesting book. You will remember, Mr. Speaker, that when the Royal Commission was set up, it was 

thought at that time that the Crow's Nest Pass rates at least might not be considered by the Commission, 

but the Commission did take those rates into consideration. The result was that there was a great deal of 

time, a large part of the time of the Commission spent listening to attacks being made on these Crow's 

Nest Pass rates, and it was quite clear that there was a move to try to make these rates the scape-goat for 

all of the problems which the railways have to face today. So the province of Saskatchewan found it 

desirable to present a rather full and special submission on this question of the Crow's Nest Pass 

Agreement rates. I said it is an interesting book; it gives the thrilling story of the conquest of the west. It 

was an open question in the western part of the continent in those early days as to whether this would be 

a part of the United States or a part of Canada. Even back in 1867, the same year as Confederation, there 

was a move in the Senate of the United States, and I want to quote from the Crow Brief: 

 

“In 1967, Senator Ramsay of Minnesota moved that the senate committee on foreign relations, 

consider the advisability of a treaty between the 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

51 

 

United States and Canada, which would provide for the American annexation of all territories in North 

America, west of longitude 90 degrees.” 

 

Just to the west of Fort William. Senator Ramsay saw an urgent necessity for action by Congress in the 

impending proposal for the annexation of the Western British Territories to Canada. He commented in 

part, and remember, Mr. Speaker, this now is Senator Ramsay‟s comment: 

 

“We are informed that a member of the Government of Canada is about to present to Parliament a Bill 

for the extention of the Dominion of Canada to the Pacific Ocean. The authorities of British Columbia, 

having applied for admission to the Canadian Federation, the passage of such an Act by the Parliament 

at Ottawa with the assent of the Queen in Council, will consummate the annexation of northwest 

British America to Canada. The people of the Selkirk settlement northwest of Minnesota, and the 

people of British Columbia on the Pacific Coast, would prefer admission to the American Union. And 

I believe it has become the duty of the American Congress to indicate openly and distinctly the terms 

and conditions which we are willing to offer as an alternative to the Canadian overture.” 

 

In 1868, Mr. Speaker, in the United States Senate, there was a committee on Pacific Railroads, and this 

committee made a report. The Senate Committee regarded American railway construction near to the 

international boundary as pointing inevitably to annexation. Their report contained the following 

comments and I quote from their report: 

 

“The line of the North Pacific runs for 1,500 miles near the British possessions, and when built will 

drain the agricultural products of the rich Saskatchewan and Red River districts east of the mountains, 

and the gold country of the Fraser, Thomson and Kootenay Rivers west of the mountains. The opening 

by us first of the North Pacific Railroad, seals the destiny of the British possessions west of the 91st 

meridian. They will be so strongly Americanized in interests and feelings that they will in effect be 

severed from the new Dominion and the question of their annexation will be but a question of time. 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

52 

 

This feeling was not confined solely to the United States. In the Legislative Council of British Columbia 

this same feeling is to be found. There was a Dr. Helmcken and in Confederation debates in the British 

Columbia Legislative Council, in March 1870, Dr. Helmcken summarized the views of the group, the 

members of which stood in opposition to the Confederation policy of the administration in the following 

words: 

 

“No union between this colony and Canada can permanently exist unless it be to the material and 

pecuniary advantage of this colony to remain in the union. The sum of the interests of the inhabitants, 

is the interests of the colony. The people of this colony have, generally speaking, no love for Canada. 

They care as a rule, little or nothing about the creation of another empire, kingdom, or republic. They 

have but little sentimentality and care little about distinction between the form of government of 

Canada and the United States.” 

 

So, there is no question that there was a situation which demanded something to be done, or else, the 

great western part of the continent would have been lost for Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must remind the hon. Member that it is now 5:30, and I shall leave the Chair until 

7:30 p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed at 5:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

The House resumed at 7:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

Hon Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, there was a very serious question of annexation of what is now 

the western part of Canada to the United States. This talk was not only in the United States, in the Senate 

of the United States and among the people, but also prevalent to some extent in British Columbia as 

well. 

 

Now, I would like to quote from a letter from Sir John A. MacDonald, to C.J. Brydges, General 

Manager of the Grand Trunk Railway, and dated from Ottawa, January 28th, 1870. In this letter he 

mentions Smith, and the Smith he refers to is Governor Smith of Vermont, with whom Brydges had 

been in conversation. And Governor 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

53 

 

Smith was then President of the Northern Pacific Railways. The extract from the letter reads: 

 

“From Sir John A. MacDonald to Mr. Brydges. 

 

Many thanks for your letter of the 26th, giving me an account of your conversations with Smith. It is 

quite evident to me not only from this conversation, but from advices from Washington, that the 

United States Government are resolved to do all they can, short of war, to get possession of the 

Western Territory, and we must take immediate and vigorous steps to counteract them. One of the first 

things to be done is to show, unmistakably, our resolve to build the Pacific Railway.” 

 

I won‟t go into any details of those times with regard to the final decision to build the Canadian Pacific 

Railway, only to mention that the Government regarded this as a question of national policy. The basic 

subsidy of $25 million was put up for the company, and twenty-five million acres of land, together with 

some very valuable privileges in regard to tax exemptions. Twenty-five million dollars today may not 

seem so very much, but we must remember that in those days they built railway lines for a cost of from 

$15,000 to $25,000 or $30,000 a mile. That $25 million meant a lot of miles of railway. The land that 

they got, of course, was on the prairies in the provinces of Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and Alberta. 

 

Now, I would like to quote from the Final Summation Argument which has been tabled in the House, 

page 4. 

 

“The four original provinces — that was Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick and Nova Scotia — had 

been granted control over the natural resources within their respective boundaries by the British North 

America Act. And the Red River settlers made it clear in demanding provincial status, that they would 

be satisfied with nothing less. Their views and requests were rejected, however, and the province of 

Manitoba was created inferior in economic and political status to the original provinces. The Manitoba 

Act of 1870, provided that all ungranted or waste lands in the province shall be vested in the Crown 

and administered by the Government of Canada for the purposes of the Dominion. Justifying this 

section of the Act in debate, Sir John A. MacDonald told the 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

54 

 

House, that the residents of the Red River colony wished Rupert‟s land made into one province, and to 

have all the land within the boundary as in other provinces. But the land could not be handed over to 

them, as it was of the greatest importance to the Dominion to have possession of it, for the Pacific 

Railway must be built by means of the land through which it was to pass.” 

 

Another quotation I would like to give to the House in that same line, is to be found in Part 2 of the 

submission, on page 11. This is quoting the Hon. Sir Charles Tupper, in 1883. 

 

“In 1883, the Hon. Sir Charles Tupper, then Minister of Railway, said frankly, „The interests of this 

country demand that the Canadian Pacific Railway should be made a success. Are the interests of 

Manitoba and the northwest to be sacrificed to the interests of Canada? I say, if it is necessary yes‟.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have dealt at some length with the question of the national policy in regards to 

transportation in the early days. I wanted to show, without doubt, that the trans-continental railway, the 

C.P.R. was built as an instrument of national policies. Besides the grants of land and cash that I 

mentioned before, the Government of Canada undertook to build the section of railway from Fort 

Williams to Selkirk, Manitoba, and from Kamloops to Port Moody, in B.C., and to convey those 

sections of the line to the company without cost. So, there is no question about it, that this railway was 

created, not as an ordinary private enterprise, but as an instrument of national policy in Canada. 

 

Then, another thing happened that had an affect on the situation was the mineral discoveries in southern 

B.C. Away back in 1855, gold was discovered, and then the development of the Caribou Gold Rush in 

the Kootenay country and coal at the Crow‟s Nest Pass. Finally this boiled down to the Crow‟s Nest 

Pass line being built for the purposes of the railway and the national policy, because the American 

railways were close to the southern boundary of B.C., and they were beginning to take off more and 

more of the produce in minerals and other things, from southern British Columbia. So, there was an 

offer made to the C.P.R. with regards to building the Crow‟s Nest Pass line. 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

55 

 

One short quotation from the submission — this is back to the Crow Brief — on page 34 of the 

mimeographed article: 

 

“A few members suggested in the debate, that the Conservative offer of a $5,000 subsidy, and loan of 

$20,000 per mile, was more generous than the Liberal offer of $11,000 subsidy per mile, since the 

loan would probably not be repaid in any case. The consensus of opinion was, however, that the 

Liberal offer was more generous to the railway, and more onerous to the Government, and therefore, 

required to be defended.” 

 

Later we find some more about the defense of that policy on page 35, speaking of the conditions exacted 

from the Canadian Pacific Railway by the agreement under discussion, Mr. Blair, who was then Minister 

of Railways and Canals, said in part: 

 

“The committee will have noted that we have sought to ensure the country a large measure of relief 

from the rates which have obtained since the Canadian Pacific Railway was started. We have imposed 

conditions upon the company which are very largely restrictive of their present powers.” 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, was in defense of what was considered to be the more generous offer of $11,000 a 

mile grant for the railway. 

 

I go on and quote: 

 

“We have embraced in one of the sub-clauses of these resolutions, a considerable list of articles which 

go into very large consumption among the people of the western provinces, and we have secured an 

agreement on the part of the Canadian Pacific Railway, that very substantial reductions will be made 

upon the existing rates.” 

 

Now, that was pretty well the beginning of the Crow‟s Nest Pass Agreement. 

 

To quote another prominent man of that day, Sir Richard Cartwright. 

 

“In contrasting the Conservative and the Liberal subsidy proposals he summed up the matter 

concisely. 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

56 

 

Now, the difference between the proposals is practically that we give, if you choose so to call it, some 

$5,000 or $6,000 per mile, to the Canadian Pacific Railway, for constructing this line, and we are 

paying them a further sum of $5,000 or $6,000 in return for valuable privileges to the whole North 

West and Eastern Canada as well. Now it is those privileges that were bought and paid for, that is it 

necessary for us to defend at this time.” 

 

I would like to point out now to the House, something about those grain rates, and what has happened to 

them over the years. The hon. Members will find this on page 52, of the mimeographed copy. If you 

have a printed copy the number of the page won‟t be the same. It is a table and this shows that before 

August 1898, the rate was lowered and from October 1903 until 1918, the rate was 18¢. Then in 1918, 

things went to pieces again and this rate began to increase and it went up to 20¢ and to 24¢ and finally in 

1920, the rate was 31½¢ a hundred pounds from Regina to the head of the Lakes. That has come down 

until at the present time the rate is 20¢. So that is comparable of what these rates have meant, and the 

importance of maintaining them for the people of the West. 

 

In 1951, a Royal Commission on freight rates reported — that was known as the Turgeon Commission 

— and they had something to say about the Crow‟s Nest Pass rates, and I think it is worthy of particular 

note. 

 

First, they — that is the Turgeon Commission — indicated succinctly the error of the view that the 

Crow‟s Nest Pass grain rate constitutes a special and unique concession to the producers of one region 

within the Dominion. 

 

Second, they considered and rejected categorically the request that Crow‟s Nest Pass grain rates should 

be made subject to general freight rate increases. 

 

Finally, they considered and rejected emphatically the suggestion that commissions should recommend 

the repeal of the statutory control of the Crow‟s Nest Pass rates. 

 

I would like now to deal just for a few minutes with the recommendation in the submission made by the 

province of Saskatchewan, and this will be found in the Final 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

57 

 

Summation and Argument beginning on page 36, because the resolution which we are debating at the 

present time asks the House to endorse the recommendation. 

 

The first one is, “The Government of Saskatchewan recommends that the Crow‟s Nest Pass rates on 

grain and flour moving into export positions, be retained under the protection of Parliament and 

maintained in their present form and at their present level without any changes.” That is practically the 

same as the wording in the motion, and really does not need much further argument to support it. But 

here is one question here, which I would like to give, on page 37: 

 

“The Crow‟s Nest Pass rates on grain and grain products, moving from the prairies to export positions, 

have since their inception constituted a fundamental and integral part of national economic policy. 

Saskatchewan repudiates the allegation of the railways, that these rates impose a burden on the 

railways, or that they are the root of the railway problem. On the contrary, great benefits have flowed 

from these rates to the railways, to Canadian industry, to Canadian trade, and to national unity as well 

as to western Canadian agriculture.” 

 

The next recommendation is found at the bottom of page 37. 

 

“The Government of Saskatchewan recommends that the existing division of assets and revenues of 

corporate railway enterprises, as prescribed by the Board of Transport Commissions in the uniform 

classification of accounts, be changed to provide that all assets employed in surface transportation, 

excluding ocean shipping, be classified as making up rail enterprises, and that all revenues arising 

from surface transportation services be brought to account in the determination of monetary 

requirements in revenue cases, arising out of applications for increases in railway rates.” 

 

In other words, now that the railways are going into the trucking business to a very great extent, their 

whole transportation business should be considered as one piece. I think that that is quite logical and 

quite proper. 

 

In one paragraph from the submission: 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

58 

 

“The fundamental position of the Government of the province of Saskatchewan on this question is that 

the Canadian Pacific Railway Company was created with substantial public assistance for the sole 

purpose of building and operating a railway in perpetuity. Other assets and other enterprises have 

accrued to the company either in the form of gifts from the Crown or from the proceeds of railway 

operation. It is the contention of Saskatchewan that all assets of the company ought therefore to be 

regarded as rail assets to assist the company in the discharge of its responsibilities. It got its land 

grants as a part of the bargain for building a railway and giving those services. It accumulated resource 

properties in southern British Columbia, which have become very valuable and have paid very 

substantial dividends to the company over the years past.” 

 

I don‟t think that these things should be ignored. 

 

One more quotation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

“The two major railways in Canada today, are much more than railway companies. They may more 

properly be described as transportation companies, for they are both active in several fields of 

transportation. Canadian Pacific operates the most complete transportation system by rail, by road, by 

water and by air, and particularly substantial development has taken place in the highway operations 

of this system. Both Canadian Pacific and Canadian National have given evidence before the 

Commission of the progress made with their plans to integrate their rail and road operations for the 

purpose of developing a flexible, co-ordinated merchandise service. Saskatchewan feels that such 

integration is likely to result in improved service to the public, and to expand the traffic potential of 

the railways to the extent that steam ship operators on inland waterways are also used in such 

integration, the same comments apply.” 

 

The third recommendation: 

 

“The Government of Saskatchewan recommends the establishment of a unified system of 

transportation control through a national transportation authority.” 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

59 

 

In part three of the submission this is stated: 

 

“The Government of the province of Saskatchewan urges this Commission recommend to the 

Government of Canada the creation by a separate act of Parliament, of a Canadian transportation 

authority to combine and include the present functions, duties and responsibilities of the Board of 

Transport Commission as for Canada, and that such transportation authority be empowered especially 

to extend its jurisdiction to the regulation and control of inter-provincial and international motor truck 

transportation. This agency would have as its objective the further co-ordination of transportation 

services in the interests of the public, with a view to ensuring the most effective use of all 

transportation facilities. A move in this direction, at this time, is a logical and necessary extension of 

the historic national policy of the regulation of transportation services in Canada.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is just as true today, that transportation must be a vital part of a national policy in 

Canada, if the different parts of Canada are going to be contented within the Confederation, and feel that 

they are getting fair treatment. 

 

The Royal Commission on transportation of 1951, that is the Turgeon Commission said: 

 

“Insofar as Parliament can regulate and control transportation, the object should not be confined to the 

rather negative work of correcting abuses, but should reach out to the positive constructive task of 

developing adequate and efficient transportation services, and of co-ordinating and harmonizing the 

service in the public interest. The regulation of railways can best be exercised by combining it with the 

regulation of the other agencies of transportation.” 

 

The fourth recommendation, Mr. Speaker, is: 

 

“The Government of Saskatchewan recommends the institution of a national transportation subsidy.” 

 

One sentence in the submission says: 

 

“Deficit subjects are so fraught with danger that they are entirely unacceptable to this 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

60 

 

province. In other words, we should not and we do not recommend a subsidy that would mean the 

picking up of the tab for the loss. But the kind of a subsidy that is recommended can be termed as a 

rate reduction subsidy, to do two things at least; to help the railways to operate more effectively and 

second, to help to eliminate some of the inequalities of the transportation burden in Canada.” 

 

The Saskatchewan submission in part three states this: 

 

“A national transportation subsidy should be consistent with established national policy and ameliorate 

to some extent the unequal impact of such national policy. It should promote the flow of traffic and 

thereby foster a closer economic relationship between all parts of Canada. It should mitigate to a 

degree the divisive effect of great distances, by absorbing a portion of the transportation cost, and 

blunt to some extent at least, the sharp edges of any future general increases. It should be applied in 

such a manner as to avoid discriminating between different regions, and thereby be regarded as a truly 

national subsidy, one from which all parts of Canada may benefit, while still achieving one of its main 

objectives, that of redistributing the burden of transportation cost. It should not be of a nature that 

would simply result in the Federal Treasury under-rating railway revenue deficits.” 

 

The submission goes on to point out that this could be established in a similar way by the adaption or the 

extension, for example, of the Maritimes Freight Rates Act. It could be called a Western Freight Rates 

Act, or a Maritimes-Western Freight Rates Act. 

 

I don‟t like to bore you with long quotations, but I think it can be said more briefly if I do quote than if I 

put it into my own words. 

 

One more quotation from page 47 of the final summation: 

 

“The appropriate level of rate reduction under the subsidy legislation can only be determined by 

careful examination. It may be urged, however, that experience un the Maritimes Freight 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

61 

 

Rate Act, should be useful for purposes of comparison, although the province of Saskatchewan wishes 

to make it perfectly clear that whatever the percentage reduction decided upon it should apply 

uniformly on traffic moving into, out of, and within the prescribed area. The province is not prepared 

to say whether a 30% reduction, as provided under the Maritimes Freight Rate Act, would effect 

adequate relief from the present high level of rates now paid by shippers. It is proposed that such a rate 

reduction as may finally be selected, might well be designed to incorporate such insufficient and 

short-term expedience as the bridge subsidy.” 

 

I would like to read a final quotation, which is the last part of this final summation: 

 

“The Government of Saskatchewan does not suggest that a national transportation subsidy ought 

necessarily to be restricted exclusively to rail traffic or rail carriers. Other carriers such as truck 

operators should not of course, expect to receive the subsidy automatically as a matter of right, but 

might qualify for it by meeting specific conditions. Truckers, for instance, might establish eligibility 

under the unified system of transportation control proposed by the province on condition of 

compliance with rules and regulations laid down by the Canadian Transportation Authority, and the 

inclusion of inter-provincial trucking within the jurisdiction of that authority. While Saskatchewan 

considers the preservation of the railway system or Canada to be fundamental national necessity, it is 

not the intention of this province to sanction railway monopoly, or to prejudice the legitimate growth 

of the trucking industry or of any other medium of transportation. It is a basic assumption underlying 

Saskatchewan‟s recommendations, both for a unified pattern of transportation regulation and for a 

national transportation subsidy, that the various transportation agencies should be treated on a 

comparable basis to the fullest extent permitted by their physical characteristics and within the limits 

of administrative feasibility. It is urged that this principle be fairly applied in administering regulatory 

procedures, and in determining the application of subsidy, all branches of the transportation industry 

should 



 

March 21, 1961 

 

62 

 

be able to compete successfully and provide the cheapest more effective and most efficient 

transportation service to the people of Canada. The Government of Saskatchewan submits that the 

adoption of a national transportation subsidy of the type recommended by the province would mitigate 

the divisive effects of great distances, and permit transportation again to fulfill its historic role as a 

unifying influence within the Canadian nation.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have at some length quoted from the submission, and I want to emphasize the 

importance today as it was important seventy-five and one hundred years ago, this national policy in 

regard to transportation, that it does need attention today if it is going to maintain in happiness and good 

relations the union which was established in 1867. I hope this motion may be dealt with promptly and 

with unanimous support. 

 

I regret the delay in introducing it to the House, but I did not want to introduce it until at least the copies 

of the submission were available to the Members. But I do hope it will get unanimous support and can 

be sent to the Royal Commission on Transportation and to the Government of Canada. 

 

The question being put it was agreed to. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 10:00 o‟clock p.m. 


