



















































Hansard: March 08, 1961


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session – Fourteenth Legislature 

20th Day 

Wednesday, March 8, 1961. 

 

The House met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. Arthur Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, I want to bring to your attention, one of the 

contestants that was in the oratory contest last night, with his teacher and some of the students from my 

Constituency. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mrs. J.E. Cooper (Regina City): — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to call your attention to two groups 

of students up in the Speaker‘s Gallery We have a special interest group of Grade VII students, with 

their teacher Mrs. Debunne. We also have a group of students from Athabasca School with their 

principal, Mr. MacDonald. We do welcome them here this afternoon, and we hope they‘ll find it a 

pleasant and profitable experience. 

 

ORATORICAL CONTEST 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Provincial Treasurer) – Mr. Speaker, a reference has been made to the oratorical 

contest held in connection with the trustees convention last evening. This is something that is looked 

forward to by trustees at their convention, and by a number of students during the year. I would like to 

join with the welcome to the contestant who is in the Gallery, and all Members of the Legislature would 

want to give encouragement to all of those who took part. I think all of us were particularly interested to 

learn that the winner of the Bryant Oratorical Contest, this year, was Miss Carol Erb, the daughter of our 

Minister of 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

2 

 

Health. All of us would be interested in passing our congratulations to Carol, and incidentally to her 

father. 

 

SASKATCHEWAN SAVINGS BONDS 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Provincial Treasurer): — While I‘m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, may I make a brief 

statement with regard to Saskatchewan Savings Bonds? All the Members will recall that we said 

originally that we hoped to get somewhere in the neighborhood of $4 or $5 million, and we didn‘t 

announce any time during which the bonds would be sold. The response, as indicated by previous 

announcements, has been extraordinarily good, and I may say that up until noon today, we had 

applications for $7,864,000. I want to take this opportunity of thanking the people who have shown such 

interest and such confidence in the province to invest their money in this way. It is necessary also to 

make an announcement that since the loan has been heavily over-subscribed, we have decided that we 

will have to curtail further acceptance after midnight on Friday of this week. Applications that are in the 

hands of dealers throughout the province by midnight on Friday of this week, will be accepted; after that 

the dealers will not be authorized to accept any further applications. I‘m afraid those who may still be 

wishing to purchase them will just have to get in line earlier next year. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed from Tuesday, March 7, 1961, the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 

the Hon. Mr. Lloyd: 

 

That Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair. (the House to go into Committee of Supply) 

 

Hon. Mr. Nicholson (Minister of Social Welfare & Rehabilitation): — Mr. Speaker, I intended last 

evening, to extend my congratulations to the new Members on both sides of the Chamber. Some of us 

have listened to maiden speeches in the Parliament of Canada, and I‘m 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

3 

 

sure that they would agree with me that the maiden efforts, here this year compare very favourably with 

any that have been delivered in the House of Commons. I want to extend my very best wishes to all the 

new Members. 

 

Tomorrow afternoon, at 3:50, ten tubercular refugees and fourteen members of their families, twenty-

four in all, are due to arrive in Regina from Rome, Italy, and Bonn, Germany. The tubercular members 

will be taken to the San at Fort Qu‘Appelle tomorrow night, after having been given a meal at a Regina 

hotel. The other members of these families will be provided with living accommodation in Regina 

through the joint efforts of a local committee of volunteers, spearheaded by Rev. Father Goski, working 

with representatives of the Federal Department of Citizenship and Immigration, and the Regina Regional 

Office of the Department of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation. 

 

This is the third group of tubercular refugees and their families to be received into Saskatchewan. The 

first group arrived in January 1960, the second group arrived last August. The Federal Government is 

responsible for the maintenance of the non-tubercular members of these families until they become self-

sustaining in the community. The province provides, at its own expense, the cost of treatment in the 

Sanatorium. May I, Mr. Speaker, invite Members of the Legislature, to be at the airport tomorrow. 

Those of you who have had the experience of arriving in a strange country without friends will 

appreciate how much it means to have someone to smile, and I‘m sure that some of the Members might 

be able to converse with these guests, in some of the languages that will be spoken. I would appreciate it 

if anyone interested in going to the airport would check with my office regarding the exact time the 

plane will be arriving in Regina, as there could be some delay. 

 

After I conclude my remarks, Members will receive some copies of pamphlets telling of the work of the 

Department of Social Welfare. You will find the name of my predecessor, the Hon. T.J. Bentley, as the 

Minister, on some of these. I should explain that we had a number of these on hand, but my Scottish 

background would never permit me to destroy these. If there are any inquiries that do come to the Hon. 

T.J. Bentley as the Minister of the Department, they will be attended to promptly. 

 

Later on I will be referring to a mimeographed booklet that gives the names and the locations of all the 

senior citizens‘ housing establishments in the province. 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

4 

 

These are not included, but they will be made available to the Members on request. Again, may I urge 

Members to visit these institutions throughout the province, and find out the work that is being done. 

 

(I have a note here that the arrival of the refugees has been delayed on account of bad weather. The 

latest is that it will be arriving on Friday morning at 8:25, but Members might check with our office 

Friday to make sure of the exact arrival time). I am sure that I am speaking for Members on both sides of 

the House in saying that the people of this province are very glad to welcome these guests to our 

country. We hope that they‘ll have better health, and a happy life in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there has been a very long tradition that when a Member is making his maiden speech 

some reference should be made to the good people who have elected him to the Legislature. I did that 

last night; now I would like to make a few references to the City of Saskatoon, but not from any 

parochial point of view. I think that Members on both sides of the House will agree with me that the 

people of Saskatchewan are very proud of the fact that for the first time in the history of our province a 

Mayor of a Saskatchewan community has been elected as president of the Canadian Federation of 

Mayors and Municipalities. I am sure everyone in the province is very proud of the fact that Mayor Sid 

Buckwold has brought this honour to Saskatoon, and to the province for the first time in our history. 

 

I heard Mayor Buckwold apologize for the fact that he wasn‘t born in Saskatchewan, where his parents 

have been living for a long, long time. Though he‘s a relatively young man, apparently the medical and 

hospital services in those days in small communities were not quite what they are now, and his mother 

went to Winnipeg for such an important event. He and his family have been very well known and very 

highly regarded citizens of Saskatchewan for a long time. Mayor Buckwold in addition to being the 

president of the Canadian Federation of Mayors and Municipalities, is the president of the S.U.M.A. and 

on three different occasions he accompanied the members of the Cabinet to the Dominion-Provincial 

conferences. I am sure we‘re all delighted that Prime Minister Diefenbaker has also recognized Mayor 

Buckwold‘s outstanding qualifications, and has appointed him to an important commission. 

 

I am very pleased that a group of school children from Saskatoon are in the Gallery. The pupils from the 

Queen Elizabeth School, with their teacher, Mr. Trembach, have honoured me by looking in briefly 

while 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

5 

 

I am speaking. I regret that it is necessary for them to move on very quickly to the museum and some of 

the other places of interest in the city, but I hope that they will enjoy their brief visit to this Legislature. 

 

One further reference to my city. The lady Member from Saskatoon mentioned the other night that the 

Women‘s Canadian Curling Championship was won for the first time by a Saskatoon rink. I regret very 

much that this speech prevented me from being in Saskatoon yesterday for the official welcome for the 

curlers on their return, but I‘m sure that Members on both sides of the House would like to extend our 

very heartiest congratulations to Miss Joyce McKee the skip, Miss Sylvia Fedoruk, Mrs. Barbara 

McNevin, and Mrs. Rosa McKee. 

 

Still one further reference to Saskatoon. I have one of the recent copies of the ―Co-operative Consumer,‖ 

and I read on the first page that a new Federated Co-op warehouse, having more than four acres under 

one roof, was opened yesterday in Saskatoon. Erected at a cost of $1,040,000. The new building is 

believed to be the largest warehouse in Saskatchewan. It is located on a seventeen acre site in the 

northwest industrial area of Saskatoon, and will house operations previously carried on at three separate 

locations in that city. In the story, it mentions that four railway cars can be brought into the heart of the 

warehouse at one time, and that sixteen trucks can be loaded at the same time. 

 

And another story on the first page mentions the fact that it was announced that construction of a 

multimillion dollar chemical complex in Saskatoon; which will be one of the largest of its kind in 

Canada, will include Canada‘s first basic pesticide plant. The complex will eventually consist of a 

plastic chlorine unit, a basic agricultural processing plant, and a chemical formulating plant. This is the 

large project that Inter-Provincial Co-operatives will be building. I am sure that all the people of 

Saskatchewan realizing that Inter-Provincial has a responsibility to the people in Manitoba, Alberta, as 

well as Saskatchewan, appreciate very, very much that this important industry will be located in 

Saskatchewan. 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

6 

 

At this point, I would like to associate myself with the Attorney General in his remarks made yesterday, 

regarding the Provincial Treasurer. The Provincial Treasurer has earned the reputation of being the 

outstanding Minister of Education in Canada these past sixteen years, and I have every confidence that 

he will qualify for the reputation of one of the most outstanding Provincial Treasurers we‘ve ever had in 

this province, or that any province has had. 

 

The former Minister of Education was one of the youngest Ministers that any province had, and he had 

some ideas which were considered to be quite queer when he became the Minister of Education. The 

practice had been that the educational buildings should be built on a mortgage or debenture basis, and I 

was interested in doing a little research work, regarding what the policy was prior to the Minister of 

Education taking over in 1944, and what has been done since. Again, this is of special interest to those 

of us who live in Saskatoon. I think it is fair to say that the University is one of our most valuable assets 

in this province. Naturally, no group of people will appreciate its importance quite as much as the people 

of Saskatoon. I was interested in getting from the Minister some interesting information regarding what 

we‘ve done through the years. I find that the cost of the university buildings and land prior to March 

31st, 1944, totalled $4,177,000 roughly, and the cost of university buildings from March 31st, 1944 until 

March 31st, 1960 was $25,705,000. 

 

There are some other details that are interesting and very important. Apparently they didn‘t keep a 

separate record of the debt charges on the university buildings as such, prior to 1921-22. But, we do 

have the information regarding the debt charges from 1921-22 to 1959-60. Hon. Members will be 

interested in knowing that we have paid on this debt, $6,526,000 but we still owe $2,900,000. It is rather 

unusual, on buildings costing just over $4 million to pay back over $6 million, and still be owing $2.9 

million. 

 

What about the performance while the Provincial Treasurer was Minister of Education? 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

7 

 

How much interest have we paid? Nothing! How much do we owe? Nothing! Some of the Members 

might be interested in just a very few of these prices, and again we are greatly indebted to the pioneers 

of more than half a century ago for visualizing the importance of a university in this province, planning 

such a fine campus, with permanent buildings. They were able to get nearly two thousand acres of land 

then for $189,000. Saskatchewan Hall, which is nearly 50 years old, and is in nearly as good shape as 

when it was built cost $278,000; the old college building $400,000; Qu‘Appelle Hall $335,000; and the 

chemistry building, which was one of the wonders of its day, $732,000. So I am sure that those who are 

interested in education will be forever grateful to our Provincial Treasurer for the wisdom that he 

displayed when as a young man in his thirties took over the responsibility of the Department of 

Education, and planned to have the new buildings paid for as they were built without a debt to pass on to 

future generations. The total amount spent, taking into account the deductions paid, was $25,705,000. 

The Federal Government paid part of the University Hospital, the University Nurses‘ Residence, and the 

School for the Deaf, and some of these other expenditures. We‘re most grateful to the Minister. 

 

I am very glad that the Minister, the Provincial Treasurer, continues his interest in education and health 

and welfare. There was an editorial in the Saskatoon ―Star Phoenix‖ recently complaining about the fact 

that the new budget did not make provision for the construction of the St. Paul‘s Hospital, but the 

Provincial Treasurer draws my attention to the fact that under the estimates for Public Health, there is an 

item for $2,500,000 which does make provision for the anticipated expenditures there might be this year 

in connection with the rebuilding of St. Paul‘s Hospital. 

 

I would like to say that we appreciate very much the fact that the new Minister of Education continues to 

take a keen interest in the needs of the children in this province. I am delighted to note that the city of 

Saskatoon will receive this year a grant of $1,817,000, an increase over last year of $321,000. I note that 

Saskatoon appears to be the fastest growing centre in the province, judging 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

8 

 

by the number of additional teachers that are going to be required next year; Regina runs second. In 

Regina they‘re going to need forty-eight elementary teachers, and the same number in Saskatoon. 

They‘re only going to require nineteen high school teachers in Regina, compared with thirty-five in our 

city. These are additional teachers. 

 

I am very glad that the Provincial Treasurer and the Minister of Education have continued to take a keen 

interest in the educational needs in rural Saskatchewan. I shall always be interested in my friends in 

Mackenzie, where they have a great many problems: the Sturgis School Unit will have 73.1% of their 

educational costs; Hudson Bay will have 77.4%; Nipawin 69.1%; and Kamsack 66.8%. These are 

percentages of the assigned costs. 

 

At this point, Mr. Speaker, I must thank the Members opposite for considering that our Department 

should have additional funds. I am sure that their helpful remarks will be given very careful 

consideration by my colleagues in the Cabinet. Only two branches have come up for critical comment, 

and I‘m sorry that I cannot say something about many of the very interesting branches in our 

Department. Social aid has received some comment, and the Geriatric Centre, and I feel obliged to say 

something about these two programs. I am aware of the fact that there have been some in all parts of 

Canada who have qualified for social aid, who have probably made false statements. May I again appeal 

to any Member, who has information regarding citizens who have made false applications, to make that 

information available to those who can do something about it. Social aid is handled by the 

municipalities. It is true that the municipalities only pay a small percentage of the costs, the balance is 

paid for by the Provincial and Federal Governments. This isn‘t a problem that is confined to 

Saskatchewan. It is a problem that‘s very old, but I suggest that it‘s a problem that we shouldn‘t laugh 

about, and I don‘t think we should assume that the only people who violate the laws of the country are 

people who receive social aid. 

 

In one of these booklets that you will have there are a few paragraphs that I hope you will read and 

consider carefully. Saskatchewan‘s public 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

9 

 

assistance program is founded on a belief in the integrity and dignity of the individual, and on the 

recognition that members of society are dependent on one another, and that the welfare of all is 

dependent on the well-being of each. Inherent in this belief is the right of every individual, regardless of 

his race, creed, residence, or citizenship, to public assistance when his need can be demonstrated, and 

the conviction that no individual should have to meet a test of moral worthiness in order to receive 

public assistance. Every individual receiving public assistance should have the right to plan his own life 

as he chooses, even though he‘s lost his financial independence. This means he should have the right to 

decide such things as how he shall spend his financial assistance, except that he has to use it to provide 

the necessities of life for himself and his dependants, where he shall live, what service he shall accept. 

This implies that every individual receiving financial assistance should receive it in the form of cash to 

enable him to make these decisions. I hope that Members will read carefully the balance of this section 

regarding public assistance, and I hope that you will discuss this with the people in the municipalities. I 

am convinced that there isn‘t any person in Canada who looks forward to his or her children having a 

career on social aid. I am sure that the remarks made by the Member for Rosthern yesterday will not be 

made a year from now when he has an opportunity to discuss these problems with the people who are 

receiving social aid. I am sure that when he gives me the particulars that he claims he has I will be able 

to give him a satisfactory explanation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to indicate how serious this problem is, I went to Hansard last night to review a table that 

Mr. Thorson placed before the House of Commons on November 11th, 1941, on Armistice Day, and the 

Premier of this province had some very pertinent questions to ask regarding this table. Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister of National War Services told us that of the first group of 209,000 young Canadians in the 

prime of life who were examined for military service, 44.1% were rejected. This was a direct result of 

malnutrition during the depression. That is a statistic that every Canadian should have a look at, and I 

hope that the Members of 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

10 

 

this Chamber will not join in the popular sport of ridiculing citizens who can‘t find work, who have no 

way of living, unless social aid is available. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nicholson: — This brings me to the next branch of my Department that has had a good deal 

of criticism in the House, and out of the House, the Saskatoon Geriatric Centre. As I said last night, I 

resent very much the extreme language which has been used about this building, which isn‘t new, which 

isn‘t built on the same scale as this Chamber, or many of the other public buildings in Canada, but it is a 

centre where excellent care is being given. I would like to read some extracts from a letter which 

appeared in the ―Star Phoenix‖ on February 4th. This was written by Gilbert Wright. 

 

―We have a place called the Saskatoon Geriatric Centre. It is the least known and the most-scolded 

institution in the city, and every day, men and women, thank God it is here.‖ 

 

Then I‘ll leave out a few paragraphs – it is quite a long letter: 

 

―In the case of the Geriatric Centre, some of the criticisms are not correct. To begin with, this is not a 

fire trap. No one could be trapped within. There are exits all around the building, about 15 for 90 

guests.‖ 

 

―Certainly there could be a fire, as there could be in any building, whatever the construction, where 

human beings are gathered together, but the internal housekeeping here appears excellent. There is 

evidence of continuing and helpful inspection by the City Fire 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

11 

 

Department, the Provincial Fire Inspector. There is an unending round of fire drills, and fire training. 

There is the feeling that the control of fire, and the safety of each guest is guaranteed by ceaseless 

vigilance. Probably people living in this centre are safer than ever before in their lives. A more fire-

resistant building is someday to be desired, and will come, but the only true safety is in constant care, 

and not in bricks and asbestos.‖ 

 

―But fire control is not the whole story‖, 

 

And I comment in passing that there are never less than 4 on duty around the clock. 

 

―Here in this building, men and women who once were miserable, are gaining a new hold on life, a 

new hope, a new courage to endure. For many of them full recovery is not possible. Human skill 

cannot yet cure deformed limbs and all the weaknesses of age, but in the Geriatric Centre, there is 

going on, hour by hour, day by day, year in and year out, one of the most exciting attacks on human 

misery on the North American continent. Saskatoon needs to be proud and sometimes should shout out 

her pride in this place, and in those who run it, in the efforts to see that everything possible is done for 

our senior citizens. It is necessary for critics to hunt out possible errors, but too few know the bigger 

story, the daily miracles and of retaining a new living. Too few have met the visitors from other 

provinces, from Europe and the United States, who come here to learn and to marvel a little, not at the 

success achieved, but at the broad base studies of the whole problem of aging. Saskatoon Geriatric 

Centre is part of a massive effort within this small province, to attack some of the disheartening 

aspects 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

12 

 

of growing old. That‘s what ―geriatric‖ means. This effort is not tied to any political theory or any 

single group. It‘s everywhere in Saskatchewan, in the Government, in the Opposition, in the press, in 

the hospitals, in the churches, in the labour unions, in the service clubs, in the hearts and mind of 

hundreds of citizens. If we single out the Geriatric Centre, because here is the very heart of our 

concern as a province, it can‘t be that good said a friend, who heard this optimistic point of view. And, 

of course, things are not always good. But, there‘s no contradicting the evidence of happiness, actual 

happiness in spite of age and infirmity within the centre. There is no doubt of the pride of most of the 

guests in the place where they live, nor is there any doubt about their personal distress when they hear 

their centre attacked. It‘s theirs, their home, their own, their joy, and source of their comfort.‖ 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nicholson: — Mr. Speaker, I‘ll have a word to say about the writer in a moment, but it seems 

that these critical letters appear in the Saturday Edition of the ―Star Phoenix‖, and when one of these 

disturbing letters appears, I drive over to the centre, and if those who criticize this centre could go in and 

see guests in bed who can‘t walk, concerned, about the consequences if fire broke out. This isn‘t a fire-

trap and the able-bodied who keep describing it as a fire-trap, and who write these disturbing letters to 

the paper, should think twice before creating fear. Of course, this building isn‘t going to last for a 

hundred years, but I resent very much, some of the criticisms that are made. 

 

A week after Mr. Wright‘s letter appeared, and I want to say that Mr. Wright isn‘t one of the supporters 

of this Government, and never has been, — 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — How do you know? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nicholson: — Mr. Wright is a public spirited citizen. What I am saying is, that 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

13 

 

this letter wasn‘t written by a Government supporter. But here is a letter from Mrs. Hnatyshyn and Mr. 

Svoboda, the very weekend after, mentioning that Mr. Wright operates a private nursing home in 

Saskatoon. Mr. and Mrs. Wright are running a convalescent home in a building that belongs to the 

Church of England. It is true that it is a privately owned home, but it is the plan that this home will be a 

home that the Church of England will be running eventually. 

 

Now, I think it is significant that Mrs. Hnatyshyn and Mr. Svoboda have been in the news a great many 

times, but so far they haven‘t made any comments about the federal centre at the airport. At the airport 

there is a veterans‘ home for veterans of the Boer War, World War I and World War II veterans are 

housed there. It was built at the same time as our Geriatric Centre. Everything that could be said about 

our centre, should be said about the Federal Government centre. But, as far as I know, neither Mrs. 

Hnatyshyn or Mr. Svoboda, have ever shown any concern about the place where the veterans of three 

wars are living. 

 

I resent very much making this an issue in an election. Just two weeks before the election, Mr. Svoboda 

was reported on T.V. as having said that he had complaints from thirty in our Geriatric Centre. These 

complaints had been drawn to the attention of the provincial Government, and nothing had been done 

about it, he said. The senior Member for Saskatoon, and I went to his office. He said he was misquoted, 

— that he hadn‘t said thirty, he had said six. Well we said we saw it on T.V. He didn‘t see it, but we 

both heard thirty, but he said he would like us to check and we said, we certainly would check. We‘d 

like you to check, and we suggested that if he was misquoted, we thought he owed it to the guests to 

apologize. The senior Member for Saskatoon and I went to C.F.Q.C.; we saw the transcript of what was 

said; it was thirty, but there has been no apology. We asked Mr. Svoboda when he reduced the number 

to six, would he give us copies of the complaints from the six guests. He said he would, but he never 

has. I was merely a candidate at that time, but I since have been elected; I‘m now the Minister in charge 

of this very important function, and I‘m still waiting for Mr. Svoboda to send the names of the six 

complaints which he said he had when the senior Member for Saskatoon and I visited his office just ten 

days before the election. 

 

I submit that it‘s quite fair to criticize the Attorney General; he‘s strong, and he can stand it; so is 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

14 

 

the Minister of Education; I‘m prepared to take any criticism that can be offered regarding anything I do 

or say, but I must appeal to Opposition Members, please leave our elderly people in the geriatric centres 

free from the abusive language that is used regarding the care they are receiving. I invite hon. Members 

of all parties to visit the Saskatoon Geriatric Centre, and I must thank the Member for Humboldt for 

visiting the place. I understand that she was advised to make her tour without consulting our staff, but 

she didn‘t think that was the thing to do, and she introduced herself to the Superintendent, and we 

appreciate that very much. I hope that all Members on both sides of the House will visit the Saskatoon 

Geriatric Centre and decide for themselves whether the people who are there are receiving the sort of 

care they should receive, whether or not we have taken every precaution that should be taken to see that 

they are as safe as could be. 

 

My colleague, the Minister of Public Works, and I are sharing this time, and time is running out, but I 

would like to say just a few words about the forty centres in the province where housing is available, and 

again I‘m very glad that this housing isn‘t being built by people who have an axe to grind. We‘re having 

wonderful co-operation by religious, municipal, and service organizations. In Assiniboia for example, 

more than thirty rural and urban municipalities have gone together to provide outstanding 

accommodation. The Federal Government has made available loans, in all these centres. They make 

loans up to 72% of the cost; we make an outright grant of 20%, and a maintenance grant of $40.00, for 

each self contained unit per year, and $60.00 for each person in the hospital. At the present time, we are 

very glad that the Member for Arm River, and the people in his Constituency are giving high priority to 

providing this sort of accommodation up at Davidson. The people around Indian Head have been 

holding meetings. The Premier and I were down at Stoughton when New Hope Pioneer Lodge was 

opened there early in the new year, and we asked, ―How many meetings did you have to have before the 

project was completed?‖ ―Oh,‖ they said, ―we had over sixty meetings.‖ That gives some idea of the 

tremendous amount of work that is required in bringing to completion the provision of housing in the 

various parts of the province. 

 

If you are interested in having a copy of this book, you‘ll be able to give information to your 

Constituents who are wondering about these, because there are more than 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

15 

 

sixty places in the province where accommodation is available. In Saskatoon, for example, we have the 

C.N.I.B. home, on 4th Avenue; Colfax House is operated by the Rebecca Assembly; Fairview Court is 

owned and operated by Jubilee Housing; they have accommodation for forty self-contained units. The 

rates are $25.75 per month; the families supply their own heat and light. Mount Pleasant, a similar rate 

of $25.75, and in the hostel, 94 bed accommodation — $75 a month. I don‘t think I should overlook the 

fact that this hostel was made possible as a result of the very generous bequest of the late Edwin Nelson, 

who left something over $100,000 to build a home where Saskatchewan mothers might have better 

living accommodation than his mother had when she passed away. 

 

Lutheran Sunset Lodge, provides accommodation for eighty-eight and is operated by the Evangelical 

Lutheran Church. Oliver Lodge, operated by the United Church, has accommodation for seventy-five, 

and the Salvation Army Eventide has accommodation for forty-eight, and the Star Court, 

accommodation for ten. St. Anne‘s Home, operated by the Roman Catholic Church has sixty-four beds. 

I hope that in the years to come, a great many more communities will take advantage of the sharing 

arrangement whereby the Federal Government, the Provincial Government, and the various 

municipalities embark on housing programs to provide better accommodation for our senior citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be voting against the amendment, and for the main motion. 

 

Hon. W.G. Davies (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, in beginning my talk today, may I 

congratulate those who have already taken part in the debates. This isn‘t to say of course, Mr. Speaker, 

that I agree with everything that has been said by Members of the Opposition, because of course, I don‘t; 

but still I think, regardless of this, there have been some very creditable speeches made by many of the 

Members during the two debates that we have had, and I want to express my congratulations to them. 

And, since this is the First Session of the 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

16 

 

Fourteenth Legislature, Mr. Speaker, may I say a word of thanks to my own Constituents for returning 

me to a seat in this Legislature. I want to say that I feel very privileged to be here, on behalf of the 

people of Moose Jaw, with my colleague and fellow Member behind me. I appreciate their confidence, 

and shall do all that I can to merit it. 

 

Without much preliminary, Mr. Speaker, I want today, to give you information on the Department of 

Public Works. I shall first of all tell you something about the activities of the Department over the 

present year that will end on March 31st. 

 

First of all, of course, one of the large buildings that has come under our purview of construction has 

been the new Court House at Regina. This building, begun in the fall of 1959, should be almost 

completed by the end of the present fiscal year. This structure will replace a very much overcrowded and 

dilapidated building that was constructed in 1894, during the last years of the reign of Queen Victoria. 

The main facing material of this building, incidentally, is of Tyndall stone and the structure itself is of 

reinforced concrete. 

 

It is hoped that the official opening will take place in May, around the middle of May, of this year. I 

might say that an interesting feature of this building, Mr. Speaker, will be a 23 foot by 9 foot mosaic 

mural in the entrance hall. This mural, which is based on an appropriate theme, is being designed and 

executed by Mr. John Miller, a local artist, and I should say too that he is being assisted by a number of 

his art students. 

 

One of the largest public works projects over many years, has been the Saskatchewan Technical Institute 

at Moose Jaw. This building, which is now substantially completed, was officially opened in January of 

this year. The first excavations for the structure began in January of 1959, and the work went on steadily 

to the completion on the date that I have already mentioned. The shop areas were ready for the students 

in the fall of 1959 and we‘re informed that the enrolment rate has been very rapid since that time. 

 

The Institute was designed, Mr. Speaker, 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

17 

 

around the nucleus of old buildings already on the site – formerly, of course, the old Teachers College 

buildings. Three additional areas constructed around the nucleus – the classroom wing, the workshop 

wing, and the cafeteria-gymnasium wing – provide areas in the order of 150,000 square feet. The total 

cost of the whole structure and all the equipment, is about $2,400,000. 

 

There is a unique architectural styling in the new park Headquarters and Commercial Facilities building 

at Madge Lake. This, of course, makes a very noteworthy contribution to the Provincial Park in that 

district. The building serves the Department of Natural Resources. It is of frame and brick construction 

and has large areas of glass that front upon the lake – altogether, a very pleasing building, that will be in 

operation during the coming season. The cost of this building totals about $70,000, as near as we can 

now estimate. 

 

Another very welcome addition, I am sure, to the community of La Ronge, is the recently completed 

hospital and nurses residence. The hospital has twenty-five beds and the nurses residence has 

accommodation for sixteen persons. This location is in a very beautiful wooded setting, and, as those 

who have been there will know, it overlooks Lac La Ronge. The design is contemporary, and I‘m sure 

that the residents of that northern community are very grateful for this building. The fully equipped 

hospital at that point, Mr. Speaker, will serve both the Indian and the white populations of the 

surrounding area. It was officially opened in July of 1960, and was opened in conjunction with the La 

Ronge Festival. The cost of the building, and of the equipment — $475,000. 

 

Now, in the town of Meadow Lake, a new Provincial Office Building is currently being constructed so 

as to accommodate the Government Agencies, in that part of the province. This building, which uses 

Saskatchewan brick as one of the principal materials, will have a two-storey portion, and a one-storey 

offset. There‘s no basement, but services will be provided in such a fashion that they‘ll serve any future 

addition which might be required. The contract for this building was let in November of 1960, and we 

expect that the building will be completed by June of this year. The 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

18 

 

total cost again, (and what we consider to be a very favourable price) – around $175,000. 

 

A Highway Storage Depot was constructed at Meadow Lake in this fiscal year. It is a standard steel 

building, erected at a cost of $25,000. Vandal-proof fences have also been placed around the highway 

warehouses at Weyburn and at Rosetown. 

 

A new boiler with all of the complementary equipment was installed in the Saskatchewan hospital at 

Weyburn, during last year. The cost – about $130,000. A new water line has also been installed to serve 

the water hydrants in this general location. 

 

Another new boiler was installed in the Legislative Building powerhouse, Mr. Speaker, and a renovation 

program has been begun in this building, to replace worn-out portions of the air handling and heating 

systems. After a period of fifty years, especially with the conditions created by Regina water, many parts 

of our systems corrode very quickly. The renovations will not simply affect the air supply they are 

handling, but they‘ll make it much easier to heat the building. Some parts of this building are heated 

almost entirely by the circulation of warm air, without radiation equipment. When the system is 

overhauled, in any event, I expect that there will be some very substantial savings, which I am sure will 

be welcomed on both sides of the House. 

 

In Regina, an office building, known formerly as the Fidelity Life Building, was purchased during the 

last year to provide extra space for Government use. This building is located at 1819 Cornwall Street, 

and with the renovations and the purchase price, the cost will be in the neighborhood of $150,000. 

 

Also, capital renovations and repair work had been carried out by our own departmental employees at 

the Saskatchewan House in Regina, at the School for the Deaf, and at the Teachers College, in the city 

of Saskatoon. 

 

During the last year, there has been some additional work carried out at Camp Easter Seal in Watrous. 

This, as Members may recall, was recently 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

19 

 

reconstructed by the Department. As well, a major renovation program to Hangar 20, at the Prince 

Albert Airport, had been carried out recently. This, I should add, is used as a building for the 

Department of Natural Resources. As well as all these works, we have carried out renovations to the 

buildings and the water system at the Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford. Our staff is engaged 

too, in general maintenance and repair work at the Saskatchewan Training School in Moose Jaw. 

 

During the last year, in the summer months, we have constructed at Ile a La Crosse and La Ronge, two 

staff residences. These two three-bedroom bungalows are fitting for the particular area, and for the 

people that receive the services in that area, and are regarded as splendid structures for the money 

expended. 

 

I should now like to turn, Mr. Speaker, to work that is proposed to be done by the Department of Public 

Works during the next fiscal year. Owing to a somewhat less favourable expectation for revenues, our 

net capital budget for the year 1961-1962, will not be as large as we had hoped for. Certain new 

buildings that had been planned will be slowed down in their construction, or delayed. Our capital 

budget will nonetheless supply a very good number of needed and valuable facilities for the people of 

the province. I mentioned that the new Court House in Regina is to be completed very shortly, with all 

of its furnishings. This year, the Department, upon the completion of the building, will design and carry 

out a suitable landscaping program and other work on the grounds, so that a pleasing setting will be 

provided. 

 

Work is to be finalized at the Saskatchewan Technical Institute at Moose Jaw; as I mentioned a short 

while back, this building was officially opened in January 1st of 1961. This last work, Mr. Speaker, is to 

be carried out by our own staff in that part of the old building that did not receive the attention of the 

contractors. The intention is to have the general decor correspond with the new building. More 

landscaping is also to be done and it is hoped to improve the very fine grounds that are around the 

former Teachers College, and to supplement them with a further landscaping program. 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

20 

 

Now, to move to the School for the Deaf at Saskatoon. We intend there, to embark on a re-roofing 

program. We intend at Preeceville to erect a new snowplow storage building – I may say that this 

structure will be similar in its design to the other structures of its kind in the province. An extension will 

be made at the sub-surface Geological Laboratory and the Core Storage Building of the Department of 

Mineral Resources. The building of course is here, in Regina, and the present structure was built by the 

Department several years ago. It now requires to be enlarged because of the storage needs that have 

developed since the first building. 

 

Construction of the park Headquarters and the Commercial Facilities Building at Madge Lake, that I 

also referred to in talking about the current year‘s program, will be finalized this coming year, probably 

by the middle of summer. The building which is designed by our Provincial Architect‘s office, will be 

under the purview of the Department of Natural Resources. 

 

At the Geriatric Unit of the Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford we intend to provide 

improvements that I‘m sure will be welcome, in the form of an additional water supply from a new well 

which had been drilled by our people. Also, sundry installations in connection with the new boiler at the 

Saskatchewan Hospital in Weyburn, which I mentioned earlier, will be completed this year. 

 

Various items of general maintenance and repair are to be carried out at the Training School in Moose 

Jaw, and the first stage of the air handling repairs, that I made reference to, will be completed too. The 

new Provincial Office Building at Meadow Lake, again, will be completed sometime before summer. 

 

At Swift Current a start is to be made on the Geriatric Centre which, when completed, will provide for 

the people of the province, and particularly for the southwestern corner of the province, 120 beds for 

elder citizens. The structure will use Saskatchewan brick as one of the main building components, 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

21 

 

and will occupy a site near the Pioneer Lodge in that city. 

 

There is to be an addition to the Regina jail, which we are estimating presently at a cost of $200,000. 

 

A landscaping program, will be undertaken by the Department at the new Saskatchewan Boys‘ School in 

Regina. 

 

I say generally, Mr. Speaker, that during the last four years in particular, the Department has paid special 

attention to the problem of winter work. All of our operations have been planned in such a fashion that 

the maximum of the work that we can provide is carried out during the winter months. I‘m very pleased 

to be able to say that over this four-year period, 50% of the work that has been done, was carried out 

during the months from November 1st to May 1st. Perhaps a very good example of what can be done is 

seen at the Saskatchewan Technical Institute. Here, 60% of the work that was carried out, was done 

during the winter time, and an even better example is provided in the Meadow Lake Office Building, 

that I‘ve told you about, which will have almost three-quarters of its building done during the winter. I 

think this showing is particularly creditable. 

 

In speaking also of the work of the Department, Mr. Speaker, I‘d like to express a word of 

commendation for the efforts of my staff. While I‘ve been in my present position for only six months, 

I‘ve been very much impressed by the very evident willingness of all the people in the employ of the 

Department to assist me in understanding and assessing the programs, and in helping me in every way 

that they can. I want to say too, that there has been quite a high standard of performance everywhere in 

the Department. I‘m grateful for it and I‘m very pleased that the employees of my Department do take 

seriously their responsibilities to the public. 

 

I think an example of their desire to keep abreast of matters that concern the Department, and certainly 

to better themselves in an overall way, is seen in the attendance at Public Works Department classes that 

have taken place during the fall and 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

22 

 

winter ;months. There have been fifteen of these classes, held once each week, in the evenings – a very 

steady and good attendance of people who, without remuneration have attended classes to improve 

themselves and assist the public service. I would like to say too, that these classes have had to do not 

only with the provision of a picture of the work of the Saskatchewan Department of Public Works, but 

have aimed at trying to provide to the employees a general idea of what other Departments of 

Government have to do in their respective spheres. Again, I‘d like to express my pleasure for the way 

that the people of the Department have responded, in attending these classes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‘d now like to turn to some of the matters that have been discussed in the current debate. I 

want to say first of all, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me, that characteristically, the Members of the 

Opposition have on one hand castigated the Members of the Government for what I think they have 

called, on several occasions, a ―lack of thrift and prudence.‖ At the same time, they have urged all kinds 

of courses that, if they were adopted, would cost the people of this province very much more money 

than is confined within the limits of the budget that will shortly be before us. It has been suggested, of 

course, by some Members of the Opposition, at least, that the Opposition has no responsibility, really, 

for performing constructively. Their main duty – as told by one Member – their only duty is to oppose 

the suggestions and the recommendations and the policies of the Government. It seems to me again, Mr. 

Speaker, characteristically, the Members of the Opposition have excluded from the whole framework of 

critical appraisal, any kind of constructive approach, or recommendations. 

 

Of course, Members of the Opposition have told us that they really have to be constructive at only one 

time – and that is once every four years – when they advance to the people of the province their election 

platform. I think several of the speakers from the hon. Members opposite us told us that this was the 

time when they put their program before the people of the province. Well, I took from this that all of the 

proposals thus fashioned would need to be reasonable, and would need to be pretty well in 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

23 

 

accordance with common sense. It seems to me, though, Mr. Speaker, that on the record this 

presumption falls very far short of the mark, because if one added together all of the proposals for 

spending money that the Members of the Liberal Party put before the people of this province in June of 

1960, it would make our present budget look like a child‘s piggy-bank. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You just can‘t add! 

 

Hon. W.G. Davies: — Mr. Speaker, I suggest that, very hungry for power and very thirsty for office, 

the Liberal Party displayed at this time anything but thrift and prudence, in the proposals put before the 

people of the province. The former Provincial Treasurer, then the Hon. C.M. Fines, estimated that their 

proposals at that time would result in a financial situation, roughly, like this, Mr. Speaker – and I think 

this was incorporated in an advertisement known as the ―Thatcher Roundup,‖ was it not? Well, Mr. 

Fines said anyway that a sober estimate would be that the Liberal election proposals would have reduced 

Saskatchewan revenues by $5,000,000 each year – while promising changes amounting to $27,000,000 

each year. Going on from that, their proposals would also result in a boosting of provincial capital needs, 

amounting to $35,000,000 more. 

 

Now, again, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that it‘s logical to say that with all this to contemplate, the proposals 

of my hon. friends opposite have been anything but thrifty and anything but prudent. I think it ill befits 

the Members of the Opposition to berate this Government for ―wasteful expenditure‖ and ―frills‖, and all 

of the other words that have been levelled at us in this context, considering the record of the party they 

come from when it has been in office. Not so long ago, we may all recall the events in the federal House, 

when the Liberal Government was in power at Ottawa in 1952. At that time, Mr. Speaker, you may 

recall that they had horses on the payroll. I don‘t think they ever did find the names of the horses that 

were on the payroll, and I don‘t think the ―horses‖ ever got paid. I‘m convinced that somebody got paid, 

but in any event, 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

24 

 

it is an example of the irresponsibility, the irregularities and the crooked dealings that went on under the 

aegis of the Liberal Government of that day. All of these remarks, I think, Mr. Speaker, can be 

substantiated by the Currie Report, which went into these matters analytically. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, further; it seems to me that the Members of the Opposition in criticizing this 

Government for its attitude and its actions, respecting unemployment in Saskatchewan, have made a 

number of rather vulnerable statements. One wonders, for example, with all of the criticism that we have 

been receiving, and the claims we heard of what a Liberal Government in power would do in 

Saskatchewan, why this has not been done in the Liberal Province of Newfoundland. Some reference, I 

think, has already been made to this province where the percentage of unemployed, Mr. Speaker, is 25% 

of the entire labour force of that province – 25%! I notice currently, in the Newfoundland newspapers, 

that Members of the Opposition are taking the Liberal Government of that province to task for a whole 

lot of things that have to do with a sliding deeper and deeper into economic recession of that part of the 

country. They claim – these Opposition speakers, — that fish landings in Newfoundland have dropped 

by 19,000,000 pounds annually; that establishments handling fish there declined from 486 to 431; they 

say that the dollar value of the fish catch has dropped considerably since 1952; they say that 

employment in mining declined, from 1956 to 1958, by 500 people and further intimate that 500 more 

people in mining will be laid off at Belle Island. 

 

Opposition speakers in Saskatchewan have had something to say about the alleged slow growth of 

Saskatchewan manufacturing. The major industries, Mr. Speaker, of Newfoundland, including the pulp 

and the paper industries, have shown a decline of employment in that province. 

 

Somewhere, not so long ago, I heard from an Opposition Member of this Legislature some reference to 

the minimum wage of the province of Saskatchewan, as a ―starvation wage.‖ Well, you know, if one 

looks at Newfoundland, one will find that the Minimum Wage 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

25 

 

Board of that province has never had a meeting since the year 1955. And what did they do in that year? 

They set minimum wages for male workers at .50¢ an hour, and wages for female workers at .35¢ an 

hour. In the midst of an environment like this, Mr. Speaker – contrasting very badly to our much higher 

minimum wage in Saskatchewan – the hon. Member also had the audacity to refer to the Saskatchewan 

minimum wage of $32.00 a week as a ―starvation wage‖, when the minimum wage rate in 

Newfoundland is one of the lowest minimum rates in Canada. 

 

Again, there has been an incessant din from the ranks of the Opposition, charging lack of industrial 

growth in Saskatchewan. The CCF has been blamed for all of the economic ills of the private enterprise 

society that my hon. friends defend so vigorously. At the same time, we‘re told of the enormous 

progress that‘s going on, where Liberals have something to do with the course of events. Well, 

Government Members have already remarked on many occasions during this debate that it is passing 

strange that we should have had in this province for thirty-five years a Liberal Government, that did not 

bring these advantages – that did not bring industry flooding into this province. 

 

I was interested, though, in reading not so long ago, something from a man who is perhaps a more 

disinterested, and impartial, or neutral voice, touching on this particular topic. Writing ―Ottawa Letter‖, 

Mr. Speaker, in the February 4th issue of ―Saturday Night‖, Mr. Raymond Rogers discussed certain 

thoughts that came to him, arising out of his attendance at that large rally, the recent National Liberal 

Convention. His article is called ―Three Premiers and the Liberal Left‖. He comments about the 

Premiers of New Brunswick, Newfoundland, and our own Premier, Tommy Douglas. Two Liberal 

provinces are contrasted with our CCF province. With your permission, Mr. Speaker, I‘d just like briefly 

to refer to a few paragraphs about what he had to say in this connection. 

 

Speaking about Premiers Robichaud and 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

26 

 

Smallwood, he says: — 

 

―They are convinced that a workable provincial and national policy – (this is for the acquisition of/or 

bringing in industry to their provinces) – can only be conducted in the context of the prevailing North 

American capitalist (so-called) system‖. 

 

He went on to say: — 

 

―They are therefore willing to chuck out the co-operatives, the Crown Corporations, and even ―big 

labour‖, if that is what they have to do to attract industry‖. 

 

Now, there‘s a neutral source, with a neutral opinion, Mr. Speaker. Now, he goes on to talk about what 

has been done in Saskatchewan. 

 

―The Industrial Development Office of Saskatchewan has been highly successful in bringing industry 

in – even United States capital. So much so that now petroleum products rank right after wheat and 

construction in Saskatchewan‘s economy. Despite the socialist labels applied to Saskatchewan, 

Premier Douglas and his Government have been able to convince ‗capitalists‘ that whereas 

Saskatchewan‘s Government holds out lower profit yields, her contracts are reliable over the years – 

as contrasted with such ‗high profit‘ areas as the Congo and Brazil. Douglas has always demanded a 

fair deal for Saskatchewan in any industrial give-away, (unlike other Canadian governments – notably 

Quebec, under Duplessis, which have often given away acres of wealth for a song).‖ 

 

Mr. McDonald: — So did we. That would apply to your socialists. 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — Then the writer says, Mr. Speaker, that indeed, 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

27 

 

Premiers Robichaud and Smallwood and others too, could learn something from Mr. Douglas. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — 

 

―His initial method of making petroleum exploitation grants is a good example. Each area was carved 

up so that private enterprise received some squares, and the state the rest. This is the sort of thing that 

has to be done if Canadians are to benefit from their own natural resources.‖ 

 

And then, having said all these very intelligent things, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Rogers ends up with this 

paragraph, that I would recommend to the attention of the hon. Members opposite: — 

 

―and to get back to our opening theme – it is tricks like these that have the Liberals worried. Over and 

over again the Liberal Rally rejected the need for a New Party. But in a private sort of Gallup Poll 

conducted throughout the rally it became clear to me that the Liberals were really afraid of a New 

Party plus Douglas.‖ 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — That‘s wishful thinking Bill. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — That‘s your Socialist Federal Government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — Now, in this debate, Mr. Speaker, and others that have taken place over the years, 

the hon. Members opposite have talked, it seems to me, almost incessantly, about lack of population in 

Saskatchewan, which they‘ve attempted to link up somehow with the presence of the CCF Government. 

Mr. Speaker, we all know that Saskatchewan‘s economic problems, during the last decade and a half, 

perhaps more, had been complicated by an exceptionally rapid growth of agricultural technology. This 

has of course resulted in a fast displacement of 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

28 

 

farmers from the rural areas to the city. It seems to me that this, and many other associated complex 

problems, has caused Saskatchewan‘s population to grow at a somewhat more reduced rate than other 

provinces. Now, Mr. Speaker, to attribute this process to the philosophy of the present Saskatchewan 

Government is absolutely ludicrous, it seems to me. The fact is that in other areas of the world, Mr. 

Speaker, many other areas of the world, that boast of very orthodox and conservative administrations 

have encountered a much similar slow rate of growth. I point in substantiation to an article in the 

―United States News and World Report‖, in the February 29th 1960 issue, of this Report – called, ―How 

the States Are Growing‖. It described what was happening in terms of population growth, in each of the 

states within the American Union. 

 

Well, this Report, Mr. Speaker, points out that the states of West Virginia, Vermont, Oklahoma, 

Missouri, Alabama, and the District of Columbia, all had population increases from 1950 to 1958 of a 

lesser percentage order than the population increase in the Province of Saskatchewan. In the same 

period, you will recall that we had a population increase of roughly 7%. The states of Mississippi, Iowa, 

Kentucky, New York, and Tennessee, had increases of an order only very slightly larger than the rate of 

increase for Saskatchewan. 

 

And, in the same study, Mr. Speaker, the article made an estimate of what the likely increase in 

population in the United States up to the year 1970 would be, and it went on to remark, that in North 

Dakota, South Dakota, and Arkansas, to name three states, these states would suffer losses in population 

from 7% or 8% downwards, and this would occur of course in the period when the whole population of 

the United States was due to go up 16.4% to 209 millions. 

 

I‘ve mentioned the state of North Dakota. This, it seems to me, is an area somewhat similar to 

Saskatchewan – somewhat similar in problems. In 1958 North Dakota had 650,000 souls. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, this was 30,000 people less than were in that state in 1930. The population of South Dakota, 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

29 

 

the neighbouring state, was just 7,000 more in 1958 than it had been in 1930. And, even in the state of 

Montana, Mr. Speaker, where there has always been a fairly pronounced mining and industrial activity, 

the population increased from 1930 to 1958, from 537,606 to only 688,000. 

 

Now, I bring these figures to the attention of the House because it seems that certainly no one can argue 

that any of the administrations, any of the Governments in the areas where these population rises have 

been either slow or non-existent, could be called ―socialistic‖ in character. The situation resulted, as I 

have intimated, because of factors that are quite unrelated to the style or the philosophy of government. I 

say, Mr. Speaker, that it would be as ridiculous and absurd to declare that these states have had poor 

population experiences because of the conservative nature of government, as it would be absurd and is 

absurd for the Opposition Members to state that it is because of the philosophy of this Government that 

we have not had as rapid a rise in population as some other provinces. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, much has been said in this debate about the New Party, especially on the part of my 

hon. friends opposite. This is joined with a combination of vitriol and misrepresentation about the labour 

movement that leaves no question unanswered in the minds of the labour people of this province . . . 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — . . . on where they stand in relation to organized labour. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — Now, whatever the hon. Members have to say about the New Party, Mr. Speaker, 

they can hardly claim that the concept is one which does not want to unite the largest and the most basic 

sections of people in this country. And to assert, as many of the hon. Members have done, that the New 

Party is a promoter of class prejudice or class conflicts, is to me, trying 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

30 

 

to engender a nasty fog over the whole discussion. If there are any promoters of class prejudice or class 

conflict in this context, Mr. Speaker, it is the Liberal Party in this province, which by its venomous 

utterances against organized labour, and the . . . 

 

Opposition Member: — Smile when you say that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — . . . distrust and the suspicion that it has heaped on this House in talking about the 

New Party and objectives of the working people, has tried to raise barriers between urban and farm 

people. And, I say they have done this, in my belief, Mr. Speaker, solely for their own narrow political 

purposes. And all the while, to declare that the Liberal Party is for the workers and for the organized 

workers, is to me again, an expression of almost conscienceless, consummate hypocrisy. 

 

We‘re facing today in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and all across Canada, an economic situation that has 

been created to the disadvantage of the people on the farms, and the people in the cities. The Members 

opposite have told us so frequently that the farmers can‘t expect any sympathy from the labour section 

of the population in helping them out of their economic troubles. Because of all this, they say there‘s no 

point in talking about a New Party. Mr. Speaker, surely any thinking farmer anywhere in this country, 

realizes that with the position as it is today, with the farmers of Canada comprising only about one-sixth 

or one-seventh of the entire population in this country, it is absolutely vital that the farmers seek allies. 

Where best can they seek allies but in the biggest section of the people of this country – the working 

people, and the large sections of the Canadian population that are not on the farm, — the small 

businessmen, the professional people, who also have an interest in the things that a New Party can do for 

them. Now, where else, Mr. Speaker, do the farmers look for their allies? Do they look for their allies in 

the ranks of the cartels, of the big companies that for generations have been adverse to the cause of the 

farmer? Of course not, Mr. Speaker. The farmers know better. And I suggest that the logical inference 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

31 

 

from this kind of discussion and this sort of assumption is that the farmer must logically look for 

political association with the working people, with the independent businessmen, and the professional 

people of this country. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Don‘t look towards Turtleford then. 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — The Members of the Opposition talk about the clash of interest between farmers 

and labour people. Now, I don‘t think that anyone would want to suggest that the interests of the worker 

in the city and the farmer in the rural area coincide in every specific particular, Mr. Speaker. Who would 

claim this? I have never yet seen any family, where everybody agrees on everything. But I do say, Mr. 

Speaker, that on the fundamental and basic questions, the farmer and labour sections not only agree, but 

they must agree in their own interests. The worker can‘t buy meat, bacon and eggs, bread, potatoes, and 

all of the other farm products, if he‘s not getting a good wage, anymore than the farmer can buy the 

products produced in the factory, if he in turn does not have the income with which to purchase these 

commodities. I say, Mr. Speaker, that you can‘t really come to any other conclusion but that the workers 

and the farmer have every interest to assure for themselves and the country as a whole, the maximum 

possible purchasing power. I think it was the Premier, in his speech not so long ago, who told us that 

there are two million people in this country who, according to the last income tax returns, didn‘t have 

enough income to pay income tax. If the New Party, Mr. Speaker, were to achieve in the first instance 

only one thing, that is the raising of the income of this depressed two million, there would be an 

overwhelming economic response favourable to every person in any way or walk of life in Canada 

today. 

 

The lady Member for Regina, Mr. Speaker, on another topic, has already assailed the Opposition for 

remarks made about socialism. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must caution the hon. Member not to make any 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

32 

 

direct reference to former debates. 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — This was in this debate, Mr. Speaker, in the debate on the budget. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is apparent that the Opposition‘s remarks in this debate have ascribed to the free 

enterprise system all of the attributes of liberty and of democracy. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that 

perhaps I should remind my hon. friends that almost every one of the democratic rights and privileges 

that we had won today, had to be wrung from the sections of free enterprise that have dominated this 

country for many years. These privileges have not come about because they were handed to us, but 

because of the efforts of thousands of dedicated and sincere people, who had to oppose, Mr. Speaker, the 

sections of selfish free enterprise to win these privileges for all of the people. And, I say that wherever in 

the world one examines the history of progressive changes, wherever in the world you look at what has 

taken place, especially in the last 100 years, it is to be noted that it is the forces of social democracy, the 

forces of the labour movement in these countries, and their allies, that have led and have directed the 

fight for better conditions and better legislation. Again, not just for themselves, but for everybody in 

those countries. I say the fact that they have succeeded, Mr. Speaker, has been, in my opinion, 

principally responsible for the fact that in the countries of the western hemisphere we have been able to 

avoid the scenes of violence, and carnage, and chaos, that have characterized other sections of the world 

where social democratic forces, not having been as vital or as prominent, were not able to bring about 

these changes. The heritage of the private enterprise systems that my hon. friends extol has resulted, in 

many parts of the colonial world in anything but a situation conducive to freedom and liberty. This is 

why in the countries of Africa and Asia today we are encountering so much difficulty, Mr. Speaker, in 

making common cause with the native population who are looking for a better life and for that freedom 

and democracy that we enjoy here today. 

 

Is it not rather significant, that in a 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

33 

 

Country like India, independence, the granting to India of all those rights that brought her in as a 

member of the British Commonwealth, was urged over very many years by many prominent members of 

the British Labour Party. I personally take a great deal of pride in the fact that a very prominent socialist 

member of the British Labour Party, Sir Stafford Cripps, was one of the people who was finally able to 

secure for India the democratic government and structure that she has today. 

 

One of my friends in the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, has had the temerity to liken the CCF to the Party of 

Adolf Hitler. Not only, Mr. Speaker, is this analogy completely false, but I suggest that it is one that 

rebounds upon my hon. friend. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — The political structure that was built by Adolf Hitler was one that only came about 

as a result of the most active financial assistance and the most active manipulation of big money in 

Germany in 1933. And I say, moreover, similar aid was given and engendered, unfortunately, by 

countries like Britain and like the United States. I think the fact is, Mr. Speaker, as any serious student 

of history knows, that in the beginning, the Nazi Party, and afterwards, Nazi Germany, was actively 

assisted by the Governments of many European countries, including, at times, the countries in the West. 

And, if any one section of the population was responsible for the rise of that brutal, restrictive, and 

totalitarian Nazi regime, it is the private enterprise system, particularly the private enterprise system of 

Germany. And I say, that one has only to think of the hundreds of thousands of members of the German 

Social Democratic Party, the hundreds of thousands of members of trade unions, who were thrust into 

the concentration camps of Germany, to see how completely unworthy, misleading, and fallacious are 

the remarks of the Member who attempted to liken the Nazi system to that of social democracy and 

socialism. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — The Russian socialists . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — I want to tell my hon. 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

34 

 

friend, the hon. Leader of the Opposition, not to attempt to weasel into another discussion. We are 

discussing a particular state and that‘s the one I am interested in presenting to the House this afternoon. 

Now, you know, Mr. Speaker, one of the cherished myths about this so-called private enterprise system, 

is what is called the – I think the phrase is – the ―rigorous competitiveness‖ of the system. It seems to 

me that myths of this kind can be very rudely punctured, and have been over the past months in 

particular, with the sentencing of a number of companies, both in Canada and the United States, for 

violating monopoly laws, and I know that in the United States, only in the last month there have been 

twenty-nine companies fined some $2½ million, (which incidentally is only about one-third of 1% of all 

that they have extracted in the process of exercising their monopoly), and that many of their leading 

officers have actually been sent to jail. It is quite ironic to me, Mr. Speaker, that these are the same 

companies that spend millions of dollars in advertisements that extol the whole principle, and honor the 

principle of free competition, yet in practice honor that of monopoly. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — One of your boys came pretty close . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — Mr. Speaker, the statement of one of the gentlemen, the president of one of these 

companies, when he was being questioned went something like this. He was asked, ―Why did you attend 

these meetings? Why did you set these prices, these monopoly prices, and resort to these practices by 

secret meetings?‖ And he said ―Well, no one attending the gatherings was so stupid he didn‘t know the 

meetings were in violation of the law. But it is the only way a business can be run. It is free enterprise.‖ 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, if this Alice-in-Wonderland concept of free enterprise that prevails so widely, 

and prevailing as widely as this apparently does judging from the Kefauver Sub-Committee‘s report to 

the Senate in the United States, when they looked into administered prices in that country, and (I 

suppose by this time an explanation in 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

35 

 

administered prices is hardly necessary), it would appear from the entire investigation the business 

world is in a state of advanced moral decay. The consumer and taxpayer of this country and the United 

States, Mr. Speaker, is almost as badly off as he was in the days of the robber barons of the 19th century. 

You may remember that Mr. W.H. Vanderbilt, when asked about the public rights, replied ―the public be 

damned‖. It seems to me that things haven‘t changed very much; they have just become more 

monopolistic. 

 

The General Counsel of the United States Steel Corporation, Mr. Speaker, when he was before the 

Kefauver Committee, made a number of very frank statements, and I think that this frankness is to his 

credit. His estimate was that all but 12% of the American economy was ―administered‖, and he said that 

of that 12%, most of it lay in the field of farm products and the stock market. I suggest that with an 

authority of that kind it is really rather fruitless for the hon. Members opposite, to try and convince us 

that private enterprise, free enterprise in the sense that we once knew it, actually does dominate in either 

Canada or the United States today. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, (I see that I have taken somewhat 

longer than I had intended to take) that the economic difficulties we are encountering in the discussion 

of this budget, are here, as everywhere else, a result of the operations of a growing monopoly system. I 

suggest again that my hon. friends opposite accept and endorse this system. It seems to me that in spite 

of all the adverse trends that have been discussed and that I have touched upon today, it is quite clear 

that the budget that we will be getting into shortly, has wrestled very successfully with the changes that 

have been made necessary by the prospect of somewhat reduced revenues in the year ahead. 

 

Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, the fact is, and I want to point this out again, the Saskatchewan Government 

will spend during the next fiscal year better than 57¢ out of every dollar, on public health, social 

welfare, or education, and I say this is good evidence that the philosophy of the C.C.F., the forward 

direction it has taken throughout the years, has not been changed by this budget. The fact that we 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

36 

 

have been able to channel $42 million as a gross expenditure for education, an increase over last year‘s 

vote of I believe $38 million, is another indication of this, and is to me particularly encouraging and 

commendable. 

 

A number of statements have been made, Mr. Speaker, to the effect that this Government does very little 

for the farmers. Now, as a city resident I have always been pleased to vote for programs that will assist 

the farmers in this province, and have been proposed by this Government. I think that when Members of 

the Opposition attempt to tell us that all the rural resident is getting in this province is 4.61% of the total 

budget, this is a very difficult thing to establish. Opposition critics have ignored completely the very 

large expenditures that have been made and will continue to be made on behalf of rural dwellers, — 

such things as the grid road program, — which alone I believe, would add something approaching 

another 5% of the total budget. They blithely ignore, at the same time, Mr. Speaker, the large sums that 

are paid for rural education on the basis of equity, where the worse-off the region, the more it can expect 

to get in an education equalization grant. It seems to me that you can go down the whole gamut of 

government operations, and find the same sort of careful attention has been given to conditions in the 

country, endeavoring to help the farmer by the application of prices. 

 

It seems to me that the Government Members on this side have been almost incessantly berated by 

Opposition critics about the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. What is this phrase we always get 

levelled at us – the millstone of debt, that‘s it – around the necks of the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that if anybody wants to look at this province, and discuss it logically, any 

debt that has been created by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation has been necessary if we wanted to 

provide farmers of this province with power. Without these borrowings it would have been impossible to 

provide for the people of this province, for the rural dweller in particular, the fine power system that we 

have created over the last decade. 

 

The Opposition damns us for erecting the 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

37 

 

power building. Apparently they are content to have the administration of this very large utility 

fragmentized in twelve different locations, all over the city of Regina. They ignore negatively and 

completely the employment stimulus that is provided by this building, and the fact that it is important 

and necessary for the effectual operation of the Power Corporation system itself. Whatever the criticism 

of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, one really can‘t help but come to the conclusion that they want to blow 

hot and blow cold on every problem that they discuss. They are not so much concerned with rational 

criticism as they are in creating a weight of misrepresentation. This will, they hope, overcome the 

constructive efforts of the Government. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the electors of this province see 

through this type of misrepresentation as they did in June, 1960. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budget we are discussing does not reflect a fear of making progress, even while 

contrary economic currents are widespread in Canada. It‘s a budget, Mr. Speaker, which strives for 

advancement and strives for social betterment. It is neither, in my view, profligate or conservative; it has 

a sober eye to the problems that have been thrust upon us by the decline in our economy; the limitations 

of which can only be successfully attacked and solved by a national government. All things considered, 

Mr. Speaker, this budget endeavors to utilize the money we hope to receive, in the best possible fashion 

for the welfare of the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I shall support the motion and reject the amendment. 

 

Mr. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — In rising to take part in this debate, I should first like to take the 

opportunity of publicly thanking the people of the Gravelbourg Constituency, for having elected me for 

my second term. I should say though, that this happened despite the efforts of the political minions, and 

statements made by Members opposite as well around the Gravelbourg area 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

38 

 

that we would not for example get natural gas in the town of Gravelbourg if they elected a Liberal 

Member. It is to be noted, Mr. Speaker, that the people of the Gravelbourg Constituency did not accept 

these bribes. 

 

There were tremendous discussions, Mr. Speaker, during the campaign by the candidate and Members 

opposite who spoke within the Constituency, that that portion of highway between Gravelbourg and #2 

Highway would be black-topped, and again, provided they elected a C.C.F. Member. Statements are 

now circulating throughout the Constituency that we are not going to get this hard surfacing. Sometimes 

I wonder, Mr. Speaker, does it mean that all Constituencies that have not fallen for these political bribes 

are going to be deprived of these services? If so, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the Government come out 

and say so, and make their political policies clear and apparent. I hope I will be able to express myself as 

fully as I would like to without the Government putting up some form of closures like they did the last 

time I attempted to speak. I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that I have some good criticism, and also some 

good suggestions. Before I go on with the suggestions I believe that a few remarks made this afternoon 

should be answered. 

 

The Minister of Public Works got up, and I think he did a marvelous job as a Minister. He got right 

down to business on his report, and made a good factual report, and for this I compliment him, Mr. 

Speaker, but then I don‘t quite agree with what he said after the first fifteen minutes. I don‘t agree with 

the C.C.F. in many cases, Mr. Speaker, in fact, I don‘t agree with them at all. There was one particular 

point where he was taking a tremendous attack and saying that some members of this party had accused 

the C.C.F. of being like Hitler. Well, I don‘t think so, I think it has been mentioned on this side of the 

House that it has been linked up with Mr. K., but not with Adolf. 

 

There is a little point that I would like to bring to mind, and where it has been left out. Some 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

39 

 

of the suggestions that have been discussed, have been the problems that we have today versus free 

enterprise – the violent attack that has been thrown at free enterprise. Well, maybe Mr. Speaker, there 

are faults within free enterprise, and I agree there are. I am not one who is going to completely deny it. I 

have a book here, Mr. Speaker, and on page 5 particularly, and if I may have your permission I would 

like to read one paragraph of it. The name of the book is ―Our Century‖, it is written by Bourque, and a 

particular paragraph or speech that he has given, in this case a cure for Communism. I am not going to 

read it all, but I‘ll read some parts of it: 

 

―Many Communists were born and brought up in the house next door, on this same street that you and 

I live. Then one day something happened to change them from bright alert young Canadians, into 

plotting scheming Communists. They became foes of society. What was the cause? The cause that led 

the Canadian Communist are many, and we have the power to remove at least some of them. They are 

found in the factories, in the mines, and offices of those employers who have not yet discovered that 

private enterprise is a responsibility, and an obligation as well as a privilege.‖ 

 

The attack is not made on all free enterprise, Mr. Speaker, only on some segments of free enterprise. 

 

―They are found in the ranks of labor unions, where leadership has been found many times to be 

misguided. Unfair business practice, faulty labor relations and poor working conditions, these do exist, 

in Canada and the United States today, and they cause Communism. Let all business be operated 

according to the ‗Golden Rule‘, and let all workers act accordingly, and the great majority of 

Communists would disappear into thin air.‖ 

 

These are steps, Mr. Speaker, that we must be concerned 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

40 

 

with and prepare. Are we going to replace free enterprise completely with monopolistic controls by 

some unscrupulous group, Mr. Speaker? I don‘t think we should. However, this is where I somewhat 

disagree with the Minister of Public Works. Before the Minister of Public Works got up, we had the 

Minister of Social Welfare who, for thirty-five minutes, was stooping, in my personal opinion, to 

political dishonesty, in making comparison with what happened in the past, during the economic 

depression, comparing it to the economy of today. Then, Mr. Speaker, making personal attacks on 

people who are not in this House to defend themselves. I think it is disgraceful, for a Minister of the 

Crown, to make these kinds of attacks. Using the radio the people of Saskatchewan pay for, to make 

these vile personal attacks. It is disgraceful! I think that that man, Mr. Speaker, as a Minister of the 

Crown, should resign today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — . . . reply to attacks. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — He got up as a Minister of the Crown, and I‘m of the understanding, Mr. Speaker, that 

when a Minister of the Crown gets up he should give a report on his Department. I didn‘t notice very 

much of a report. I was rather surprised yesterday, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Social Welfare, 

prior to adjourning the debate, accused a Member on this side of the House of reading a prefabricated 

speech apparently prepared by somebody. Well, if the hon. Member would be in his chair a little more 

often he would probably realize, by hearing the reports or the efforts of the various Members on this side 

of the House, that they haven‘t got a stereotype type of speech, such as often emanate from the other 

side. Last winter, Mr. Speaker, or on several occasions in this House, Members on the Government side 

of the House have gotten up with a prepared text – manufactured by whom I don‘t know. On one 

particular occasion I remember very well, Mr. Speaker, a Member was reading his speech and he said 

―Oops a hard word‖, and then he kept talking, and so on and so forth, and another hard word. That‘s 

exactly the way it came out. Do you mean to tell me, Mr. Speaker, that that person made his own 

speech? 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

41 

 

These things have happened, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We, on several occasions, in Public Accounts, Mr. Speaker, have asked the Members of the 

Government, or the Committee, about the names of persons who have appeared on the payroll, and on 

several of these occasions we found that these names inquired about were researchers, advisers and 

planners. Practically each and every one of these Ministers had his speech written and prepared probably 

by these advisers and planners. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nicholson: — Who wrote yours? 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I wrote it myself. 

 

Government Member: — It sounds like it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Each Minister, and his staff with them on most occasions, have had to stand up and 

read their speech verbatim. Well, that can be expected from a Minister, Mr. Speaker, because he has to 

give a factual report, one that is beyond reproach insofar as his Department is concerned. 

 

We on this side of the House, have to do as much work as on the Government side of the House with all 

their advisers in each of their Departments; we have provided ourselves with the service of one man. 

Then, we have the Minister of Social Welfare direct his attacks on this one person, who is not in a 

position to defend himself in this House. 

 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, I always believed that a Minister of the Crown should give a good factual report 

of his Department. I should like to mention a few words on the question that was mentioned in the 

House yesterday in regard to some question of securities. 

 

Two years ago, Mr. Speaker, a couple of cheap promoters – salesmen – came into my Constituency, and 

after fraudulent representations were able to get 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

42 

 

a few of my unfortunate Constituents to invest in a supposed oil well, an offset oil well, near the area of 

Lloydminster. This was supposed to be approximately one-quarter of a mile from a producing well. At 

that particular time I was interested in the oil development of the province, and I happened to have a 

map of the location. I don‘t know how we happened to get together, these gentlemen and myself, but 

they drew my attention to the land location. On checking the map, I found that the well that they were 

proposing to drill was approximately eighty miles from a producing well. Now, it is quite apparent, Mr. 

Speaker, that there was some fraud in that respect. At that time I told these two gentlemen concerned, to 

come to see me sometime in Regina, and we would go and see the Securities Commission. When they 

came to Regina we went to the Securities Commission at the time, and the now Minister of Education 

was then the Securities Commissioner. We got no more than a brush-off, and he suggested that we lay a 

charge through the regular channels of the courts. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, will the hon. Member permit a question? 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Yes, sure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Did you say that the present Minister of Education was the Securities 

Commissioner two years ago? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Would the hon. Member please sit down while the question is being addressed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I understood the hon. Member to say this instance occurred two years ago here in 

this House. Is he now saying that the present Minister of Education was Chairman of the Securities 

Commission at that time? 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Whether he was the Securities Commissioner or the Chairman, I may be wrong in the 

actual designation, but the gentleman concerned, Mr. Speaker, was the man that we happened to see. 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

43 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — It is not so. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I went to see Mr. Beaudry, and I was then referred to Mr. Blakeney at that particular 

time, and Mr. Blakeney was the one that was brought to the desk to see us, and we spoke to him at that 

particular desk. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — He must be wrong, on the date, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — If you say it wasn‘t so, maybe it wasn‘t so, Mr. Speaker, but he was there. If you wish 

I will bring the other two gentlemen in question to confirm our discussion. I may be wrong on the date, 

there is a possibility, Mr. Speaker, but the point is, or the facts are, that we did go to the Securities 

Commission and lay this complaint that we had, and all we heard was ―You go to the courts of the land.‖ 

 

Well, after a couple of guys have been fleeced for two or three thousand dollars a piece, they hate like 

the devil to take the chance of having additional court costs and everything to try to regain their losses. 

However, Mr. Speaker, shortly after that, these two salesmen were apprehended in Calgary, and were 

charged under the laws for the same type of infraction that was permitted here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. These two men, Mr. Speaker, are now serving time in Alberta. Surely, Mr. Speaker, 

when consultations are asked by the public, and particularly if they are accompanied by a Member of the 

Legislature, I believe that it should arouse sufficient interest on the Commission‘s part or from the 

Securities Commission, to look into the matter rather than just a casual brush-off. I said two years ago, it 

might have been four. I was quite green to the ways of the Legislature, at that time. So, Mr. Speaker, I 

do believe that we should have a judicial inquiry, as was mentioned yesterday, into the activities of the 

Securities Commission. In fact, to all activities of the Government. 

 

I was very surprised in hearing the speeches 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

44 

 

of the various Members opposite in these last few days, particularly on the budget speech. Well, the 

name C.C.F., Mr. Speaker, seems to have been a common word or name that has been shunned by many 

Members opposite. In the last few days, Mr. Speaker, I have heard such things as social democrats, the 

New Party, the socialist party, and some have connected themselves specifically to the socialist party. 

Then another one has the audacity, Mr. Speaker, of saying that the C.C.F. party is the political arm of 

the co-operative movement. What a despicable thing to say, Mr. Speaker! I do believe, that the Minister 

in charge of the Department of Co-operation, should take a firm stand in correcting the hon. Members 

who tie political movement to the co-operative movement. Mr. Speaker, the co-operative movement is a 

movement that is made up of people who have banded together to provide themselves with better 

services. It‘s a movement of the people. It may be in the retail; it could be in a community project. That 

is what co-operative stands for. No sneaking politician, Mr. Speaker, should be permitted to sneak and 

contaminate the word co-operative. The C.C.F. propagandists are making continuous efforts to spread 

the idea that Liberals are opposed to the co-operative movement. The C.C.F. attempt to exploit co-ops 

for their own political advantage is highly injurious to the movement. All important legislation to enable 

the co-operative organization to operate was put on the statutes by a Liberal Government. All the C.C.F. 

has done is to continue the policies that were started by a Liberal Government, insofar as the co-

operative movement is concerned. They are laughing, Mr. Speaker, but I should like to suggest that the 

Members opposite go into the Legislative Library, take the Annual Report for the co-op movement in 

Saskatchewan, for 1945, and they will find it shows that during the period of 1914 to 1944, and I quote 

exactly: 

 

―The co-op movement in Saskatchewan experienced spectacular growth.‖ 

 

The new establishment of the Department of Co-operation, was a logical step, Mr. Speaker, in that 

direction. Now, there are some basic 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

45 

 

conflicts as far as I can see, between the co-op movement and socialism. As long ago as 1941, Mr. 

Fowler, a well-known authority on the co-operative movement in America, wrote a letter to the 

―Saskatchewan Co-operative Consumer‖, taking exception to a paper prepared by Dr. Carlyle King, who 

was then the President of the C.C.F. Party, saying: 

 

―Socialism and the co-operatives should be partners.‖ 

 

This is what the socialists of this province have been trying to do – to make themselves a partner, trying 

to infiltrate within the ranks of the co-op movement. Mr. Fowler, went on to say in that letter: 

 

―We want less and less state action, rather than more and more. For every responsibility we pass to the 

state, we take a balancing quantity from our liberty and individuality.‖ 

 

The efforts made, Mr. Speaker, by the C.C.F. movement to infiltrate into the co-operative movement, I 

am convinced, have hindered it and done it a great amount of damage. As I said, Mr. Speaker, a few 

moments ago, the Minister of Cooperation should be on his feet at any time that the co-operative 

movement is abused. 

 

Some mention has been made, Mr. Speaker, of the proposed merger of our socialists and labor unions. I 

feel personally, that more should be mentioned in that matter. Whenever a political party, a political 

socialist party, takes control, or attempts to take control of the labor unions, it is an unfortunate situation 

for the wage earner affiliated with a union, to have to contribute to a political party that is not of his 

choice. The proposal put forth by both the C.C.F. and C.L.C., has been one of raising a political 

education or slush fund. Now it has been suggested, Mr. Speaker, and most Members of the House are 

quite aware, and I concur most heartily with this particular letter that was received just the other day, 

that the Trade Union Act, should be amended by adding a section showing – that it shall be an unfair 

labor 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

46 

 

practice for any collective bargaining agreement to contain compulsory maintenance of membership 

clause, if the union in the agreement is directly affiliated with a political party. This way, Mr. Speaker, if 

we incorporate this in the Trade Union Act, we will be safe-guarding the rights of the wage earner in a 

free democracy. Protecting the wage earner, Mr. Speaker, from further brain washing, should he decide 

to contract out. 

 

A few Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, have spoken quite a bit on socialism, and they seem to be 

confused as to the meaning of socialism. In case they don‘t know the difference, Mr. Speaker, the 

difference between socialism and public ownership, I should like to quote them the ―Labor Review‖, 

which has been explained before is a labor publication. Now here is where I quote from it, Mr. Speaker: 

 

―Now here is the difference between socialism and public ownership. In some situations, now and 

then, and here and there, the public ownership of a civil undertaking appears to be desirable, even 

necessary. It is a practical matter, a question to be decided on its merits by the people who must foot 

the bill and who therefore, have mainly material considerations in mind. In short, public ownership is 

a business proposition, and there is very little theorizing about it. Socialism is a view completely the 

opposite, in the opposite direction. It is a theory by which every measure of public ownership is not an 

end in itself, a plain business transaction, but a step towards fulfillment of the master plan.‖ 

 

Then I ask myself, Mr. Speaker, whose plan? 

 

―The common ownership of the means of production, distribution, exchange, etc.‖ 

 

Public ownership without any socialist purpose in mind 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

47 

 

has been practiced for many years, and in many lands. It has been introduced for convenience and 

expediency, rather than principle. Now, this is the difference between the public ownership and 

socialism which many of the Members opposite try to put together. 

 

I would like to say a few words, Mr. Speaker, on telephones. I was pleased to know that there would be 

an expansion in power and telephones to provide more services, but I was not quite in agreement with 

the way that the expansion was taking place. I know the proposed expenditures are there for frills, Mr. 

Speaker. I don‘t think that frills should be in any program when we have an economic depression just 

around the corner, or facing us in the face. These frills, at the moment, Mr. Speaker, should be left out. 

 

On several occasions, Mr. Speaker, Members on the government side of the House, have gotten up and 

expressed the theory or belief that they alone are responsible for establishing the telephone service in 

this province. Well, I should like to set the records straight once and for all, Mr. Speaker, and at this 

particular place I direct this to the Member for Regina, the lady Member for Regina, and if she doesn‘t 

believe me she can go ahead and check the Annual Report of the Department of Telephones 1958, which 

will give the complete record of the Department of Telephones, and will show you that it is not a 

socialist corporation, but it is a corporation that was established, as I previously explained, as a public 

ownership and not a socialist ownership. The corporation had its origin in this province in 1908, and I 

could go on and on, but I will just refer you to this document, and read it, and then I hope that the lady 

Member from Regina, Mr. Speaker, will know the difference between public ownership and socialist 

ownership. 

 

―The Government Telephones was established by a Liberal Government for the purpose of providing 

services to the people of Saskatchewan, and not for the glorification of socialist thinking.‖ 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

48 

 

At this point, I would like to make a suggestion. They say we have always criticized. I would like to 

draw attention to the Minister in charge of the telephones, that his Departments should take a proportion 

of its percentage of the net revenue, and that it should be used exclusively, to provide services at points 

in this province that receive little or no service. This was the original intent of the Department when it 

was started in 1909, to provide services where they didn‘t have any, to extend a service, not to put on the 

fancy frills. I appreciate, Mr. Speaker, that it is very nice to put your fingers on a little dial and ring it, 

but there are many places that haven‘t even got a place to get in to phone from. Let us provide that 

service; let us provide a portion of your net revenue to that. Then, another thing, Mr. Speaker, I was 

rather perturbed, that the telephone rates had to go up immediately after the election. I thought that they 

were going to hold the line. They‘re going to hold the line for them, to heck with the guys out in the 

sticks. They have to pay the shot. 

 

I believe mention should be made, Mr. Speaker, on the administrative power building in Regina. I do 

believe that the time will come, or probably would come, when the Power Corporation should have a 

central administration building to house its many branches, but at this time when the economic pressure 

is so great, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the $6 million spent to create this large monument – probably to 

try and justify socialism, I don‘t know – but I believe they should spend that amount of money in 

bringing and extending the services to the many communities which are within reasonable distance, of 

the existing pipelines. That would be a step in the proper direction, one which will also entail a capital 

expenditure, and one which would bring greater profits and returns to the corporation, and enable them 

at some future date to build their magnificent office building. Providing gas to urban centres would 

certainly have provided the extra employment, and it would have helped in more ways than one in 

construction, servicing, and 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

49 

 

in many of the related services. It is sad indeed, Mr. Speaker, when we find a town like Gravelbourg, 

Vanguard and Hodgeville and LaFleche, and particularly a town like Gravelbourg with its children‘s 

schools, its hospitals, its home for the aged, are not getting the use of natural gas to help them out. The 

hon. Minister of Mineral Resources considers that a frill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — No I don‘t. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — They don‘t want to give to the aged. They don‘t want to give to the sick or to the 

children to provide these extra services, but they are prepared to give it to the high-priced help to build 

them a monument in the city of Regina. I am certainly hoping that the Minister in charge of the 

corporation will certainly assure us that some provision and some gas will be there before the year is 

out. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — You vote against the budget. You don‘t want gas. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I sympathize at times, Mr. Speaker, with the Treasurer, who has to refrain the other 

members of the Cabinet in their attempts to stop some of their spending orgies, but eventually there is 

some controls in it. 

 

The Treasurer, Mr. Speaker, mentioned in the budget – that he deals with a part – and I will just use part 

of the phrase that he uses – not just in dollars and cents, but hope and human values. I fail to see, Mr. 

Speaker, where the hopes of the unemployed are raised with the insignificant approach towards 

unemployment by the Government. I fail to see any mention or any attempts to relieve the low rental 

housing problems. 

 

At this point, Mr. Speaker, I should like to quote the Minister of Social Welfare, not the present one, 

from the ―Leader Post‖, of April 19, 1958, it says: 

 

―Poor, overcrowded housing provides the unhealthy home, an atmosphere which provides a high 

percentage of people 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

50 

 

who become social problems and have to be cared for in our provincial institutions. We will 

have to think of a community planning in terms of housing, as an investment to eventually 

reduce the great share of taxes that goes to cover the cost of caring for home casualties in our 

institutions.‖ 

 

Good true words, Mr. Speaker, but no effort by the Government to try to relieve it. The unemployed in 

this province have presented the Government with such a brief, and they are still asking, ―What is the 

Government going to do about it?‖ I also note, Mr. Speaker, that the brief of the unemployed, which was 

presented to the Government, says this: 

 

―We propose, in the clearest language at our command, to say to you that there are certain things 

which you as a Provincial Government can do, and on which we want action on immediately.‖ 

 

Yet, Mr. Speaker, I have seen no action. It goes on: 

 

―We would like to take one paragraph, however, to say that as an unemployment organization, we 

have a right to be before you, together with the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour who support our 

organization and our brief as we support them. It is correct to say that the Federation believes, as we 

do, that as long as there are unemployed workers they are entitled to form an organization which 

speaks on their behalf, and one of our objectives is to see that such an organization will be developed 

to create unity of purpose, and a collective voice for the unemployed.‖ 

 

I could go on with that paragraph – and then it goes on: 

 

―The matters which we believe need your urgent and immediate attention, and which our brief will 

discuss, can be summarized in the following points.‖ 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

51 

 

I took one point, Mr. Speaker, because it dealt particularly with the statements from the Minister from 

Social Welfare. Their brief goes on in respect of housing and mentions that the 5%, which the 

municipalities in this province are asked to bear should be taken over by the Provincial Government, and 

that the scheme should be gotten underway immediately, and that the 5% which under the tripartite 

agreement is very small, could be easily taken over by the Government, and the housing gone into 

effect. Local government has been so hard pressed for taxes and for money that they have not been able 

to get that 5%. So, I would like to make a suggestion, Mr. Speaker, that probably due to the regulations 

in regard to the tripartite agreement the Government is not supposed to provide that 5%, and at this 

point, this is where I would like to make the suggestion that the Government of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, undertake to change the clauses in the tripartite agreement and the Provincial Governments to 

lend the municipalities the 5% that they require, interest free. This would permit the provincial 

authorities to immediately enter into an agreement for housing, and would permit the employment of 

many of our unemployed. 

 

Now, I may be late in raising this, Mr. Speaker, but it goes to show that we in Saskatchewan can cope 

with our unemployment problems, and I should like to quote something that Mr. James E. Coyne, 

Governor of the Bank of Canada, said in this respect: 

 

―Whatever degree of assistance the people of Canada decide to provide for the unemployed – even 

up to the point of guaranteeing them incomes equal to that which they had when they were 

employed, if that should be the decision of the community, it can be provided without resort to large-

scale Government deficits or monetary inflation.‖ 

 

―Similarly as regards the problems of providing employment for the unemployed, on direct 

government projects, . . . ‖ 

 

And here I would like to emphasize: 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

52 

 

―. . . there is no financial obstacle to Governments at all levels in expanding their operations as to 

provide a useful and productive work, for the entire number of the unemployed, including suitable 

work for the skilled as well as the unskilled. The clerical and technological as well as manual 

workers.‖ 

 

―But, if and to the extent that it is found necessary or desirable to provide employment directly 

through government projects, whether national, provincial or municipal, suitable financial methods 

can be found to meet the cost and share the burden without resort to large-scale deficit financing or 

monetary inflation.‖ 

 

I have only one more point to bring up, Mr. Speaker, and it is something that I have noticed throughout 

the election campaign, and the Ministers of the Crown should be ashamed of the attitude that they have 

taken in this respect, Mr. Speaker, Throughout this campaign, every Minister of the Crown, and many of 

the Members opposite, have gone into the country, and told the people of Saskatchewan not to fear and 

not to worry about the services that could be required if they are committed to the Institution at Weyburn 

and Battleford. They said this service is provided to the people at no cost to the people of Saskatchewan. 

The impression, Mr. Speaker, has been created to all the citizens of Saskatchewan that services provided 

at the provincial institutions at Weyburn and Battleford, are provided at no cost to the people living in 

Saskatchewan. That, Mr. Speaker, is utterly false. That statement, Mr. Speaker, is not according to fact, 

and the Minister of Health stands there and says that is so. 

 

A particular case, Mr. Speaker, has been brought to my attention, and in discussing it with my fellow-

Members on this side of the House, find that this is not so. You find, Mr. Speaker, that a person who is 

committed to an institution, and if for some reason or the other this patient decides to leave the residue 

of his Estate made prior to their entering 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

53 

 

into the institution they leave their Estate to a friend who has been very good to them, as neighbors will, 

(a lot of people do leave some parts of their Estate to their friends or neighbors, or cousins or secondary 

relatives), then after making this will, if this person is committed to an institution, and then dies in the 

institution all charges for the care of this patient will be charged against the residue of the Estate. That is 

a fact, the Minister says it‘s to be agreed, but then, Mr. Speaker, he agreed a few moments ago that all 

treatment in institutions is at no cost to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! Is the hon. Member willing to accept the explanation at this time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — That‘s right, I will. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — He said to the individual . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Would you mind sitting down and the hon. Member will . . . 

 

Mr. Coderre: — He has made his statement, Mr. Speaker, he has said to the individual and I will agree 

with him, that is what they say now, but when they go out . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! I believe the hon. Member doesn‘t want to make an explanation. If you 

are willing to accept the explanation would you please sit down. Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — He has made the statement and I have heard it, Mr. Speaker. He said just now, that the 

charge is not made against the patient, and I agree with him, but that is not the impression that that 

political party has left across the province, that‘s what I am trying to bring out, Mr. Speaker, not what 

the facts are, but they have been misleading the public in that respect. I believe this humanity first 

Government . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — . . . are not concerned with the cares of brotherly love which 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

54 

 

are exercised by friends, nor can they be rewarded in any way, due to the actions of the socialist 

Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that no provisions have been made to take any steps to 

alleviate unemployment in our province, I feel that I cannot support the motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! These interruptions and interjections are very disorderly, and it is very 

detrimental to the decorum and the honour in which the House is held. I wish that the hon. Members 

would endeavor to hold themselves in a little. 

 

Mr. Franklin E. Foley (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, in rising for the first time in this debate, I wish 

first of all to congratulate you on your elevation to the Office of Speaker, and to say how gratified I have 

been, to hear compliments from both sides of the House upon your conduct in this office. 

 

I wish also at this time, to express my sincere thanks to all those who supported me on February 22nd in 

the Constituency of Turtleford and for the honour they accorded me in returning me to the Legislature. I 

wish to assure all the people of the Turtleford Constituency that I will do my best on their behalf in the 

deliberations here. 

 

I wish also to extend my thanks to the Premier, and to the Members of the Legislature for the courtesy 

extended to the Constituency of Turtleford in passing the Legislation which enabled me to take my seat 

in this Assembly at the time that I did. 

 

This week is Education Week in Saskatchewan. I believe there are a number of people present in our 

galleries, representing the trustees throughout the province, and I‘m sure that Members on both sides of 

the Legislature will join me in extending greetings to them this afternoon for having come down to visit 

the Session. Some of them are known personally to me, and I‘m very pleased to see them here today. 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

55 

 

Having been a teacher for a number of years in this province, and having had a hand in encouraging 

young people to participate in Bryant Oratory Competition, I‘m sure we were all pleased with the 

honour that came to the family of a Member of our Legislature when Miss Carol Erb won the Bryant 

competition last night, and I congratulate her most heartily. 

 

Now during the past few weeks, a number of hon. Members on both sides of the Assembly have visited 

the Turtleford Constituency. I trust that during their visit they noted that we still have many highway 

problems. For those who wish to visit Spiritwood and Leoville in our Constituency, a considerably 

longer route must be travelled to reach those points than is desirable to the residents of those areas. I 

sincerely hope that this Government will fulfill the commitments that were made during the byelection 

to the people of the Constituency with regard to highways. I refer specifically to the statement that the 

Government had already approved of some twenty-four miles of reconstruction and gravelling in the 

Constituency for the coming year. I want to thank the Government for that commitment, and I sincerely 

hope that they will find it possible to fulfill. 

 

I also would like at this time to express, on behalf of the residents of the Horsehead, and Barthel areas, 

appreciation for the fact that radio-telephone service will soon be provided in that area. As hon. 

Members know, I have during the time I‘ve had the privilege of being in this Legislature, had the 

opportunity of drawing to the attention of all hon. Members the lack of rural telephone service in our 

northern areas. In the Constituency which I have the privilege to represent we have very few rural 

telephones as yet in relation to the number of farm families in that area. I know others have said a good 

deal about frills, but I want to say sincerely, Mr. Speaker, that in this rather remote area where people 

are anywhere from 15 to 30 miles from all weather roads, that the installation of this essential telephone 

service could well be the means of saving lives, and could well be the means of avoiding serious 

inconveniences in time of storms, particularly in the winter months. I sincerely hope that it will be 

possible to do more and more toward improving communications among the people in the areas that I 

represent, and I know I speak for other Members who have the same problems across the northern part 

of the province. 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

56 

 

I trust too, that this Government will find it possible to honour commitments made to the Indian people 

in the Turtleford Constituency. It was mentioned that the Government will shortly be sending a 

representative down to Ottawa to attempt to bargain in the interests of our Indian people. It is interesting 

to note some of the questions on the minds of the Indians with regard to Government and government 

service. For example, questions were asked at the public meetings concerning the Indian status with 

regard to educational services, with regard to fish, fur and timber fees and licenses and permits. The 

question is raised: Has the Government the constitutional right to collect fees and permits of this type? 

In my opinion, some clarification is necessary in this matter. For example, I believe that the Indian 

people need not pay the Education Tax. If I recall correctly, the Premier has made a statement, that the 

Treaty Indian people were not required to pay the Education Tax. 

 

I gather too, from remarks made, there is some question as to whether the Indians can be required to pay 

fishing and fur fees on Crown Lands. Here again, I would appreciate having the status of the Indian 

people with regard to these matters, clarified through the proper authorities. I trust also, that it will be 

increasingly possible to give the Indian people more assistance with regard to education, hospitalization, 

and other benefits. Some mention was made in the recent campaign, concerning the possibility of 

extending the electric power to our Indian Reservations, with the assistance of federal authorities 

working together with provincial authorities, and I gather, local authorities. There is no doubt about it, 

our Indian people are becoming more and more progressive, and more and more desirous of the modern 

benefits of our society. Here again, anything that can be done with regard to these services for these 

people, will, I am sure, add greatly to their comfort and their way of life. 

 

Just a word concerning the matter of the extension of the liquor privileges to the Indians. Here again, I 

believe, there is some misunderstanding and some concern on the part of local and provincial 

authorities. In view of some of the situations that have arisen on our reservations, and in some of our 

communities, I would urge the Government to reassess this matter, with a view to correcting what in my 

opinion are some weaknesses in regard to the present situation in various parts of the province. 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

57 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‘ve heard in this Assembly a good deal about the role of the Opposition. We have in the 

newspapers and various other places heard a good many analyses of the election just passed in the 

Turtleford Constituency. In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, the results of this byelection indicated clearly that 

people do recognize the importance of Her Majesty‘s Loyal Opposition in the role of Government. In 

my opinion the results in the Turtleford Constituency serve to indicate, and indicate clearly, that people 

recognize that there are two sides to every issue, and that it is important that both sides of every issue be 

presented for general discussion by this Legislature. 

 

I believe too, that the results do constitute a tribute to the work of the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 

Thatcher, and the work of my other colleagues on this side of the House, and indicate the concern of the 

rural people with regard to present proposals, regarding changes in local government structure. 

 

I want to make it abundantly clear, Mr. Speaker, that I am not opposed to change. We do recognize that 

changes are necessary from time to time, and that changes can bring progress. But, at the same time, I 

think Mr. Speaker, we recognize too, that not all changes are progressive just by virtue of the fact that 

they are changes. The Liberal Party has been very clear on this issue. We are not opposed to changes in 

the structure of local government, providing it is indicated clearly by the people that they recognize the 

characteristics of the changes, and that they are in favour of them. We believe, Mr. Speaker, that after all 

possible information has been given to our people, to our ratepayers, we believe they should be given 

the democratic vote, and not just a vote on whether they want a modified county or a full county. To me 

this was not the issue at stake when the votes were taken under the auspices of the Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities some time ago. In my opinion, this was not the issue in the minds of 

the rural people of my Constituency, in the recent byelection. Instead the question was – do we want 

some form of municipal reorganization, or do we not? Mr. Speaker, this choice is the desirable choice to 

give to the ratepayers of our province, in this matter of municipal reorganization. I believe that many 

rural people are concerned over the possibility of loss of 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

58 

 

control of their taxation dollar as centres of centralization get further and further away. I believe, that a 

program of education with regard to rural and municipal problems is necessary. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we‘ve heard a good deal said in this Legislature with regard to the role of the 

Opposition. It has been suggested Mr. Speaker, that we have not done anything more than criticize the 

work of the Government, and that not too constructively. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Members of the Opposition have been constructive in this Legislature. 

Mr. Speaker, one suggestion that the Opposition has made is that the Government should have taken a 

longer look at the $6 or $7 million expenditure of the Department of Public Works at this particular 

time, when social welfare and other services were being curtailed. I find something constructive in this. 

 

Another suggestion made by the Opposition was that extensions of hospital service, or service to our 

mentally ill should have received preference ahead of a building such as the new liquor warehouse that 

is being planned by the Government. Time and time again, the Government has attempted to place us in 

a position whereby, when we question expenditures, they suggest we are voting against essential 

construction and essential utilities. I don‘t believe the people of the province will take these comments 

by Members of the Government seriously because I‘m sure that all of us here in the Opposition are 

interested in progress in matters of public utilities. We are interested in the wider development of power 

and gas. I too, like the hon. Member from Notukeu-Willowbunch represent a rural Constituency which 

has not had as yet the privilege of natural gas. We are pleased to see that natural gas has now reached the 

City of North Battleford, and possibly if we can have some co-operation from the Member for the 

Battlefords and others in the area, we may soon have natural gas lines running north to some of our 

north-western Constituencies. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, we are concerned as all hon. Members are, with the allocation of revenues, 

and hereto, I believe, all must be done to give the people of the province the very best of service with 

regard to health and other benefits, as well as public works and other construction. Now, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe, 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

59 

 

the time has come in our province when more and more emphasis is being placed on education, and 

quite justly so. In my only brief reference to the budget, speaking again as a member of the teaching 

profession, I am naturally gratified to see that revenues for the purpose of education have not been 

curtailed in spite of the fact that this is a deficit budget. I am sure that members of the trustees‘ 

association, members of the teaching profession, and parents throughout the province, will be gratified 

to know that educational services will be extended and that funds will be provided for those purposes. 

 

However, in the field of education too, we have, I believe, more to be done with regard to those children 

throughout the province who require specialized training. I know a start has been made with regard to 

the Metis people, and more can be done in the field of vocational training and in the field of retarded 

children. I sincerely hope that every effort will be made to launch more and more of this type of work in 

the field of education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is nearly 5:30. I shall be honoured with the rest of my colleagues to support the 

amendment, and vote against the motion. 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, there‘s an old saying, that hell hath no fury 

like a politician with an undelivered speech, so I suppose I should be furious now, with just exactly one 

minute to go. But, in that minute I would like to congratulate you. This is the first time I‘ve officially 

been on my feet, and I would like to congratulate you on your appointment as Speaker, and also 

congratulate you on the splendid manner in which you have carried on. 

 

I also wish to congratulate my desk-mate, the Member for Wadena for having been appointed as Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

I would like too, to congratulate the Provincial Treasurer for the very splendid budget speech he has 

delivered, in an excellent way, and I‘m going to suggest that in a short seven months, he has become as 

capable as his predecessor. I anticipate for him a good many years ahead as Provincial Treasurer of this 

province. 

  



 

March 8, 1961 

 

60 

 

I would like to say in the few seconds remaining, just a few words in connection with my Constituency, 

and the fact that they saw fit to return me in June of last year. On election night, of course, I thanked 

everybody within hearing distance over both radio and television. Somebody got the bright idea that I 

should do a tap dance on that occasion, and I was hoping that they would destroy the film, but they kept 

it. 

 

However, I just want to mention the three Members who were elected along with me, Mrs. Cooper, the 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney, and Ed Whelan. I am very pleased with the three of them. With those few remarks, 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to adjourn the debate. 

 

The Debate was, on motion of the Hon. Mr. Williams, adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 p.m. 

 


