



















































Hansard: February 15, 1961


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

FIRST SESSION — FOURTEENTH LEGISLATURE 

5th Day 

 

Wednesday, February 15, 1961. 
 

The House met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

NEWSPAPER CORRECTION 
 

Mrs. Gladys Strum (Saskatoon): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with I 

would like to draw your attention to a correction in „The Leader-Post‟ of Tuesday, February 14th, 

reporting that I said that the Power Corporation‟s new building will cost $6 million. I wouldn‟t dream of 

such a thing. That $6 million should have been in association with the new Co-operative Chemical Plant, 

and I would like „The Leader-Post‟ to make this correction. 

 

Mr. W. Ross Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are 

called, I should like to rise on a matter of privilege. Yesterday I asked the Provincial Treasurer Question 

12, seeking information as to loans which had been made by the Industrial Development Office. The 

answer in essence flatly refused to give any information. Now, very respectfully I suggest the answer is 

a reflection on the rights and privileges of every hon. Member on both sides of the House. I think it is 

our duty to see that the taxpayer‟s dollars are well spent. Surely it is in the interests of the public that the 

Opposition be provided with this kind of information. I don‟t think the Government has something to 

hide. But surely if they haven‟t got something to hide, we want that information, and I hope the hon. 

Minister will give it to us. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I don‟t believe the hon. Member has a point of privilege. I believe Mr. 

Beauchesne is very clear on this point, that the refusal to answer a question on the part of the 

Government cannot be raised as a point of privilege. The Government has only to say that they do not 

answer this question because of public interest, but Mr. Beauchesne goes further to say that they do not 

have 



 

February 15, 1961 

 

2 

 

to give any reasons why they do not answer a question, and very specifically states that this refusal 

cannot be raised as a point of privilege. You do not have a point of privilege in this regard. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Yes, of course, I must accept your ruling, but does Beauchesne not also say that 

before any money is spent, the Legislature must approve of it. Here is money being spent, and our 

MLA‟s don‟t know the details. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I‟m afraid I can‟t allow argument on a ruling in this regard. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Hon. A.M. Nicholson (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to 

draw your attention to the House that we have a distinguished party on the floor — the students from the 

University of Saskatchewan, the Debating Directorate and members of the International Association of 

the University have honoured us by their presence. When some of us were at university some years ago, 

it never occurred to us that law-makers might be interested in visiting our Debating Directorate, nor did 

the law-makers suggest that the students might be interested in attending a Session of the Legislature. I 

am sure we are honoured to have these young people with us today and we are especially delighted that 

so many students from the International Association have come here today. While our university isn‟t 

the largest in the world, we are flattered that they have selected it as one of the most important, and we 

hope that their stay in Saskatchewan and Canada will be pleasant and profitable. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Frank Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I wish to draw the 

attention of the House to a fine group of young students in the west gallery. These are 27 pupils from 

Grade X class of Cupar School, and they are with their teacher, Mr. Earl Chambers. I am sure this House 

will agree with me that we wish them a pleasant stay here this afternoon, and I am sure they will find it 

an education to sit here in the House today. 



  

February 15, 1961 

 

3 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon): — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to welcome a group of students from the 

Montgomery School who have just arrived here. I hope their visit here will be a pleasant one. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Kramer, seconded by Mrs. 

Strum: 

 

And the proposed amendment thereto, moved by Mr. Thatcher, seconded by Mr. McDonald: 

 

Premier T.C. Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure I am expressing your wishes as well as the wishes of 

every Member of the House, when I extend to the University students a most hearty welcome. We are 

delighted to have here the students from the Debating Directorate, and even more especially those from 

the International Student‟s Club. I want to assure those of you who are from outside of our province, and 

outside of our country, that although our weather is cold, our welcome is warm, and I am sure that you 

will find Saskatchewan people a hospitable, and a generous people to meet. We trust that during your 

stay here in Canada you will form a good impression of the Canadian people, and that you will carry 

back to your respective countries our good wishes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the House gave me leave to adjourn the debate last night, I was dealing with some of 

the statements which had been made by the Leader of the Opposition. After listening to him for an hour 

and three quarters yesterday, and some fifteen or twenty minutes the day before, I feel certain that if the 

Liberal Party thought they were improving their situation by changing leaders, they must be sorely 

disappointed. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier T.C. Douglas: — I want, first of all, to deal with one of the things which the Leader of the 

Opposition mentioned: automobile insurance rates. Liberal speakers throughout the province, and 

particularly in the Turtleford Constituency, have been making the categorical statement that automobile 

insurance rates have been increased. This is particularly true of the President of the Liberal 



 

February 15, 1961 

 

4 

 

Association, Mr. Dave Steuart, who has been reported to that effect in the press a number of times. IO 

was surprised when the Leader of the Opposition made this same categorical statement last Monday. Of 

course, it‟s not true. When I challenged him on it, he said, “Well, they haven‟t been increased; they will 

be increased after the Turtleford by-election.” Mr. Speaker, that also is not true. In order to substantiate 

this somewhat irresponsible statement, he quoted from the Manager of the Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance Office. He quoted only the Regina Leader-Post. I would like to draw attention to two other 

quotations, which he apparently missed. One is in the Prince Albert Daily Herald of January 10th, which 

quotes Mr. Hammond as saying, 

 

“The 1961 rates which will become effective May 1st have not yet been decided upon, and won‟t be 

until early in March.” 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — After Turtleford. 

 

Premier Douglas: — 

 

“However, I do expect from the upward trend in automobile accidents and the additional benefits 

provided in 1960 under the Automobile Insurance Plan, that a modest increase in rates is indicated.” 

 

In the Saskatoon Star Phoenix of January 12th he is quoted as saying, 

 

“Of course there is nothing definite on the matter yet, for the Automobile Accident Insurance 

Committee currently studying the situation has not made any recommendations to the Government. 

However, if the present trend of accident rate continues, undoubtedly the committee will have to make 

a recommendation for a modest increase.” 

 

The Leader of the Opposition, in his great haste to find something which the Government had increased, 

overlooked two important facts. The first is that the Automobile Insurance Plan does not bring the 

Government in one dollar of revenue. Nor do we put one dollar of Government funds into the plan. 

When the plan was introduced in this Legislature in 1945, the Liberal Member opposite said it was the 

greatest hoax that had 



  

February 15, 1961 

 

5 

 

ever been perpetrated upon that Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — That isn‟t true. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I made the statement at the time that not one dollar of automobile insurance 

money would go into Government revenue, and neither would the Government put a dollar in the fund. I 

stated that the premiums would be collected and would be placed into a fund, and from that fund 

benefits would be paid. If our accident rate was good and we were able to build up surpluses then rates 

would be reduced. If the surplus began to decline to too low a level then either rates would have to be 

increased or benefits would have to be cut. Now that‟s the situation. Our hon. friend apparently 

overlooks this. It is not a tax. 

 

The second thing he overlooks (he should have taken the trouble to check), is that this fund has a surplus 

built up of over four million dollars. If we were trying to keep the fund at a surplus of over four million 

dollars a moderate increase in rates would be necessary. But it‟s not necessary, and the Government has 

no intention of asking for an increase in automobile insurance rates. I say quite frankly, however, Mr. 

Speaker, that if the people of Saskatchewan don‟t try to hold the rate of automobile accidents down, and 

that surplus gets to the place where it is dangerously low, then sometime in the future, undoubtedly, it 

will be necessary either to increase the insurance rates or to reduce the benefits. I want to make it 

categorically clear now that there is no intention of increasing these rates this year. 

 

The second thing I want to deal with is the Leader of the Opposition‟s reference to the work of the 

Continuing Committee on Local Government. As I took his words down he said, “The report of the 

Continuing Committee has not been brought down on account of the Turtleford by-election.” Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s an insult to the men who are members of that committee. Who are these men? One of 

them was a Conservative candidate last June. Another was a Liberal candidate last June. Another is a 

President of a Liberal Association, whom I know very well, and so does the Leader of the Opposition. If 

you go over the political affiliations of the members of the Continuing Committee, so far as I know 

them, I would say there are more who are Liberals than there are who belong to any other political party. 

It will be news to them, Mr. Speaker, to learn from the Leader of the Opposition that they are holding 

back the 



 

February 15, 1961 

 

6 

 

report in order to help the CCF government in the Turtleford by-election. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Just a coincidence. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Now let me say something about this committee. All the Members will remember 

that the Royal Commission on Agricultural and Rural Life, in its report, suggested that the Government 

should call a conference of local government bodies to look into the whole question of local government 

reorganization. That conference was held in this Chamber on December 11th, 1956. As a result of the 

week‟s conference it was unanimously agreed that a Continuing Committee should be set up to look at 

the matter of reorganization, change of boundaries and a reallocation of financial responsibilities. All the 

local government groups were invited to nominate their representatives. This committee was not 

selected by the Government. The men on the committee were chosen by the Saskatchewan Association 

of Rural Municipalities, the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, the Saskatchewan School 

Trustees Association and the Health Regions and others. I want to pay tribute to them, because for over 

three years they have worked diligently and sincerely. These are busy men. They are not getting paid for 

what they‟re doing but they are getting their out-of-pocket expenses. They have given of their time 

freely and they‟ve worked tirelessly. Last fall before they wrote their report they decided to take their 

ideas out to the country and to discuss some of the ideas they had with local government people. 

Immediately they were set upon. Some Members sitting opposite followed them around from place to 

place, to see if they couldn‟t stir up a little trouble. Several groups in the province started to criticize 

their proposals. Votes were taken in some municipalities, although no proposals were yet formalized. I 

don‟t know whether I‟m going to agree with the recommendations of this Committee, I haven‟t see the 

recommendations. I don‟t know whether I‟m going to agree with them or not. But, Mr. Speaker, 

common courtesy would demand that you do not start to criticize the report before you have seen it. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — All I ask is that the Members of this Legislature, and people in other parts of the 

province, at least give these hard working people an opportunity to submit their report. Then study the 

report. When that has been done, we will be in a position to know what action we should take. 



  

February 15, 1961 

 

7 

 

The amendment which was moved yesterday by the Leader of the Opposition criticizes the Government 

because we have not come out and said that people will be given a vote on the question of whether or 

not there shall be basic changes in local government. Well, one of the terms of reference which was 

given to this committee was to recommend what form of consultation and in what way we should 

ascertain the wishes of the people themselves. I don‟t know what they will recommend as the best way 

of consulting the ratepayers and the people affected, but I‟m certainly not going to stand up and say that 

we will take this particular method or that particular method until the Committee itself has had a chance 

to make its recommendations to us. I want to say to the Members of this House, and to the people of 

Saskatchewan that we have no intention of introducing legislation regarding reorganization or a county 

or a modified county system at this time. When this Committee has prepared its report and submitted it 

to us, we propose to put copies in the hands of every Member just as quickly as we can, it will then be 

printed and sent out to all the local governing bodies in the province, including municipalities, school 

units, health regions and so on. When we have had a chance to study it, we will sit down with them and 

decide which of the recommendations can be implemented, which are practical, and which we consider 

impractical either for the moment or in the long run. I want to remind the House again, that when the 

conference was held in December 1956, I made a statement on behalf of the Government. It is found on 

page 12 of the opening statement. I said: 

 

“The Government itself believes that some kind of basic reorganization, at least in the rural areas, is an 

essential and inevitable step in meeting the problems of local government today. I want to make it 

abundantly clear that the Government will not embark upon a program of municipal reorganization 

unless this program is assured of the co-operation of the local governing bodies and the widespread 

support of the general public.” 

 

That pledge, which I made on behalf of the Government then, still stands. Liberals attempt to make 

political capital out of attacking men who can‟t defend themselves, and whose only fault is that they 

have laboured for three years trying to find ways and means of strengthening democratic local 

government in this province. 



 

February 15, 1961 

 

8 

 

I was interested yesterday, Mr. Speaker, when the Leader of the Opposition gave the House the benefit 

of his definition of socialism. If I copied correctly he defines a socialist as “a person who has lost all 

hope of becoming a capitalist”. Well I came across a better definition. I was thumbing through Hansard, 

and on page 4316 of Hansard for 1948, I found this definition: — it says: 

 

“. . . we democratic socialists, fundamentally believe in the laws and teachings of the Christian church 

. . .” 

 

That‟s a much better definition. It was uttered in the House of Commons on May 24th, 1948 by the 

Member for Moose Jaw, Mr. Ross Thatcher. Mr. Speaker, if ever you wanted to see the degeneration of 

a personality, you only have to measure the two quotations. 

 

I noticed yesterday, that the Leader of the Opposition made a statement which must have shocked some 

of his colleagues; it certainly shocked me. He stated that the Liberal Party will not move left as long as 

he was leader of the Liberal Party. He said that he did not leave one socialist party to join another. I 

want the gentleman opposite to remember that. The whole world, Mr. Speaker, is moving progressively 

leftwards. As it moves the only person that will be left standing over in the right field of reaction, 

apparently, will be the leader of the Liberal Party. As a matter of fact there was a National Liberal Rally 

in Ottawa a few weeks ago. The Leader of the Opposition didn‟t go, for reasons best known to himself. 

It certainly indicated, at least on paper, that the Liberal Party was moving left. Mr. Speaker, it may just 

be that the Leader of the Opposition is going to find that for the second time in his life, he has joined the 

wrong party. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You found it once or twice too. 

 

Premier Douglas: — As a matter of fact, I predict to the Members opposite, that even their party may 

become too progressive for his reactionary views. 

 

Yesterday, the leader of the Liberal Party spent a good deal of time referring to Aesop, and talking about 

Aesop‟s Fables. Actually Aesop was a very good writer. I came across one of these fables, plus the little 

moral which he attaches always to them. This little fable said: 



  

February 15, 1961 

 

9 

 

“One hot summer‟s day a fox was strolling through an orchard till he came to a bunch of grapes just 

ripening on a vine which had been trained over a lofty branch. „Just the thing to quench my thirst‟, 

quoth he. Drawing back a few paces, he took a run and a jump and just missed the bunch. Turning 

around again, which a one, two, three, he jumped up, but with no greater success. Again and again he 

tried after the tempting morsel, but at last had to give it up, walked away with his nose in the air, 

saying: „I am sure they were sour‟. 

 

The moral: It is easy to despise what you cannot get.” 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I notice there is some applause from the gallery. We will have to insist that this 

does not continue. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Those were boos, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I‟m sure there is no “booze” in the gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I would hope not — you‟re paying them. 

 

Premier Douglas: — That exhibits a spirit of exuberance! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — They‟re on the payroll. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Leader of the Opposition spent a good deal of time 

playing the old record that he has played from one end of Canada to the other, and throughout the length 

and breadth of Saskatchewan, depicting this province as a place of economic stagnation, where nothing 

has happened, where everything is backward — a place in which there has been no progress. No man 

has done more to try to belittle this province in other parts of Canada than he. He peddled this story of 

his up and down the length and breath of Saskatchewan last May and June. But he couldn‟t make the 

people believe him, because they had the evidence all about them. One thing the Liberal Party has never 

been able to forgive the electorate of Saskatchewan for is that they won‟t swallow these tall tales which 

they have been telling. 

 

What are the facts about the economic situation in this province and in Canada? You might as well 

recognize, 



 

February 15, 1961 

 

10 

 

Mr. Speaker, that Canada is in the grip of an economic recession and that our economy has been losing 

its momentum for some seven or eight years. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — For 16 years! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — That‟s just Saskatchewan. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I don‟t mind interruptions, but I didn‟t interrupt my hon. friend yesterday when he 

spoke for an hour and three-quarters. I would certainly appreciate, unless my friend has something to say 

that he just keep quiet for today. 

 

The fact is, that during this past year the gross national product in Canada increased only 2½%. When 

you adjust that for price changes it is only 1%. When you realize that the population has gone up more 

than that amount and express it on a per capita basis, our gross amount national product on a per capita 

basis actually declined 1.2%. The picture in Canada is not an encouraging one. Consumer demand has 

been slowing down and there has been a decline in capital investment. The unemployment situation in 

Canada is the worst we have had since the „thirties‟, averaging in 1960, 7% of the labour force out of 

work or seeking jobs. At December 31 last, 528,000 unemployed represented 8.2% of the labour force. 

We must all be concerned about a situation as serious as that. 

 

Against this national background, I want to say that the Saskatchewan economy has stood up remarkably 

well. We would have done better in a booming and expanding economy, but our economy has stood the 

brunt of an economic recession — even better than we have had any right to expect. The net value of 

commodity production during this past year is estimated at over $1,000,000,000. That is 15% higher 

than the year before. A good part of this, I say in all fairness, is due to a good crop. Our personal income 

for 1960 is estimated at $1,350,000,000 — up 14% over the previous year. Our unemployment which, in 

1959 was less than 3%, last year averaged less than 4% of our total labour force. 

 

I am not going to suggest for a moment I am happy that an unemployment percentage of less than 4% 

exists, but I want to point out that it is less than the national average which is 7% and less than the 

prairie regional average which is 4.2%. It is less than Ontario with 6.4%, Quebec with 10.1%, and the 

Atlantic provinces with 11%. 



  

February 15, 1961 

 

11 

 

The Leader of the Opposition yesterday was talking about 28,000 unemployed in Saskatchewan. It is not 

something that makes us happy. But he makes no comment at all of the 49,500 unemployment in 

Alberta, and the 34,000 unemployed in the province of Manitoba. 

 

The fact is that the provincial economy has remained fairly stable in the face of a national recession and 

a low level of farm income. The fact that we have been able to have this degree of stability is due to the 

fact that we have been able to broaden and diversify our economy during the past 15 years. 

 

The net value of production in 1950 — a decade ago — was $636,000,000. As I said a few moments 

ago, this last year it was over $1,000,000,000 representing an increase of some 60%. This is due to 

greater diversification. Ten years ago, 75% of our total production was agricultural and only 25% 

non-agricultural. This year, with a much bigger crop, less than 50% per our production was agricultural, 

and more than 50% non-agricultural. If you look at some percentage figures you will find them 

interesting. In 1950, mining represented 4% of our total output; last year it represented 16%. In 1950, 

manufacturing represented 8% of our total output; last year it represented 13%. In 1950, construction 

represented 10% of our total output; last year it represented 18%. In 1960 and 1950, our farm output was 

about the same — $625,000,000. Therefore, the great increase in our output has been due to the 

non-agricultural sector of our economy. Take commodity production in mining for instance. In 1950 it 

had a gross value of $20,000,000. In 1960 it was $179,000,000. Last year the gross value of all our 

mineral production was some $214,000,000. 

 

I was interested yesterday when the Leader of the Opposition was constantly making comparisons with 

our neighbouring provinces. He didn‟t point out to the House that whereas our petroleum production last 

year in Saskatchewan went up 8.5%, Alberta went up only 1.1% and Manitoba went down 8.7%. In 

1950, manufacturing was $218,000,000; this past year it was $350,000,000. Construction, in 1950 was 

$119,000,000. In 1960 it was $353,000,000. Electric power in 1950 was $12,000,000. In 1960 it was 

$41,000,000. 

 

The non-agricultural segment of our economy is becoming increasingly important. The emphasis, as I 

pointed out to this House before, had to be placed, and still has to be placed on primary industry. As we 

move from primary industry 



 

February 15, 1961 

 

12 

 

to manufacturing industries, it too will become important. Since 1950, 320 new manufacturing concerns 

have been established. We have averaged 51 new concerns a year for the last five years. During the past 

year the expenditures in new and expanded plants in manufacturing alone amount to some $50,000,000. 

These have included new items such as steel plate, cattle feeds, paints, septic tanks, TV tubs, pumps and 

water softeners, oxygen and acetylene, fibre glass boats, school furniture, structural steel, soaps and 

detergents, shotgun shells and potato chips. 

 

The number of people in 1950 engaged in these industries was 10,596. Last year it was 12,500. The 

D.B.S. Monthly Survey of Larger Firms shows from September, 1951 to September, 1960 an increase of 

more than 30% indicating the growth of these larger and more powerful manufacturing concerns. Of 

particular significance is the growth of the iron and steel product industry. The Industrial Office, for 

instance, has made 23 loans to this industry, totalling $2,924,000. The iron and steel products in 1960 

accounted for 10 new firms and 7 additional under construction or coming into operation. Since 1945 

there have been announcements of 71 new firms in the iron and steel products industry alone. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition yesterday talked a lot about phantom industries. It is true that there have 

been companies like the Hoesch Company of Germany, and Campbell & Associates of Vancouver who 

not only made announcements of new industry, but spent very considerable sums of money and then 

decided not to proceed with their operation. This, of course, can happen at any time. But my friend did 

not check some of these facts very carefully yesterday. He talked about the Electrolier Plant of 

Weyburn, and said he had talked with the former Mayor, the Liberal candidate, and he said it was just a 

warehouse they had there. If he had made further inquiries he would have found that these people not 

only have warehouses there, but have secured the necessary space and plan to move their machinery into 

operation and begin manufacturing. They have had some trouble at their head office plant, but this does 

not mean that their program is not being proceeded with. 

 

He had a lot of fun about the „Miracle‟ building which was going to be made at Weyburn. Well, if he 

had looked around a little he would have found that this industry, instead of gong to Weyburn has been 

taken over by an aggressive firm in Moose Jaw. They claim to be the largest manufacturers of truck 

hoists in western Canada, and they 



  

February 15, 1961 

 

13 

 

expect within the course of the next few months to be in business in building material. A number of 

these people who are called „phantoms‟, have already been calling in to say that they are very much 

alive. The Leader of the Opposition said that a plant is manufacturing septic tanks at Wynyard, and 

according to his report there is only a sales office in Saskatoon, Regina and Moose Jaw, and the firm is 

currently employing five people. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — That‟s what your bulletin said. 

 

Premier Douglas: — The manager of the plant said that there are 22 full time employees, not 5, and 

instead of having 3 agents, they have 70 agents. He said that they are concentrating on septic tanks, and 

they hope to make 2,000 tanks this year. They also say that they are going to make monuments for 

cemeteries. After the speech the Leader of the Opposition made yesterday, I think they would be 

prepared to contribute a tombstone when they come to bury the hopes and aspirations of the Liberal 

Party. The Leader of the Opposition talked about these little industries, some of which were not included 

in the 32 industries mentioned in the Speech from the Throne. But he said nothing about the fact that the 

first steel ingot was poured in this province for the first time in its history. Saskatchewan now has the 

nucleus of a steel industry. There is nothing about the Dominion Bridge Company coming in here to put 

up a structural steel plant. There was nothing about cement or steel pipe. He said nothing about these 

other industries. He talks about iron ore and petro-chemical industries. He should know these represents 

tens of millions of dollars of investment. When I talked about a petro-chemical industry a little over a 

year ago, on coming back from overseas, he hardly expected that in a few months somebody was going 

to put up twenty or thirty million dollars to start a petro-chemical industry. It‟s not like starting a 

hardware store! It takes a lot of money. I think if my friend will just have patience he will see 

development in these industries in due course. 

 

He spoke rather slightingly of the potash industry. He said that although we had talked about the potash 

industry, we had kept from these people the conditions they would run into. We couldn‟t tell them 

whether or not there was going to be quicksand in the Blairmore formation. But if he had looked at the 

Saskatoon Star Phoenix, of February 10th, he would have seen a statement there by John W. Hall, of the 

Potash Company of America, in which he said, 



 

February 15, 1961 

 

14 

 

“A twenty-six million dollar mine had been in operation for about a year, the first ore being brought 

up in early November 1958, when it was forced to close down November 1st, 1959, because of 

considerable water entering the shaft and threatening to engulf the workings.” 

 

The article goes on to say that they have solved this problem. It said: 

 

“Mr. Hall is optimistic for the future of the plant. He said there is an expanding market for potash, 

showing a 4% to 5% growth each year. Both the export markets and the world demands were good, 

and he anticipated they would stay good.” 

 

This constant attempt to make it look as though industry will not come to Saskatchewan, and trying to 

doctor up figures to support it, Mr. Speaker, is not going to commend itself to the people of 

Saskatchewan. Yesterday the Leader of the Opposition got out the Public and Private Investment 

pamphlet, put out by the Department of Trade and Commerce, Ottawa 1960, and on page 10 he picked 

out one little item. It was manufacturing. He quoted that, and said that there was six or seven times as 

much investment in Alberta and Manitoba. When he quoted Alberta, in addition to quoting 

manufacturing, he quoted processing plants, oil refineries, gas processing companies, which are not in 

the manufacturing. 

 

This constant confusion between primary industries and secondary industries is something which the 

Liberal Party has done for years in order to attempt to mislead people. Let‟s look and see what the 

figures are. If we take out of public and private investment, that is, all social capital including money for 

schools, churches and housing, and take only industrial and commercial investment, whether for primary 

industries or secondary industries, what do we find? We find that last year the investment in 

Saskatchewan was $435,400,000. For our neighbouring province of Alberta, of course, it was higher, 

$819,000,000. For Manitoba it was less than Saskatchewan, only $394,500,000. Mr. Speaker, take it on 

a per capita basis, which is the only fair way to compare figures between provinces. Take it on the 

amount of investment for commercial and industrial purposes per head. Last year, Saskatchewan was the 

second highest in Canada. 



  

February 15, 1961 

 

15 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Premier would permit a question. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Yes surely. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well now, Mr. Premier, I think in fairness you would agree you are also including the 

investments of farmers in farm machinery, which is about two-thirds or three-quarters of that figure you 

quoted, and of course farm machinery in Saskatchewan is much greater than in any other province. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. Member made a speech yesterday and I don‟t see why I 

should give him time to doctor it up today. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I didn‟t want you to get away with this. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He doesn‟t like it. 

 

Premier Douglas: — This covers all commercial and industrial investments. The fact is that 

Saskatchewan has the second highest per capita investment in Canada for industrial and commercial 

purpose. Moreover, Mr. Speaker, take the steady growth in this investment. The average from 1950 to 

1953 in Saskatchewan was $380,000,000. For the last three years the average per year has been 

$612,000,000. The gentleman across the way has been constantly trying to rub out these facts by saying 

a lot of this is for schools and hospitals. As a matter of fact Saskatchewan is above the national average 

in the percentage of total investment which is going into commercial and industrial purposes. Our 

percentage is over 70%. 

 

The result of this constant increase in the amount of money invested in the province, for industrial 

development and for the extension of commercial enterprise, has broadened the employment 

opportunities for our people. The agricultural labour force, as everyone knows, has dropped from 

148,000 in 1951 to 127,000 in 1960. That is a reduction of 15%. Also, in some of the highly mechanized 

industries like refineries, automation has reduced the number of people employed, although the amount 

of goods produced has been greatly increased. Despite that, Mr. Speaker, the total labour force in 

Saskatchewan, which in 1951 was 302,000 was 316,000 last year. Over the past few years 

Saskatchewan‟s labour force has expanded more rapidly than the figures for the Prairie Regions, or for 

Canada as a whole. The non-agricultural labour force ahs increased from 154,000 in 1951 to 189,000 in 

1960, an increase 



 

February 15, 1961 

 

16 

 

of 22%. My hon. friend tried to pick out a few manufacturing plants. They want to forget about the 

primary industries. They want to forget about the basic industries. But the fact remains that our 

non-agricultural labour force has gone up by 22% during the past ten years. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Most of them are unemployed. 

 

Premier Douglas: — As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, if one takes the D.B.S. employment indices 

which gives 1949 as the base year equalling 100, one finds that in 1960 Canada stood at 118, (that‟s an 

18% average increase across Canada), Manitoba at 111, (which is an 11% increase), Saskatchewan at 

126.6 (or a 26% increase) and Alberta 154, (or a 54% increase). Again, Mr. Speaker, the increase over 

the past few years in Saskatchewan has been higher than the increase in Manitoba, or the average for 

Canada. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition made the statement the other day that Saskatchewan has the lowest wages 

any place west of the Maritimes. The disadvantage about making wild and irresponsible statements is 

that you cannot get away with them. The D.B.S. figures show that for the first 10 months in 1960, the 

average wage in Saskatchewan was $72.00. This is lower than Ontario, lower than Alberta and it is 

lower than B.C. But it is equal to Quebec and it is higher than Manitoba. When a man comes in and says 

this is the lowest west of the Maritimes, he is only trying to deceive the people or he doesn‟t know what 

he is talking about. 

 

The hon. Member goes further and talks about population decline. Everyone knows that rural population 

has declined, because of farm mechanization. The fact is that from 1936 to 1946 we not only lost our 

natural increase, we lost an additional 99,000 of our population. But from 1951 to the present time our 

population has increased by 88,000. That doesn‟t mean we kept our natural increase. We didn‟t. But at 

least we stopped going back and we kept some of our natural increase. The last survey shows, Mr. 

Speaker, that during this period 6 out of 10 Canadian provinces lost a share of their natural increase, 

including all of the Atlantic provinces and Saskatchewan and Manitoba. This is what my friend failed to 

recognize. While this loss of rural population is a trend, due to mechanization, in terms of the urban 

community we have had the second highest increase in Canada. Our increase in Saskatchewan in the 

urban population in the inter-census period was 28%. Only Alberta has more, with 41%, B.C. was 24%, 

Manitoba was 16%. 



  

February 15, 1961 

 

17 

 

The real measure of growth is not only population. It is the wealth which is produced for people to 

enjoy. In terms of wealth produced over the last 10 years, personal income has risen steadily. The 

two-year average for 1950-51 was $906,000,000. The average for the two-year period 1959-60 was 

$1,260,000,000. There has been some change in prices so bring it down to constant dollars and adjust 

for price changes. Ten years ago, the average was $827,000,000. The average for the last two years was 

$975,000,000. This is an increase in personal income in constant dollars of $148,000,000. Not only is 

our population coming back, not only have we stopped the downward trend and have 88,000 more 

people in the province, but we are producing more wealth and the personal income enjoyed by our 

people has been increased. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would say, with all due modesty, that I think the Government‟s program has contributed 

to this encouraging picture. For years, through our Resources Department we have carried on surveys 

and inventories of resources. We have conducted aero-magnetic surveys. We instituted the prospectors 

plan and built the core laboratory. We helped with technical and scientific research through the 

Saskatchewan Research Council. We have helped to improve the basic utilities which are needed for 

industry, including communication, better roads, power and natural gas. We have surveyed for water and 

we are now spending money on the South Saskatchewan Dam, in order to provide an abundant water 

supply for the larger cities in the province. We have spent large sums of money on technical training, 

because you cannot have industries unless you have a trained labour force. The Technical Institute 

which we have just opened a short time ago is an indication of that fact. 

 

We have also encouraged both co-operative and private companies to invest in Saskatchewan. The 

Industrial Development Office which was set up some 10 years ago is now a full-time department, and 

they have now enlisted the support of both Regina and Saskatoon who have engaged full-time industrial 

development officers. 

 

The Industrial Development Fund has made some 90 loans totalling over $6,000,000. The Government 

has underwritten bonds for major large-scale projects such as cement, steel and the Co-op Refinery. 

Under the Co-operative Guarantee Act, assistance will be given to the Inter-Provincial Co-operative 

chemical plant at Saskatoon, which when it is completed with cost some $6,000,000. 



 

February 15, 1961 

 

18 

 

Public enterprises, Mr. Speaker, have played an important part in developing this role. I was surprised 

when the Leader of the Opposition, who has talked a great deal in the past about Crown Corporations, 

did not spend any time yesterday talking about Crown Corporations. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I will, before too long. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Well, I hope he gets the facts better in the House than he got them when he was 

talking in the country. There are some things he ought to know about the Crown Corporations. Last year 

they did $90,000,000 worth of business. They gave employment to 5,800 people. They paid out wages 

and salaries of $26,000,000. They made grants and payments to municipalities of $1,433,000. They now 

have total assets (net of depreciation) of $497,000,000. Government direct advances have been 

$383,500,000. The House will be interested to know that from the preliminary figures (the audited 

reports will be tabled shortly) indicate that for 1960 every Crown Corporation will show an operating 

surplus, in spite of the fact that we have had over-all business economic recession in Canada. 

 

The Opposition always like to talk about the so-called CCF Crown Corporations. They say that Power 

and Telephones are utilities so you can‟t take them. They like to talk about the others. Well, let‟s look at 

the other ones. The other nine Crown Corporations represent an investment by the people of 

Saskatchewan of $8,500,000. They have paid back to the people of this province since 1944, the sum of 

$13,398,000 after paying all operating costs, and providing for the capital losses of the Woollen Mill 

and the Shoe Factory and all the other losses that were involved. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — They have paid back the people of Saskatchewan one and one-half times of what 

was invested, and we still have the assets worth $32,000,000. 

 

The two utilities, of course, have contributed a great deal to the economic development of 

Saskatchewan. When we took office we found that in 1945 there were 25,000 customers for the Power 

Corporation. Today there are over 186,000 of which 58,000 are on farms. Power production has more 

than doubled since 1955. The gas program which did not exist in 



  

February 15, 1961 

 

19 

 

1944, in 1952 had only 290 customers and today is operating in some 95 centres, 24 of which were 

added last year, and it now has over 71,000 customers. The telephone system has been greatly expanded. 

In 1946 it had 52,000 telephones; now it has 183,000. 

 

I was surprised that the Leader of the Opposition didn‟t make his usual little speech about the sodium 

sulphate plant at Chaplin. He always likes to talk about that, because it is in his Constituency. He used to 

talk about the fact that we put everybody else out of business to run the sodium sulphate plant. He said it 

was a million dollar baby which we built in order to win a by-election in Morse. The fact is, of course, 

that this plant is operating in competition with three other plants in the province. During the past year it 

earned a surplus of some $300,000 which represents 30% return on the outstanding advance. Thirty 

percent is pretty good, even for a hardware business! Since 1947, when it was erected, this company has 

paid in surpluses totalling nearly $1,700,000 and by the end of this year will have paid back twice what 

was invested in it, and in addition the people of this province will own it. They paid also to the 

Government in royalties, some $550,000 and it paid out over $3,000,000 in wages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is not enough to talk about industrial development or increased wealth production unless 

that increased wealth production is of some value to the people in the province. Fair shares for all the 

people can only be accomplished in a democratic society through the will of the community, as 

expressed by the electorate and implemented by the Government which it elects. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition talked a great deal yesterday and the day before about high taxes. Mr. 

Speaker, it is always easy to have low taxes. All you need to do is have no services — that‟s all. Taxes 

have a two-fold function. Taxes make it possible for a community to do things together that they cannot 

possibly do individually. You could cancel the gasoline tax and car licence fee and let everybody build 

their own roads. This is not feasible. You could cancel the educational taxes and let people educate their 

own children at home. This is not feasible. You could have less taxes if you paid your own cancer bills, 

provide your own care for tuberculosis, provide your own care for mental illness, and if some member 

of your family is sick, paid for you own hospitalization. 



 

February 15, 1961 

 

20 

 

The function of taxes is to collect money so that all of us can do things as a group. If you accept the 

philosophy of the gentlemen opposite, which is „paddle your own canoe‟ whether you have a paddle or 

not, you don‟t need taxes. But if you believe that we are all in the same boat, and we have got to paddle 

together as a group for the benefit of all then, of course, you do need taxes. 

 

The second function of taxes is that they are the means by which we redistribute wealth. They are a 

means by which we collect from those who are better off to provide some welfare to those who are less 

well off. They are a means by which we collect from those who have no families to help educate the 

families who have children. The gentlemen opposite may not believe in some form of redistribution of 

wealth. They may not believe that the community as a whole ought to have high social objectives. But I 

want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the sole purpose in the mind of this Government when it seeks to develop 

our resources and to expand our industry, is that we may increase wealth production so that we can 

improve the standard of living of our people and so that we can have better social conditions for the 

people of this province. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — I think this is reflected in our program. You will find, if you take the trouble to 

check, that of all the provinces in Canada, Saskatchewan spends a larger percentage of its budget on 

health, welfare and education than any other province. The Saskatchewan figure was 57.7% in the year 

1960-61. Alberta was second with 55.7%. If we take the three fields on a per capita basis, we find 

Saskatchewan spends $96.82 per person of the population. Alberta and B.C. spend more per capita, but 

Manitoba and Ontario spend less per capita than we do on these three important things. When we come 

to the field of health, Saskatchewan spends more money per capita through this Government than any 

other province in Canada. We spend $41.54 and the closest to us is B.C., with $38.04 per capita. In the 

field of education, we are spending $41.54 per capita. Again, Alberta and B.C. are ahead of us but we 

are in turn away ahead of both Manitoba and considerably ahead of Ontario. In social welfare we are 

spending $13.74 per capita. It is again slightly less than Alberta and B.C., but considerably more than 

both Manitoba and Ontario. 



  

February 15, 1961 

 

21 

 

A great deal has been said these days about the mental health program. I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, 

that the province of Saskatchewan, through its Government, contributes a larger percentage of the care 

of mental illness than any other province in Canada. The closest to us is B.C. which spends $6.32. 

Alberta spends $5.55 and Manitoba spends $4.28. When you compare the standard of salaries of 

psychiatrists and other service personnel, with one or two minor exceptions, we are making the highest 

payments in Canada. We also have the best record in Canada in terms of discharges as related to 

admissions. 

 

When we are talking about how we distribute this extra wealth you get, it seems to me that it is 

important to say something about the Medicare Care Plan. Last year the Government campaigned on a 

plank to set up a prepaid Medical Care Plan. We said that we hoped that the Advisory Committee on 

Medical Care, which had been established, would bring down a report either in the latter part of 1960 or 

sometime in 1961. We set as our target that we would have a Medical Care Plan in operation sometime 

in 1962. Mr. Speaker, there has been no change in the target date which we have set. We still expect and 

believe that a Medical Care program can be set up in 1962. 

 

But yesterday the Leader of the Opposition made a very strong plea for postponing the implementation 

of a prepaid Medical Care program. He did so on two counts. The first was that the poor economic 

conditions at the present moment made it unwise to proceed, and secondly that a Royal Commission was 

going to be set up by the Federal Government to look into the whole case of medical care. Let me 

examine for just a few moments these two items. The first, that poor economic conditions make it 

unwise to proceed at this time. Mr. Speaker, I suggest that periods of poor economic conditions and 

when we are in an economic recession is precisely the time that people need prepaid medical care. The 

Leader of the Opposition said yesterday that this is going to cost $18,000,000 or $20,000,000. That is 

probably correct. That is about out estimate. Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are now paying 

about $18,000,000 to $20,000,000 a year for medical care. The only difference is that at the present time 

it is being paid by the people who are sick. Under our plan, everybody will contribute, so the burden will 

not fall on the unfortunate few. 



 

February 15, 1961 

 

22 

 

The Leader of the Opposition tried to bolster his argument by saying that we should look at Great 

Britain where they expected it to cost very little and it is now costing $800,000,000 a year. Yes it is. But 

stop and figure it out. This is less than $50 per capita. If we could get medical care, surgical care, 

hospital care, dental care, artificial teeth, hearing aids and drugs and all the other health services for that 

figure, don‟t you think we would consider ourselves fortunate? When I was in London I talked to one of 

the senior Cabinet Ministers in Great Britain. He is a Conservative. He said, “Mr. Douglas, when the 

British Health Services Act came before Parliament, I voted against it. I am not proud of that fact.” He 

said, “We would never go back to the old system. If the Health Plan costs us twice what it is costing us it 

would still be worth it.” Mr. Speaker, the fact that times are difficult is no reason for not proceeding. 

This is precisely the kind of period when people need to be insured against calamitous illness and 

against catastrophic medical bills. 

 

The second argument was that there is going to be a Royal Commission appointed, and therefore we 

shouldn‟t do anything. I am glad that the Federal Government has appointed a Royal Commission, and I 

think their selection of a Chairman is an excellent one. But we don‟t know how long this Commission 

will take before it brings down a report. We have no guarantee that the Government will act on the 

Report when it is brought down. We may be talking about a period of 3 years, 5 years or 20 years. As a 

matter of fact, some Members will remember that back in 1919 the Liberal Party, at its great convention 

when Mackenzie King was chosen as their leader, pledged itself to introduce in Canada a comprehensive 

system of National Health Insurance. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the hon. Premier would permit a question. I wonder if he 

remembers a speech he made March 24, 1943, when he said it would immediately bring all medical 

science . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Oh, sit down! 

 

Government Members: — Will the hon. Member please sit down! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — He made this promise, too — that was 18 years ago! 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, my hon. friend need not worry about this Government‟s record. We 

have taken it to the people of this province four times, and have had it endorsed. That‟s something he 

has never had! 



  

February 15, 1961 

 

23 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You bought it! 

 

Premier Douglas: — Four times the people of this province have endorsed our record. I want to say 

further that we have gone further in providing health services than any province in Canada, and certainly 

more than any Liberal Government ever did in Canada. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — And carried out less of your program than anybody in Canada. 

 

Premier Douglas: — The hon. Member is trying to kill my time, but it is not going to work. In 1919 the 

Liberal Party pledged itself to National Health Insurance. That was over 40 years ago. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — And 18 years ago . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — In that period they were in office for 31 years and they left office without having 

implemented one single iota of health insurance. They got the Hospital Insurance Plan on the statute 

books, Mr. Speaker, in the hope that it would get them through the election but they did not give one 

single dollar for hospital care under that Plan — not a nickel. They just passed the legislation. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You‟re kidding! 

 

Premier Douglas: — If my hon. friend would just keep quiet. I listened to him yesterday for an hour 

and three-quarters and heard the worst garbage I have listened to in years, and I did not interrupt him. If 

he will just possess his soul in patience, he will get all that is coming to him, if he will just keep quiet. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Well, stick to the truth then. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I want you to notice that the Liberal tactics are like this.”We are in 

favour of health insurance. We promised it back in 1919, but when we were in office we did not do 

anything about it. But now that we are out of office we are in favour of it again. But now is never the 

time to do it. It is never the time to do it now. Always after a Royal Commission report, or after 

something else happens.” 

 

Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition made an appeal to the people of Turtleford. I 

don‟t 



 

February 15, 1961 

 

24 

 

know how proper it is to make an appeal from the floor of the House, but he did because it seems to be 

on his mind these days. I want to say this to him, that his arguments yesterday telling the Government 

we ought to postpone the Medical Care Plan and not to introduce it for 1962 ought to serve notice to the 

electors of Turtleford that a vote for the Liberal candidate is a vote to postpone implementing the 

Medical Care Plan. It will please his doctor friends who contributed to his campaign funds for the 

leadership of the Liberal Party, which the Member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) will know 

something about. The Leader of the Opposition has tossed the Turtleford Constituency out the window. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You‟ll be surprised next Tuesday! 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I want to spend just a few moments saying something about the 

national economy, because the country faces a very serious situation. As I said earlier, our gross national 

product on a per capita basis actually went down lat year by 1.2%. In constant dollars there has been a 

reduction on a per capita basis in the merchandise which we have exported. As our economy is slowing 

down, it is not because there is any lack of goods produced. There is an abundance of almost every 

commodity which you can name. Nor is there any shortage of manpower. As a matter of fact there are 

over half a million people in Canada looking for jobs. Why is our economy losing its momentum? There 

are two reasons. The first is that there is a decline in the domestic demand for our economic output. 

Secondly, there is a slackening in the overseas demand for Canada‟s products. 

 

I suggest this is a problem which ahs to be tackled on a national scale. No province can become an 

island. We in this province can use whatever resources we have to put money into circulation by putting 

up buildings and by providing social aid. We can train the unemployed for jobs. We can invest as much 

public money as we can in promoting public utilities. But in the final analysis those who control the 

fiscal policy of Canada must do something to stimulate the demand for goods. Where is this demand? I 

submit, Mr. Speaker, there is a latent demand. Last year, out of 6,000,000 income earners in Canada, 

2,000,000 of them or one-third, did not earn enough to pay income taxes. That means they didn‟t earn 

$1,000 a year if they were single, or $2,000 if they were married with no children. Thirty years ago 

Franklin D. Roosevelt 



  

February 15, 1961 

 

25 

 

said: “The United States should be alarmed by the fact that one-third of its people were ill-fed, 

ill-housed and ill-clad.” It can now be said of Canada that one-third of our population has less income 

than is necessary for a decent standard of life. We cannot possibly get our national economy onto the 

rails with a new growth and a new momentum unless this lower third of our income group have the 

necessary purchasing power to buy the goods which we are able to produce in such abundance. 

 

That is why I have said repeatedly, and I want to say it now, that the answer lies in stimulating 

purchasing power. How can this be done? It can be done by reducing taxes on the lower income groups 

so as to allow them to keep more of their income to buy goods. It can be done by increasing transfer 

payments, such as old age pensions, family allowances, P.F.A.A. payments and unemployment 

insurance benefits. It can be done by the Federal Government making money available at low rates of 

interest to the provinces and municipalities, to proceed with employment, to create socially useful 

projects, such as building schools, hospitals, roads, parks and recreation sites. It can be done by the 

Federal Government itself setting up a tremendous housing program not only in urban centres but on 

farms as well. We could build 2,000,000 houses a year in Canada and we wouldn‟t have any difficulty 

finding people who need them. The problem, Mr. Speaker, is no longer one of inflation. The problem 

now is one of under-consumption and under-employment. If we are faced with the problem of inflation 

we can correct it by having selected price controls on those articles which are in a monopoly situation. 

We could liberate a great wave of purchasing power in Canada by putting purchasing power into the 

hands of this lower third. 

 

We must also do something about export trade. We need to dispose of our agricultural products by 

removing trade barriers between nations, by being prepared to enter into barter agreements with them, 

by being willing to take the currency of other countries, by even making free gifts of large quantities of 

our agricultural products which will be of far more use feeding hungry people than they will be lying 

here in danger of spoiling. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that we have one major and over-riding problem and that is the 

survival of the human race in the face of the threat of nuclear war. We are confronted today with dangers 

that arise from the plotting of power-hungry men, and also from the risk that 



 

February 15, 1961 

 

26 

 

some trigger-happy general may push the wrong button. Clemenceau once said that “War is too 

important to be trusted to generals.” That is even more true of peace. We in this country and every other 

country of the world must recognize that war and force as an instrument of national policy is obsolete. 

We can no longer defend ourselves against inter-continental missiles and against nuclear warfare. Resort 

to war today means, not the destruction of a few thousand people but it can mean the destruction of the 

human race and of all that we are pleased to call civilization. 

 

I believe that the time has come when Canada must give some leadership to the other nations of the 

world to help build and establish the rule of law in the world. Canada could give this leadership to the 

middle powers, Mr. Speaker, but we cannot do so as long as we are looked upon as a military satellite of 

one of the major antagonists. I think the time has come for Canada to take an independent position. If 

Canada feels as most people, I think, in Canada do, that a nation such as China should be allowed to 

come and sit in the councils of the nations and be allowed to become a member of the world community, 

and be compelled to obey the laws of the world community, then Canada should have the courage to 

stand up and say so. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — When I say Canada should take an independent position I do not mean that 

Canada should withdraw into isolation. Rather Canada should be prepared to surrender its sovereignty 

and work through the United Nations in order to help maintain peace in the world. Mr. Speaker, what is 

the alternative if we do not follow this policy? Mankind has learned to control the forces which hold the 

universe together, it now remains to be seen whether or not he can control himself. Man has grown up, 

technologically and scientifically. It now remains to be seen whether he has grown up morally, socially 

and spiritually. The great test of our time is whether or not there are nations in the world who are 

prepared to give the necessary moral leadership to break the impasse which faces humanity and to lift 

the eyes of the nations of the world to some new kind of human relationship in order that men may learn 

to live at peace together. Someone has said that “Man has learned to fly through the air like a bird, to 

swim through the sea like a fish, to burrow beneath the ground like a mole — if he could only learn to 

walk the earth like a man this would be paradise.” 



  

February 15, 1961 

 

27 

 

This is the crying problem of our time. How do we learn to live together under the rule of law. I have no 

illusions, Mr. Speaker, that everybody is going to sit quietly by and that there aren‟t going to be some 

nations which insist on trying to take something that doesn‟t belong to them. There will always be 

difficulties; there will always be problems; there will always be outbursts. But unless we come to the 

place where these will be dealt with on a collective basis and not by the unilateral use of force by any 

single power, then the chances of our surviving or our children surviving, is very remote. To me, Mr. 

Speaker, this is the number one issue which faces mankind. Unless we can settle this problem, settling 

all the other problems will be for naught. That is why in this Legislature and every other Legislature, and 

wherever men and women gather together to discuss the problems of their day and generation, this 

matter must be talked about. This matter must be discussed. Ideas must be formulated. Public opinion 

must be crystallized around the idea of building a world of sanity, and a world in which man can 

survive. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition, the other day, confidently said that the CCF were going to disappear. I 

think he underestimates the great drive in the CCF. Under whatever name, the things for which the CCF 

stand — social justice, economic equity and human brotherhood, will survive, Mr. Speaker. They will 

survive as long as there are dedicated men and women, who — come could or heart, danger or pain, or 

even death — will work day in and day out until that day comes when men and women of all races and 

all colours shall come from the north, the south, the east and the west, to sit down together in “the 

Parliament of man and the Federation of the world”. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:09 o‟clock p.m. 


