



















































Hansard: March 15, 1961


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

25th Day 

 

Wednesday, March 15, 1961. 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to call to the attention of the 

House the fact that there are sitting in the Speaker’s Gallery a group of students from the St. James 

School in Regina, and I know that all Members will join with me in expressing the hope that their stay 

here will be enjoyable and profitable. 

 

STATEMENT RE PHOTOS 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, it’s been brought to my attention that the West Photo 

Studios request Members of the Legislature who haven’t had their picture taken yet, to try and keep the 

appointment which had been made with them, or to make their appointments with them because they’d 

like to get their pictures taken, so that they can complete the Legislative Assembly photo. 

 

HOUSE BUSINESS 

 

Hon W.S. Lloyd (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, the notice on the desks with regard to the 

Crown Corporations for tomorrow indicates that Government Insurance and Government Guarantee & 

Fidelity will be before the Committee. This has been changed now 



 

March 15, 1961 

 

 

2 

and Government Telephones will be on first, followed, if time allows, by Transportation. 

 

MESSAGE OF SYMPATHY 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I regret to inform the House that last night the Hon. L.F. McIntosh, 

the Minister of Municipal Affairs suffered a mild heart seizure and has been admitted to the University 

Hospital in Saskatoon. As the hon. Members know, Mr. McIntosh has been recuperating from a heart 

attack which he suffered last July. We’ve been trying to curtail his activities as much as possible, and 

yesterday he insisted on attending the S.A.R.M. Convention and delivered an address yesterday 

afternoon. I regret very much the seizure which he’s had, however, his doctor describes his condition as 

satisfactory. I’m sure I’m voicing the sentiments of members in all parts of the House, when I say that 

we extend to him our best wishes for a speedy recovery. 

 

Mr. W. Ross Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Opposition 

Members, I too would like to say that we’re sorry to learn of Mr. McIntosh’s illness and we hope that he 

will have a speedy recovery. 

 

STATEMENT RE MAPS 

 

Hon. C.G. Willis (Minister of Highways and Transportation): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to pass around 

to the hon. Members the Saskatchewan Traffic Volume Map for 1960, and to express the hope that the 

hon. Members will get from this map information regarding traffic counts. There is one such question on 

the Order Paper now, and I would suggest that the hon. Member would probably see his way clear to 

withdrawing that question because the information is contained here. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I would like to inform the hon. Members that later today His Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor will give Royal Assent to certain Bills in this Chamber. 



 

March 15, 1961 

 

 

3 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 42 — An Act to amend the Research Council Act, 1954 

 

Hon W.S. Lloyd (Provincial Treasurer): — This Bill provides some relatively minor amendments to 

the Research Council Act. It actually provides for a larger council, for more members on the council, 

due to the fact that we are looking forward to expanding the size of the council by adding more persons 

outside of the Government and the university groups. The other amendment has to do with giving the 

council the authority to invest certain sums of money, and all Members may know the grant paid over by 

the Government on a quarterly basis — it is made to be quite a sizeable grant. Now, it would be 

advantageous to invest it for a month or two months rather than leave it in the bank. I move a second 

reading of the Bill. 

 

The question being put it was agreed to. 

 

At 4:15 o’clock p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor gave Royal Assent to certain Bills. 

 

STATEMENT RE HOUSE BUSINESS 

 

Premier Douglas: — Before I move the adjournment I would like to consider the business for 

tomorrow. As I said on Monday, we were going to deal with legislation, with the exception of taking 

Committee of Supply on the Department of Mineral Resources. However, with the speed at which 

legislation is going through, I think we should have some understanding about what will happen if we 

clean up most of the legislation tomorrow and some time is left. If it’s agreeable to everybody 

concerned, we could start at the beginning of the book and deal with the Administrator of the Estates of 

the Mentally Incompetent and the Attorney General’s Department. I think the Minister of Agriculture 

will be away so we couldn’t take his. We can take the Estates of the Mentally Incompetent and the 

Attorney General’s Department, assuming that we get through all the legislation tomorrow. We will 

follow the procedure I suggested on Monday, that is, we’ll 



 

March 15, 1961 

 

 

4 

take legislation first. Of course, Private Members day and motions will come first, then legislation, and 

if we’ve got time over, we’ll move to estimates, but only if we have finished all the legislation. This 

does not include The Vehicles Act. I believe that a request has been made to postpone consideration of 

The Vehicles Act. We shall leave that stand. Mr. Speaker, I move that the House do now adjourn. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I would like to draw to the attention of the hon. Members the reception and dinner 

being given by His Honour the Lieutenant Governor in the Hotel Saskatchewan this evening at 6:30 

o’clock. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:21 o’clock p.m. 


