



















































Hansard: February 27, 1961


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session – Fourteenth Legislature 

13th Day 

 

Monday, February 27th, 1961. 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Premier T.C. Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of the House to a very fine 

group of young people, who are in the west gallery. They are high school students from Western 

Christian Collage. I’m sure that I’m expressing the views of all Members in the House, when we say 

how glad we are to have these students along with their teachers Miss Torkelson and Mr. Peterson with 

us today, sitting in on the Legislature. We hope they will enjoy their visit to our proceedings. 

 

BUDGET ADDRESS 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, in rising today with the annual Motion of 

Supply, I should like first to express a personal welcome to the many new Members on both sides of the 

House. While the balance of strength to your right and left, Mr. Speaker, has not changed greatly in this 

fourteenth Legislature, the entry of some twenty new Members has certainly changed its face. At the 

same time, those of us who sat in earlier Legislatures, certainly miss the presence of many friends, — 

good colleagues and redoubtable opponents alike. This is particularly true in my own case. I follow in 

the footsteps of a particularly able Provincial Treasurer, one whose long term office contributed much to 

the shaping of the new Saskatchewan we have seen emerge in the post-war period. 

 

Since budgets are developed against the background of existing economic conditions I turn first, Mr. 

Speaker, to the essential survey of those conditions. In this regard there is no doubt that our 1961 budget 

has been developed against one of the most disturbing backgrounds of the post-war era. 

 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

2 
 

Last year my predecessor noted that while the Canadian economy was recovering from the recession of 

1957-58, this recovery was ―marked by considerable stress and imbalance‖. He expressed concern over 

the prospect of an early ―damping down in the rate of advance‖. His apprehensions were well-founded. 

The recovery was in fact very weak and short-lived. By the middle of 1960 the turning point of the 

economic cycle had already been reached and we were once more headed into another recession. 

 

The performance of the economy in the past year has now been fairly well delineated. The total 

Canadian output of goods and services will fall far short of the 6 per cent increase predicted in the 

federal budget of last March. With continued growth in population and labour force, unemployment 

emerged as a particularly serious problem. The rate of unemployment, seasonally adjusted, averaged 

more than 6 per cent for the last six months of 1960. In January of this year the official federal survey 

reported 693,000 Canadians out of work — equivalent to 10.8 per cent of the Canadian labour force. 

The 1960 record was marred not only by unemployment of people but also by under-employment of 

productive capacity. Complementary aspects of the economic decline were a lagging rate of growth in 

total consumer income and expenditure, and a sharp fall in private capital investment. 

 

However, of even greater concern than the 1960 statistical record is the behaviour of the successive 

economic cycles throughout the post-war period. There have been three full ups-and-downs in the 

Canadian economy since the end of World War II. We are now experiencing a fourth. A review of these 

brings to light an emerging and disturbing pattern. 

 

First, it may be noted that the duration of the expansionary phase of each business cycle has shortened. 

Second, the indexes of industrial output and of employment have risen less in the later cycles than in the 

earlier ones. Finally the fall in these indexes has been progressively greater. 

 

To find a full explanation for these disturbing trends one must look to some of the more fundamental 

changes that are taking place in the Canadian economy. This is not to suggest that the short-run forces 

that account for periodic ups-and-downs are not important. I do suggest, however, that they may be less 

significant in shaping our current problems than the longer-run forces and, therefore, not as crucial in 

our policy consideration when we seek the necessary solutions. 

 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

3 
 

One basic cause of the economic problem we face in Canada is the fact of lagging effective demand — 

domestic and foreign. This demand underpins our economy. It has not been growing fast enough to 

maintain the high level of activity we must have if our increasing manpower resources and our 

investment in plant are to be kept fully employed. 

 

This was not the case in the first post-war decade when a variety of circumstances and events combined 

to provide a strong stimulus for economic growth. Then there was a pent-up consumers’ demand for 

goods and services unavailable during the war years. There was a similar demand from producers to 

replace and add to their worn-out plant and equipment. Together these had a tremendous impact on 

employment and output. This was followed by the Korean War which necessitated increased 

government expenditures and expanded world markets for our raw materials. Subsequent years saw a 

particularly intensive search for, and development of, our raw materials and heavy capital expenditures 

to meet this need. Population growth and immigrations further strengthened overall demand for the 

output of Canadian industry. 

 

Since 1956-57 these particular demand factors, domestic and foreign, or equally effective substitutes, 

have been lacking. Our domestic consumption has lost a good deal of its strength. Without substantial 

improvement in the income levels of the lower third of our population, without release from the demand 

destroying cost-price squeeze on our agricultural industry, little dynamic support will be found at home. 

The recovery of the European economies, and their tremendous growth in output and technology, has 

restrained a continuous expansion of foreign demand. The growth of large trading blocs is further 

jeopardizing our foreign markets. 

 

This is not to say that I believe for one moment that further Canadian prosperity must be founded on the 

devastation of war and famine abroad. Nor can we afford to rely on the creation of artificial wants at 

home. My point is that the support for the economic growth we have known in the past no longer 

applies. Consequently it is crucial that we find an effective and acceptable alternative. Such an 

alternative exists. It exists in the vast potential of genuine but unmet needs of human beings both at 

home and abroad. I suggest that Canada must move — and move with a deep sense of purpose and 

urgency — in these new directions. In so doing we achieve not only our long-run economic health but 

our political and social salvation as well. 

 

It will not be easy to underwrite an adequate rate of growth for the Canadian economy. To do so will 

require new departures in public policy, not only in specific programs but 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

4 
 

even more in our fundamental approach and the technique of operation. It seems to me inescapable that 

to achieve our essential goals we must emphasize the instrument of government, and that governments 

in turn must adopt that technique of purposeful planning. There is a world-wide trend in this direction — 

in the mature democracies of Europe and in the under-developed but newly-emerged nations of the 

world. The United States and Canada are not isolated from this development, as current trends in 

Washington and Ottawa clearly indicate. Indeed one is intrigued by recent political events which suggest 

that at long last some of the superstitious belief in the natural divinity of the market place, so long 

cherished by some political parties in Canada, is at last succumbing to the logic of deductive reason and 

observed fact. I am hopeful, even if very doubtful, that this new insight will in due time penetrate the 

outposts of reluctance so familiar to us here in Saskatchewan. 

 

This brings me to a review of the Saskatchewan economic scene. Here the lagging pace of the national 

economy has been clearly reflected in a number of ways during the past year. Divergent trends tend to 

blur the overall picture. My main impression, however, is that while a distinct levelling-off in our 

accustomed rate of growth has occurred, on the whole the provincial economy has stood up extremely 

well. 

 

It is good to reflect that the strongest productive sector of our economy once again proved to be 

agriculture. Like most of my colleagues in the Legislature, I am, in years and relationship, still close 

enough to a Saskatchewan homestead to derive considerable satisfaction from this fact. The favourable 

fall moisture conditions in 1959, together with timely rains during the early growing season, led to a 

near-bumper wheat crop of some 308 million bushels, with a per acre yield one-third higher than the 

long-term average. All told the harvest of principal field crops rose to 530 million bushels, some 42 per 

cent of the Canadian total. On the strength of this large grain crop, the composite index of physical 

volume of agricultural production climbed at least by 25 per cent over the previous year. 

 

The farm economy, moreover, continued its efforts to diversify production, not only in different grains 

but also through an expanding cattle population. Unfortunately the price situation for livestock and 

related products gave little incentive in this direction. Cattle marketings remained fairly steady in 

volume but prices were distinctly weaker. Hog production was sharply curtailed following rapidly upon 

the major decline in prices in 1960, and 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

5 
 

the June 1 survey showed that the number of hogs on Saskatchewan farms fell to its lowest point since 

1956. It seems valid to argue that some certainty of price will better guarantee diversification than will 

be hoped for, long delayed income from wood lots and Christmas trees. 

 

In dollar terms, cash income from the sale of farm products is estimated at $545 million, a little lower 

than the previous year. Somewhat higher grain marketings, helped to offset a decline in livestock 

income. Supplementary receipts, including P.F.A.A., federal acreage payments, and the 

provincial-federal compensation for loss of crops covered by the early fall snow of 1959, were 

considerably higher. Adding these payments, farm cash income rose to $587 million, an increase of 2.5 

per cent for the year. 

 

In spite of a further worsening of the cost-price squeeze, the net income picture for 1960 shows a greater 

improvement. The index of farm prices fell by 7 per cent during the year, while farm costs moved up by 

2 per cent. Fortunately total operating outlays increased only fractionally, even though a much larger 

crop had to be handled. Farm net income is estimated at about $380 million, some 50 per cent higher 

than in 1959. A large part of this income is of course held in the form of unsold farm stocks of grain. 

 

As for the non-farm commodity sectors of the provincial economy, a rather mixed picture emerges from 

1960. In mineral production, the gross value of output is estimated at about $214 million, up slightly for 

the year. In this sector, declines in the value of metals, particularly in uranium mining, were 

counter-balanced by a further advance in the value of oil production. The latter figure rose to about $106 

million, and average daily production amounted to 145,000 barrels, about 28 per cent of total Canadian 

output. In the manufacturing industries current monthly data indicate some contraction of output. 

However final revision usually results in an upward adjustment of the annual total, and on this basis the 

value of factory shipments is expected to round out at about $350-$360 million, approximately the same 

as in 1959. Electric power continued as a particularly dynamic sector as increasing consumption boosted 

gross revenues to an estimated $42 million, a gain of some 14 per cent for the year. 

 

Early in 1960, the capital investment survey indicated a rise in total investment intentions in 

Saskatchewan to a record figure of $628 million. However, it now appears that this high level has not 

been fully realized. Even so total capital investment of all kinds will reach approximately $600 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

6 
 

million for the year. In per capita terms this was significantly ahead of the national average, an 

advantage maintained by the province for the greater part of the past decade. 

 

The overall measurement of commodity output is best reported in terms of net value of production. This 

eliminates the duplication which arises when the products of one industrial sector are used as the raw 

materials of another. In 1960 the total net value of commodity production rose to slightly more than 

$1,000 million, compared with $874 million in 1959. 

 

This strength in commodity production has sustained a high level of activity in the service industries. 

For example, after a slow start retail trade picked up during the year and is reported at only 2 per cent 

below the record high of $942 million reached in 1959. Reflecting the trend in total output, personal 

income receipts rose to an all-time high of some $1,350 million of $1,485 per capita. 

 

In my review of the national economic scene I made reference to the very serious problem of 

unemployment. This is a nationwide problem, but some regions of the country obviously have been hit 

far more seriously than others. The January, 1961 labour force survey shows unemployment rates of 

over 13 per cent of the labour force in British Columbia, 14 per cent in Quebec, and 15 per cent in the 

Atlantic Provinces. No official breakdown is available for each of the three prairie provinces, but 

comparative data on unplaced applicants indicates that unemployment in Saskatchewan itself is not as 

severe as for the region as a whole. Nevertheless it is appreciably worse than one year ago and the 

province is determined to use its fiscal and other resources to the fullest extent possible in creating jobs 

for those out of work. 

 

I come now, Mr. Speaker, to a brief outline of my expectations as to the year ahead. Everyone will 

acknowledge that predicting future economy events is a hazardous job. However, an understanding of 

the outlook provides a necessary basis for the budget, and it must therefore be tackled. 

 

The first problem is that of appraising the general impact of national and international forces. As might 

be expected, there are a number of conflicting signals. There is some evidence that the high level of 

activity in the overseas economics which stimulated some increase in Canadian exports in 1960 has 

already levelled off, with consequent 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

7 
 

repercussions on prospects for exports this year. The disturbing indications of a more restrictive tariff 

policy on the part of the federal government could also affect our ability to persuade other countries to 

purchase our surplus production. 

 

On the other hand, it is widely expected that the new administration in Washington will underwrite a 

considerable effort to revive the United States economy, with resulting favourable effects in Canada. 

Further, two intersecting indicators within our own country developed late in 1960. These were a revival 

of residential construction and the change in the trend of business inventories from that of accumulation 

to a substantial depletion. These factors have been interpreted as possibly signalling an upturn in Canada 

rather earlier in 1961 than had been thought likely only last fall. 

 

However, if my general appraisal of long term trends is correct there is, unfortunately, little reason to 

hope, in 1961, for any vigorous and rapid recovery from our existing recession. Putting the evidence 

together, there seems reason to expect that Canada’s total production of goods and services in 1961 may 

rise to just about $36 billion. This would be an increase of as little as 2 per cent following on the meagre 

2.5 per cent rise of 1960. 

 

The outlook at the provincial level is shaped in part by this national prospect and in part by more local 

conditions. So far as the provincial industrial sectors are concerned, I anticipate some increases in 

mineral production, manufacturing and electric power. Enlarging oil markets, the resumption and 

expansion of potash mining, and sharply increased activity in gold exploration in northern Saskatchewan 

are all in prospect. Construction and investment are particularly difficult to forecast, especially because 

of the conflicting pressures of unmet needs and high interest rates. I feel reasonably confident, however, 

that the very high levels of recent years will again be substantially maintained. 

 

As for agriculture, there is currently a good deal of concern regarding sub-soil conditions because of the 

very dry fall. Obviously it would be unwise to look for a harvest comparable with that of 1960, and we 

might therefore anticipate some decline in farm output. As I indicated previously, however, farm stocks 

of grain have been built up again to some degree. Even if wheat export sales in the 1960-61 crop year 

exceed 300 million bushels, the carryover of these stocks in Saskatchewan into 1961-62 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

8 
 

is likely to approximate 70 million bushels. Farm deliveries during this year, therefore, are not expected 

to fall and cash income from grain should be well sustained. Little change is also foreseen in the 

livestock situation and total farm cash income is likely to remain close to the 1960 level. 

 

In summary, then, it seems probable that the non-agricultural industries will show some further modest 

growth during the year ahead. The overall advance, however, may be affected by the moderate fall in the 

agricultural sector, and I therefore anticipate that the provincial economy as a whole will move slightly 

above the plateau achieved in the current year. Our budget policy for 1961-62 has been framed within 

this and the suggested national context. 

 

Before an appraisal of our provincial prospects can be complete there must be some comment on the 

important item of Federal-Provincial relations. It is well known, Mr. Speaker, that the state of the 

Canadian economy affects the Saskatchewan budget very directly. The Province’s revenues tend to rise 

and fall with the total economy. This is particularly true with regard to the amounts received as a result 

of the arrangements to share the income and corporation tax yields in Canada. 

 

Now it is quite true that Ottawa, by virtue of its constitutional authority and its more extensive economic 

power, has the competence to influence the direction and the tempo of economic development in a way 

denied to any single provincial government. But it is also true that a wholly adequate federal economic 

policy can be achieved only with the co-operation of all ten provinces. For this reason the government of 

Saskatchewan has for years been advocating a Federal-Provincial Economic Development Program. It 

would have two objectives: to increase the rate of economic growth in Canada, and in doing so to 

provide employment-creating projects during recessions. As recently as October, 1960, the Premier 

proposed a Federal-Provincial Full Employment Program under which the federal government would 

make it possible for the provinces and local governments to increase expenditures on schools, hospitals, 

university buildings and roads during recessions. 

 

Unfortunately the response of the Federal Government to these two suggestions has been quite 

ineffectual. In fact one response has been a curiously perverse one: a ―baby budget‖ which accentuates 

the difficulties of provincial financing rather than relieving them. The Government of Canada’s new 

withholding tax makes it more difficult and more costly for the provinces and municipalities to borrow 

outside of Canada. The resulting increased pressure on the 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

9 
 

Canadian market will almost certainly maintain unreasonably high interest rates at home. The net effect 

will probably be a reduction in public works expenditures and increased costs for those which are 

undertaken. 

 

As to the fiscal or tax-sharing arrangements between Ottawa and the provinces, Saskatchewan along 

with all the other provinces, has repeatedly urged upon the Federal Government that fiscal arrangements 

must be improved if adequate provincial and local government services are to be maintained. 

 

One key to improved fiscal relations is a more equitable provincial share of the income and corporation 

tax fields — more than our present 25 per cent. The second key is the maintenance of adequate 

equalization payments, payments which will ensure that all provinces receive equal benefits from 

income and corporation taxes. 

 

We have just returned from the Dominion-Provincial Fiscal Conference. I regret to say, Mr. Speaker, 

that the changes in the tax sharing arrangements proposed by the Dominion will not benefit 

Saskatchewan or its local governments in any way. They simply freeze us to the level of payments we 

would have received under the present arrangements. 

 

Federal payments to all the provinces will rise by only $17 million. Ontario will receive an increase of 

$18 million; the Atlantic Provinces together will receive only $5 ¾ million more; Saskatchewan, Quebec 

and Manitoba will receive no more, and Alberta and British Columbia will receive less. 

 

What is more the new plan departs from the equalization principle in a dangerous way. Currently 

Saskatchewan receives an equalization payment which guarantees us the same benefit from income and 

corporation taxes and from succession duties as the two richest provinces. Under the new plan the 

payment will bring us only to the national average. This represents an abandonment of the equalization 

principle and the substitution of a principle of ―average-ization‖. 

 

The equalization formula is further weakened by the proposal to equalize to the national average yield 

not just of these national tax fields, but these plus 50 per cent of provincial natural resources revenues. 

Just why this one provincial revenue source was singled out was not satisfactorily explained to us. 

 

In dollar terms these two changes in the plan will 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

10 
 

reduce Saskatchewan’s equalization payment from about $21.5 million to $8.6 million. Approximately 

60 per cent of this loss is due to ―average-ization‖, and 40 per cent is due to the unaccountable inclusion 

of natural resources revenues in the formula. These losses are only offset by a ―guarantee payment‖ 

which brings Saskatchewan’s total payments back up to where they would have been under present 

arrangements. 

 

The second major change in the tax arrangements is that the provinces will in future be required to 

impose their own income and corporation taxes. If they wish they may ask Ottawa to collect these taxes 

for them, on condition that the provincial tax laws are identical with the federal tax law except for rates. 

The abandonment of the tax rental system means we can expect no leadership from the Dominion in 

preventing a return to the ―tax-jungle‖ of the 1930’s. More important, it means that the Federal 

Government will have lost the last vestige of its control over the use of income taxation as a means for 

combating unemployment and stimulating economic growth. 

 

The abandonment of the tax rental system means we can expect no leadership from the Dominion in 

preventing a return to the ―tax-jungle‖ of the 1930’s. More important, it means that the Federal 

Government will have lost the last vestige of its control over the use of income taxation as a means for 

combating unemployment and stimulating economic growth. 

 

One feature of Ottawa’s proposal could be misunderstood. The promise is made that federal personal 

income tax will progressively be reduced, yet the very next sentence says this does not mean that federal 

taxes will not otherwise be raised: What it really means is that ―average-ization‖ payments will rise 

slightly over the next five years, that the provinces will have to increase their taxes as Ottawa reduces 

theirs, and in Saskatchewan’s case that we will lose a corresponding amount from the guarantee 

payment. 

 

I turn now, Mr. Speaker, to the Province’s finances. The Public Accounts for 1959-60 were tabled at the 

beginning of the Session. They reveal a surplus of revenues over expenditures — both ordinary and 

capital — of more than $2 ¾ million. This surplus, combined with sinking fund earnings, reduced the 

Province’s net debt by more than $3.5 million. Consequently our net debt moved from $20.9 million to 

$17.3 million. 

 

Revenues rose from the previous year’s level of $135 million to nearly $143 million. The principle 

increases in 1959-60 came from the Dominion-Provincial tax sharing payments, and from the education 

and hospitalization tax, the gasoline tax, and liquor profits. These increases were offset to some extent 

by a decline in non-recurring oil revenues, this being a part of the general slump in Canada’s oil 

industry. 

 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

11 
 

Expenditures rose from $132 million to $140 million. One major increase was in the Department of 

Agriculture, where some $3 million was paid to farmers whose crops were buried by the untimely 

snow-falls of 1959. Another increase was in the Department of Education where expenditures rose by 

nearly $5 ½ million. Also the Municipal Road Assistance Authority paid out an additional $1.2 million 

in road grants to municipalities. 

 

In the current year the picture has not been as bright. Revenues forecast at close to $149 million will fall 

short of that mark by some $3-4 million. The reason for this is not hard to find. A year ago the Federal 

budget was based on a 6 per cent rise in the Gross National Product. Saskatchewan’s budget was based 

on a 5 to 5 ½ per cent rise. Now a year later, we find the Gross National Product will have risen by less 

than 3 per cent. This illustrates an earlier reference to the effect that ―predicting future economic events 

is a hazardous job‖. 

 

The effect on Saskatchewan has been immediate and direct. Dominion-Provincial tax sharing payments 

will reach only $38 million instead of the expected $42 million. This decline has been partially offset by 

a $1.8 million payment on account of the fiscal year, 1958-59. Sagging retail sales across most of 

Canada have been paralleled in the Saskatchewan scene – at least in the first half of this year. The result 

is that our education and hospitalization tax collections will likely be short of the estimated level by 

about three to four hundred thousand dollars. Even so the amount collected will exceed that of the year 

before. 

 

Further, despite an actual rise in oil production, our oil revenues will probably fall short of the estimate. 

One reason is that a larger proportion of petroleum royalties will accrue to the School Lands Fund than 

was anticipated in the original estimates. A second is that technical difficulties have arisen in certain oil 

fields which will reduce farm-out and net royalty revenues in these areas. Third, the sale of drilling 

reservations has been less lucrative, owing to a general slow-down in Canada’s oil industry. 

 

Finally, the marketing difficulties being experienced by Canada’s uranium industry have had their effect 

on Saskatchewan. Instead of uranium royalties of more than $1 ½ million, we will likely collect 

approximately $800,000. 

 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

12 
 

The effect of Canada’s current recession is also being felt on the expenditure side of the budget. While, 

as I have indicated earlier, unemployment in Saskatchewan is less serious than in other parts of Canada, 

nevertheless our social aid bill will rise by about $ 1 ½ million. In addition, payments under the 

Municipal Winter Works Incentive Program will amount to over $400,000. 

 

To make it possible to meet these and other pressing needs, expenditures on other programs were cut 

during the year. As a result our total expenditures will not exceed the estimated level of $148 million. In 

fact, they will likely be below that figure. 

 

The net effect of revenue and expenditure changes will be a budgetary deficit of some $3-4 million — 

the amount by which our revenues will have failed to meet expectations. Let me emphasize, Mr. 

Speaker, that this does not mean that we will be borrowing this amount to pay operating expenses; it 

means that of $24 million of capital expenditures on highways, agriculture and public buildings, our 

revenues will cover about $20 million and the balance will be borrowed. This method, of financing by 

borrowing for such capital expenditures, has been used by the majority of Canadian provinces for many 

years. 

 

Honourable Members will notice that the present financial problem is due not so much to inherent 

difficulties peculiar to the Saskatchewan economy as to massive problems of the whole Canadian 

economy. 

 

I remind you again that Canada is suffering from its second recession in four years. Unemployment, as a 

percentage of the labour force, ranged between 2 ½ and 5 per cent through most of the 1950’s, whereas 

in 1958, 1959 and 1960 it has ranged between 5 ½ and 7 ½ per cent. From 1951 to 1956 Canada’s 

production rose by an average of $78 per person per year. But from then until now it has risen by less 

than $25 per person per year. 

 

Saskatchewan is not insulated from these difficulties. As our industrial development and diversification 

proceeds, our economy grows more and more sensitive to a greater number of forces. Not only does it 

depend on the weather and the demand for wheat, but it depends increasingly on markets – local, 

national and international — for a steadily widening range of products. As our contribution to the 

national economy increases in amount and in variety, so does our interdependence increases. The state 

of the national economy is therefore rapidly coming to have a much greater significance 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

13 
 

for Saskatchewan. If the Canadian oil industry faces a slum Saskatchewan’s oil industry cannot avoid 

being affected. If the nation’s uranium industry loses contracts, Saskatchewan’s industry will do the 

same. Unemployment in industrial areas means less purchasing of agricultural produce. Conversely, if 

Saskatchewan’s agricultural industry is depressed, industry in central Canada suffers. The lesson to be 

learned is that much of Canada’s prosperity — or lack of it — is not divisible. The implication is that 

federal governments simply must learn to give more effective leadership in combating recessions and in 

stimulating economic growth. 

 

However, the Government of Saskatchewan, while regretting the inadequacy of federal leadership and 

knowing that provincial powers are limited, must do what it can to maintain employment and resultant 

production and income. That is why we have tried to maintain essential expenditures, and why we were 

willing to deficit finance. For this I offer no apologies. Of this I shall have more to say later. 

 

First, however, let me outline the borrowing program which the Treasury undertook in 1960 to finance 

capital expenditures and loans to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and Saskatchewan Government 

Telephones. The program for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation totalled $71.5 million. This included 

over $16 million for the purchase of properties in the Hatton-Many Islands gas field, an investment 

which will ensure future supplies of natural gas to Saskatchewan consumers at minimum cost. It 

included the purchase of the National Light and Power Company, thus providing for more effective use 

of power production facilities. The Saskatchewan Government Telephone program required $6 ¾ 

million. Finally a loan of $2 ½ million was made to the Government Finance Office. These loans were 

financed by the sale of debentures to a variety of markets. 

 

A total of $9.5 million of one to two year debentures was sold by negotiation in the Canadian money 

market. Long-term debentures in an amount of $15 million were sold publicly in the Canadian market, 

and an issue of 40 million Swiss francs (about $9,000,000) was sold in Switzerland. 

 

Private sales of debentures included: a $9 million long-term issue for the purchase of gas field 

properties; a $2,650,000 long-term issue for the purchase of the assets of the National Light and Power 

Company; a $7 ½ million three-year debenture issue sold to three chartered banks, refunding in part an 

earlier loan; a $3 million long-term issue sold to make loans to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation; 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

14 
 

and 2 issues — one for $10 million and one for $2 ½ million — long-term issue — sold to government 

trust and pension funds. This year’s deficit will be financed by a similar issue sole privately to 

Government funds. With your permission, Mr. Speaker, I should like to include a list of 1960’s 

debenture issues. 

 

Date Maturity Coupon Payable Amount 

Apr. 1, 1960 Apr. 1, 1980 5 ¼% Canada $9,000,000.00 

Apr. 1, 1960 Apr. 1, 1980 6 Canada 7,500,000.00 

Apr. 12, 1960 Apr. 1, 1961 2 Canada 1,000,000.00 

Apr. 13, 1960 Jan. 3, 1961 2 Canada 1,000,000.00 

Apr. 14, 1960 Apr. 14, 1961 2 Canada 1,000,000.00 

Apr. 15, 1960 Oct. 15, 1962 2 Canada 1,000,000.00 

Apr. 20, 1960 Nov. 20, 1961 2 Canada 1,000,000.00 

June 1, 1960 June 1, 1980 5 Canada 2,650,000.00 

July 1, 1960 July 1, 1963 5 Canada 7,500,000.00 

July 15, 1960 July 15, 1980 5 ½ Canada 7,500,000.00 

July 15, 1960 July 15, 1975 4 ½ Switzerland 40,000,000,00 

    Swiss francs 

Sept. 30, 1960 Sept. 30, 1979 5 Canada $10,000,000.00 

Nov. 15, 1960 Nov. 15, 1965 4 ¾ Canada 2,500,000.00 

Dec. 1, 1960 Dec. 1, 1961 2 Canada 4,500,000.00 

Dec. 1, 1960 Dec. 1, 1970 2 Canada 1,000,000.00 

Dec. 1, 1960 Dec. 1, 1975 2 Canada 2,000,000.00 

 

There are, of course, critics who have argued that the Province’s debt is rising too fast. They are wrong 

on two counts. First, the debt we have incurred has been self-liquidating debt. This contributes to 

Saskatchewan’s growth thereby increasing our financial capacity. Surely this is cause to applaud not to 

complain. Second, the true measure of a province’s financial position is the net debt. This use of net debt 

as a measure of our financial position is the same measurement as is used by the Government of Canada. 

It is the same one used by all Canadian provinces when they sell debentures in U.S.A. The net debt of 

the province of Saskatchewan has been going down steadily, until it stood at March 31 last at a very 

manageable $17 million. The fact of this reduction to this manageable level recommends Saskatchewan 

securities to the investing public. 

 

A review of the province’s finances in 1960-61 would be incomplete without reference to the Crown 

Corporations. The general levelling of business activity had some effect on the overall financial results 

of our publicly owned enterprises. However, the corporations without exception reported surpluses for 

the year. In two or three cases, 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

15 
 

special conditions brought about significantly better revenues. 

 

On the basis of statements to date, the net earnings of the Corporations, other than Power and 

Telephone, total $1,290,917. This surplus amounts to a return of 15.27 per cent on the advances 

outstanding at fiscal year-ends — a rate of return obviously more than adequate to cover any interest 

payments. Advances outstanding were reduced slightly to $8,452,688 by the return of capital to the 

Government Finance Office. The amount paid into the budgetary revenues of the province in the next 

fiscal year will again be $1,000,000. 

 

In comparison with the previous year, the earnings of the Timber Board show a considerable decline, 

due primarily to the sharp fall in lumber prices in both domestic and export markets. As increase in 

charter business, on the other hand helped the northern airways to achieve a small operating surplus. The 

salt cake division Saskatchewan Minerals was able to reduce costs and expand sales in both Canada and 

the United States, in spite of vigorous competition from other Canadian, America and European 

suppliers. The company’s net earnings rose 44 per cent to a record $326,860. 

 

Capital expansion continued as a major activity by the public power, gas and telephone utilities. By the 

end of 1960, loans outstanding from the province to Saskatchewan Government Telephones and 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation totalled $375,000,000. Gross revenues, before allowances for interest 

deductions, rose to $18,682,993, but net revenues declined to $3,004,280. 

 

As the general contribution of the publicly-owned business sector to the overall economy, it may be 

noted that the total business volume rose from $79 million in 1959 to $90 million in 11960. Salaries and 

wages totalling $26 million were paid to over 5,800 employees on staff. Grants and payments to 

municipal governments in lieu of taxes increased sharply to $1,433,000. The actual book value of assets, 

net of depreciation, held by the companies now stands at close to $500,000,000. 

 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

16 
 

SUMMARY OF RESULTS OF OPERATIONS OF CROWN CORPORATIONS 

FOR THE FINANCIAL YEARS ENDING IN 1960 

(before interest) 

 Advances at 

Year-end 

Surplus 

for Year 

Saskatchewan Government Airways ……… $600,000 $33,411 

Saskatchewan Timber Board ……………… 3,877,000 235,119 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance ……. … 432,602 

Saskatchewan Guarantee and Fidelity ……. 365,688 66,319 

Saskatchewan Fur Marketing …………….. 100,000 12,402 

Saskatchewan Clay Products ……………… 600,000 37,703 

Saskatchewan Sodium Sulphate ………….. 1,085,000 326,860 

Saskatchewan Government Printing ……… 275,000 68,730 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company …. 1,550,000 77,771 

 $ 8,452,688 $1,290,917 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation ………… $298,411,379 $13,532,835 

Saskatchewan Government Telephones ….. $76,614,263 $5,150,158 

 

With that background before you, I come now, Mr. Speaker, to the presentation of the 1961-62 budget. 

 

The budget of a government is the financial plan setting forth sums of money which will be raised in 

various ways and which will be spent for various purposes. It is that — and much more. It is more 

because its motives are not just financial, they are human. The budget is a reflection of social and 

economic philosophy. It deals not just with dollars and cents but with hopes and human values. 

 

More specifically, a budget is simply a statement by the government of the services which it believes 

can best be provided co-operatively — rather than privately. This statement finds its authority in the 

people who elected the government; it is their statement of the services which they wish to provide for 

themselves, collectively. It is a statement which implies a willingness to pay for those services as 

taxpayers rather than to try to buy them as private consumers. 

 

Now I have been in politics for too long to have any illusions about the happiness with which people pay 

their taxes. But that same experience has contributed recognition 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

17 
 

of the value which people generally put on those services which they purchase through their collective 

tax contribution. Consequently I am convinced that the public would not consciously choose to 

eliminate useful and desirable public services for the simple purpose of reducing taxes. After all, the 

provision of public services — education, health, highways, resource development — based on using the 

resources of the people, is the means by which each individual gains maximum opportunity for personal 

development. The quality and quantity of this opportunity is a main component of individual freedom. 

 

The budgeting process begins in fact with the public discussions which precede the electorate’s choice 

of a government. The elected government is then obligated to decide the timing and the extent of public 

programs to meet public needs and proceeds to formulate a budget. In doing so it is, of course, essential 

that the side effects of the required taxation be judged against the benefits of the public services. This is 

a necessary part of the process. But it is simply irresponsible to argue that taxes are too high, if to reduce 

them is to dispense with services which individually most of us could not provide for ourselves, or to 

dispense with services which have a higher value than alternative private expenditures. 

 

I do not mean by this that all government programs are sacrosanct, or that all administrative 

expenditures can be defended. We in government have a responsibility steadfastly to weed out obsolete 

programs and rigorously to pare administrative expenses. I might say, Mr. Speaker, that during the last 

seven months I have had some considerable experience in these two exercises, I believe my colleagues 

will testify to this. 

 

But I know too that my colleagues support me in the view that expenditures on education, on health and 

welfare services, and on public investment for the development of a stronger economy, are vastly more 

important than many expenditures which have become symbolic of an affluent society. I simply don’t 

believe that new styling for automobiles and pastel coloured refrigerators and a wider variety of table 

wines are more important than the co-operative provision of basic public services. 

 

My second general observation about public finance is that budgets should promote stable economic 

growth. Governments do have a responsibility for promoting and stimulating, in fact for direct 

investment to make possible, a more productive economy. It will be realized that provincial 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

18 
 

governments are severely limited in what we can do alone, and that we must be prepared to co-operate 

with and indeed to spur the federal government, the government which has the major responsibility and 

opportunity in this field. 

 

These are the guiding principles which my colleagues and I employed when we prepared the budget for 

1961-62. Here are the figures. The budget provides for expenditures of $147,414,930, revenues of 

$144,749,060 and a budgetary deficit of $2,665,870. In addition, it provides for loans of $61 million to 

the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, Saskatchewan Government Telephones and the Industrial 

Development Fund. It also provides for net debt retirement payments of $6 million. 

 

Honourable Members will realize, Mr. Speaker, that this is the first budget in many years in which the 

revenues do not exceed both the ordinary plus the capital expenditures. There is good reason for this. I 

have already said that the Canadian economy shows few signs of an early recovery from the recession 

which has persisted now for almost a year. Consequently my colleagues and I, determined that every 

effort shall be made by the government to maintain employment and income, decided that we would 

deficit finance. That is, we decided to borrow to the extent that is reasonable possible in order to sustain 

public investment in human and economic development. 

 

I think everyone knows why this is desirable. To the extent that governments maintain their 

expenditures, they tend to shore up employment and sustain personal incomes. To the extent that these 

expenditures are wealth producing they make more certain the sources of payments for tomorrow’s 

services. 

 

The obstacles to an even more extensive provincial effort are three in number. First, despite its major 

responsibility for combating the recession, the federal government has failed to take effective action. I 

have already discussed what I consider to be the shortcomings of the national policy and effect on 

Saskatchewan finances. Secondly, our revenues are not expected to be quite as high as in the current 

year. Finally, Saskatchewan, as does every province, faces limits in the amount of money which can be 

reasonably borrowed. 

 

As to the province’s revenues, I anticipate that returns from the education and hospitalization tax, the 

gasoline tax and liquor profits will be up over the actual for the current year. 

 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

19 
 

The main reason then for expecting revenues less than for the current year is our estimate that 

tax-sharing payments from Ottawa will amount to $38 million. This is slightly less than this year’s $38.7 

million, and substantially less than our original estimate of $42 million for the current year. The other 

anticipated decline is in oil revenues. The same reasons that brought about a reduction this year will be 

operative in 1961-62, and we expect revenues to level out this year at about $500,000 below the current 

figure. Let me emphasize again, Mr. Speaker, that this is not because total oil production is expected to 

decline, but rather because of a shift in the location from which oil is being produced and because of the 

technical adjustments. 

 

With regard to borrowing, there is after all a rational limit for governments, just as there is for 

individuals and private businesses. Our 1961-62 program calls for borrowing a total of $69 million: 

some from our own Saskatchewan people by means of the new Saskatchewan Savings Bonds, some 

from the Canadian money markets, some from the Canadian bond market and some, to the extent 

necessary, from the United States market. This investment is primarily necessary because of steady 

increase in power consumption, because of the distribution of natural gas to additional communities and 

because of the continued growth of our telephone system. 

 

Let me add at this point that I fully intend to balance the provincial budget in the long run. But while this 

implies surpluses in periods of economic buoyancy, it must also imply deficits in depressions. 

 

I turn now to the programs and the expenditures provided for in next year’s budget. Honourable 

Members will notice that total expenditures have been set at a level slightly below those of the current 

year, and that the appropriations requested for many departments are at or below the estimates for the 

current year. Despite the natural cost increase for all departments, this was achieved after a careful 

scrutiny of all programs and expenditures. 

 

Our first effort was to find administrative economies; to pare down expenditures on supplies, on 

travelling and on equipment. In addition this has necessarily involved the elimination of some 

permanent positions, in the expectation that the public service — which is a top flight public service, 

Mr. Speaker — might be able to produce the same good work with somewhat smaller numbers. 

 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

20 
 

Next we examine all our programs to search out any which were obsolete or which were contributing, by 

comparison with their cost, relatively little to the public good. This was an instructive experience. The 

fact is that very few programs fell into this category. It is an easy matter for some people to say glibly 

that millions of dollars can arbitrarily be cut from any government budget; it is quite another matter to 

justify such a statement. My colleagues and I believe the programs contained in the budget cannot be 

sacrificed without imposing resultant disadvantages on our people. Nevertheless, we did eliminate some 

lesser programs, and we did remove ―extras‖ and ―refinements‖ that had crept into others. 

 

Finally, it was necessary reluctantly to postpone a good may capital expenditures. This was done only 

after having made all the other expenditure reductions, after having decided upon our revenue policies, 

and after having agreed upon the policy of deficit financing. 

 

Nevertheless total expenditures on economic development next year will exceed $71 million. The 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation will spend about $46 million on plant expansion and improvement. Of 

this $16.1 million will be spent on the Squaw Rapids hydro-electric development and over $3.5 million 

on the South Saskatchewan River Dam Project. Over $6 million will be spent on power distribution in 

urban and rural areas. The Corporation will also invest approximately $8 million in the production and 

distribution of natural gas. Of special significance to the construction industry is the beginning of the 

new head office building — a project which will provide direct employment for many construction 

workers and for many other workers indirectly because of the use of Saskatchewan products such as 

steel, bricks and cement. 

 

Saskatchewan Government Telephones will embark upon an $8.4 million investment program, some of 

it to be financed by corporation funds. Taken together the construction projects of the two major 

corporations will exceed the 1960 program by more than $1.5 million. The smaller Crown Corporations 

will spend an additional $490,000 on capital improvements, to be financed out of their own funds. 

 

The Industrial Development Fund, in turn, will assist private industry to increase their capital 

expenditures. It is difficult to estimate the level of demand for such loans in 1961, but I shall be 

surprised if it does not exceed 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

21 
 

$2 ¾ million. Of this, $1 million will be provided to the Fund by the Treasury and the balance will come 

from repayment of outstanding loans and from the Government Finance Office. 

 

The Departments of Mineral and Natural Resources will together spend approximately $6.7 million, 

down from the $7.8 million estimated for the current year. Some program contraction has been judged to 

be acceptable in view of the very satisfactory state of our resources inventories. A major reduction is to 

be found in the estimate for the construction of northern roads. Expenditures for this purpose will be 

reduced by about $400,000, due in large part to the fact that the Otosquen road will be completed this 

year, and that the Hanson Lake road will be nearing completion. While expenditures on development 

roads will be down, those on forest access roads will be greatly increased. 

 

A new Dominion-Provincial program has been established, under which the costs of forest access roads 

will be shared equally by the Dominion and the provinces, up to a prescribed maximum. Saskatchewan’s 

expenditure under this program will total $232,000 in 1961-62. 

 

Expenditures for the improvement of our agricultural industry will be maintained at current year’s levels 

— approximately $6.8 million. However, several changes have been made in the programs which should 

be drawn to the attention of the Assembly. First, work on the South Saskatchewan Dam is proceeding 

very favourably, and it is expected that expenditures this year will reach nearly $10 ½ million. Of this, 

Saskatchewan’s share is $2.6 million. This payment is shared between the Department of Agriculture 

and the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 

 

Irrigation studies, on the other hand, will be less costly this year than last, by $200,000. The reason is 

that many of the first-stage surveys were done in 1960, and these must be analyzed in 1961 before the 

next major expenditures are undertaken. Also, as more of the farms in northern areas have achieved a 

more adequate cultivatable acreage, it has been possible to reduce expenditures on clearing and breaking 

land. Expenditures on northern community pastures will be maintained at current levels. 

 

Like other departments, the Department of Agriculture was able to achieve many administrative 

economies, and in some cases to reduce the level of less important programs. 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

22 
 

By doing this it is possible to proceed in a very satisfactory manner with the new programs which were 

started this year. The Government has already announced that 40,000 farmers have been invited to 

participate in the crop insurance plan which was started last year. It has also been announced that 

modern plumbing systems were installed in more than 700 farms this year, and will be installed on 1,500 

more during 1961-62. 

 

The installation of sewer and water systems in Saskatchewan towns similarly will increase in tempo 

during 1961. Grants to municipalities from the Municipal Water Assistance Board will be increased 

from $340,000 to $600,000. Programs such as these satisfy several valuable objectives. They provide 

employment and stimulate business. They provide more desirable living conditions on our farms and in 

our smaller urban communities. 

 

Unfortunately it is not possible for the Government to recommend that expenditures on roads and public 

buildings be maintained at current levels. As far as major public buildings are concerned, it is proposed 

to complete work and/or payments on the Regina Court House, the Provincial Technical Institute in 

Moose Jaw, and the office building in Meadow Lake. In addition, construction of the Geriatric Centre in 

Swift Current will proceed, and $200,000 is being provided for the provision of greatly needed facilities 

at the Regina Jail. 

 

It has, however, been necessary to postpone work on the Regional Mental Hospital in Yorkton, and this I 

greatly regret. Payments to the Yorkton General Hospital to provide facilities eventually to be used by 

the Regional Mental Hospital are provided. Moreover, in line with our policy of steadily improving 

facilities for our handicapped people, funds will be spent on the renovation of the Prince Albert 

Sanatorium to convert it to a training school for retarded children. 

 

Plans for a new government garage and for the proposed administration building in Regina will not be 

proceeded with. These projects have been deferred for the simple reason that the total of revenues and 

borrowed funds will not be sufficient to finance them. 

 

For the same reason the Government is forced to proposed some reduction in expenditures on roads. 

Ordinary expenditures of the Department of Highways — largely maintenance costs — have been set at 

$8,600,000. The condition of our highways is good, and the deferment of some regravelling and some 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

23 
 

re-capping of bituminous surface roads will not likely cause a major inconvenience to highway users. 

 

Construction expenditures by the Department of Highways have also been reduced. The reduction 

however, is not as extensive as might appear on the surface. The reason is that of the $15.9 million 

budgeted for this current year, well over $1 million was for carry-over of projects commenced in the 

previous year, while in 1961-62, owing to an excellent construction season in 1960, the carry-over will 

be much smaller. 

 

Grants for municipal roads will also have to be reduced very slightly. In view of the necessity of 

reducing road expenditures, it seems reasonable that the market road system should share this reduction 

with the provincial highway system. 

 

Honourable Members might be interested in the total that the Government proposes to spend on 

construction in 1961-62. In spite of the curtailments previously mentioned, the total to be made available 

for all types of construction in 1961-62 will be $78.1 million, a slight increase over the corresponding 

figure of $77.3 million for 1960-61. Included in this figure is provision for $64.2 million in direct 

Government expenditures, to cover a $5.3 million outlay on Government buildings, $41.6 million on 

power and gas installations, $12.5 million on Highways projects, and several smaller capital projects. 

Grants for construction purposes to local governments and to the University will be increased to $13.9 

million from $13.3 million in 1960-61, to provide assistance for building Municipal Grid Roads, 

schools, hospitals and other capital projects. I am pleased, therefore, that the Government will maintain 

its current level of expenditure on construction, despite the difficult budgetary situation. 

 

Expenditures on health and welfare services will rise in 1961-62, from $41.9 million to $43.2 million. 

The principle change in program will be the inauguration of a second training school for the mentally 

retarded. This will be located in Prince Albert thus making effective use of the present Tuberculosis 

sanatorium. This building is in excellent condition and the decision of the Anti-Tuberculosis League to 

transfer patients to other sanatoria makes it available for this purpose. It will accommodate about 

350-400 patients. 

 

Nothing gives me greater pleasure than the inclusion of 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

24 
 

funds for this purpose, Mr. Speaker. The waiting list of patients for the Moose Jaw Training School has 

been growing. It will be of enormous benefit both to the parents and the children themselves, to have 

this additional accommodation provided. 

 

A second major increase is the amount provided for grants to hospitals for construction purposes. These 

grants will total $1.5 million, compared with $832,000 in the current year. As Honourable Members 

know, a new policy has been adopted for the payment of the capital costs of hospitals in Saskatchewan. 

Under this policy the Province will pay grants of up to 70 per cent of the construction costs of hospitals, 

after deducting federal grants. This will mean that the community and private hospitals of Saskatchewan 

will receive a major portion of their construction costs at the time of building, rather than having to 

finance the initial requirements largely by borrowing, and then having to bear the interest burden. The 

new formula also provides for the payment of outstanding hospital debenture debt as it comes due. 

 

As to operating costs, the Hospital Services Plan has asked all hospitals to keep their expenditure 

increases in 1961 within three per cent of 1960 levels. It is true that changes in medical technology and 

improvements in nursing and other salaries make some cost increases inevitable. Generous allowances 

to provide for such improvements have been made for many years. But it does seem to us that the 

hospitals, like the Government, must bend every effort to find administrative economies and to eliminate 

the least essential services. It seems consistent with our economic situation, and indeed with desirable 

administrative procedure, that a special effort be requested this year. 

 

The third major increase in health and welfare services is in social aid expenditures. These will rise from 

just under the $4 million estimated for this year to $5.5 million in 1961-62. The principle reason for this 

increase is that during a recession the number of social aid recipients inevitably rises. This was true in 

the current year, when we found our $4 million estimate to be inadequate, and unless there is a strong 

upsurge in the economy the $5.5 million will be required in the coming fiscal year. 

 

Let me turn now to the budget for the Department of Education. In this field of government, 

expenditures serve 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

25 
 

the double purpose of advancing individual opportunity and of investing soundly in the future. The 

quality of education we provide to our young people should be more than adequate — it should be 

superior. Consequently, the Government decided that, while the same administrative economies would 

be required in this department as in all others, program expenditures should be increased. 

 

The first change proposed is greater provision for interest-free loans to students pursuing higher 

education. As Honourable Members will know, the Student Aid Fund, established in 1949, has been of 

enormous benefit to many thousands of students of the Teachers Colleges, the Technical Institute and 

the University. The Fund originally received a capital of $1 million, and the loans were made from the 

earnings of the Fund and from the repayment of earlier loans. Over time, however, the demand has 

exceeded the funds available, with the result that in several years supplementary moneys have been 

voted. Next year, for example, it is proposed to vote $166,000 compared with $115,000 this year. 

 

Clearly it is desirable to augment the capital of the fund in order to make it more self-sufficient and it is 

proposed to triple the capital of the fund, raising it from $1 million to $3 million. This we will do by 

transferring $2,000,000 from the School Lands Fund. This transfer reduces the income of the 

Consolidated Fund, but makes the money available for student loans. 

 

A second change is an increase of $550,000 in the operating grant proposed for the University of 

Saskatchewan. This will raise the level of the grant to $3,750,000 in 1961-62. As for capital 

construction, the University will continue its large expansion program at an accelerated secure capital 

financing for next year’s program from other sources, including the Canada Council, the Jubilee 

Campaign, and loans under the National Housing Act for student residences, it has been agreed with the 

University to defer a portion of the Province’s annual construction grant to a later time. 

 

A third important advance in program is in the field of vocational and technical training. The gross 

expenditure by the Department for this purpose will be increased from $621,000 in the current year to 

$1,119,000 in 1961-62. 

 

Finally, with respect to grants for local schools, in 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

26 
 

accord with our long-term objective, we propose a further substantial increase of $3.1 million, thus 

raising the total vote for these grants to $31.6 million. 

 

As a consequence of these and other increases, the total vote for the Department of Education is raised 

by $3,952,000, and the gross expenditure by the Department in 1961-62 will exceed $42 million. On a 

net basis, total expenditures for education will account for 28 per cent of our total ordinary and capital 

expenditure. 

 

By far the largest share of education expenditure is of course passed on to local school authorities in the 

form of grants. The proposed increases thus serve two purposes: they help to ensure greater educational 

opportunity for our young people; and they assist local governments in holding down property taxes and 

maintaining reasonable stability in the school mill rate. 

 

We in the Government of Saskatchewan are as anxious that local governments have adequate revenues 

to discharge their responsibilities as we are anxious that the provinces have adequate revenues to 

discharge theirs. Evidence of this is found in the increasing provincial grants and loans to local 

governments. School grants, financial aid on behalf of municipal roads and streets, payments on behalf 

of social aid, and on behalf of operating costs of hospitals will this year use 36.5 per cent of the 

provincial government’s revenue exclusive of that which we borrow. In the last decade school grants 

have risen from $6,228,288 to $31,600,000. Assistance for local roads has risen from $816,210 to 

$6,763,700. Municipalities have virtually been relieved of financial responsibility for social aid. 

Hospital operating costs are now borne by the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan. The anticipated 

provincial medical care program will undoubtedly — as did the provincial hospitalization plan — 

assume burdens which have traditionally been those of municipalities. Loans to local governments for 

capital expenditures have reached $4,780,000 per year. Local government funds constituted 31 per cent 

of those issued by larger school units and 37 per cent of those issued by towns and villages. 

 

Even with progress and assistance of this magnitude the provincial government is aware of the basic 

problems facing local governments. We are not convinced that just providing more money provides an 

equitable and effective solution to these problems. We are convinced that there are 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

27 
 

more complex and subtle barriers which stand in the way of the development of maximum strength for 

local government. By maximum strength I mean that combinations of financial ability and 

administrative opportunity which leaves the greatest possible amount of discretion in the hands of 

elected officials of local governments. 

 

It is for this reason that we are looking forward to studying the report of the Continuing Committee on 

Local Government. Local government organization chose for their representatives on this Committee 

persons whom, for the most part, they had already elevated to positions of leadership. These 

representatives were given a particularly difficult and time consuming public responsibility. They have 

performed this responsibility in a statesman-like manner. It remains for the rest of us to act similarly in a 

statesman-like fashion in evaluation their recommendations and deciding upon an appropriate policy. 

 

May I return, Mr. Speaker, to the overall budget. Obviously a great many choices had to be made in 

preparing it. At the risk of repetition let me reiterate some. 

 

Our first decision was to embark upon a program of economy measures in order to maintain desirable 

public services. Having done this we faced three alternatives. One was to reduce the level of capital 

expenditures. A second was to deficit finance. The other was to increase taxes. The Government decided 

to accept a combination of these three courses. 

 

I have already outlined the main reductions in capital expenditures. Reference has also been made to our 

decision to deficit finance — a decision made possible because of our satisfactory debt position even if 

limited by our borrowing capacity. 

 

Let me turn now to the sources of additional revenue proposed in this budget. First, the Saskatchewan 

Liquor Board has been asked to increase the prices of alcoholic beverages so as to bring about a $1 

million increase in revenues. When additional money for essential services is needed it is entirely 

consistent with sound public policy to seek that money by exacting a greater return from non-essential 

expenditures. 

 

In the past four years highway expenditures have been rising much more rapidly than gasoline tax and 

motor license revenues, with the result that those revenues have been paying a decreasing proportion of 

road costs. 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

28 
 

During the last two years, for example, they paid only about 81 per cent of the Government’s 

expenditures on provincial and municipal roads. On this basis, my colleagues and I concluded that it 

would be appropriate to raise the fuel petroleum products tax, effective April 1st, by two cents per 

gallon. This action will increase revenues by $3 ½ million, and will mean that road users will next year 

be meeting the full amount of the Provincial Government’s road expenditures. As these expenditures 

rise in the future, this percentage will undoubtedly fall again. 

 

The Government is particularly aware of the strain that heavy trucks put on our roads and highways. 

Vehicles which are powered with diesel fuel undoubtedly receive a higher ton-mile return in relation to 

their fuel costs. For this reason the Government proposes to impose a 17 cent per gallon tax on diesel 

fuel compared with the 14 cent per gallon tax on gasoline. Such a differential is in effect in several 

Canadian provinces. In fact in the province of Ontario the tax on diesel fuel is 5 ½ per gallon more than 

on gasoline. This tax change will be effective April 1st. 

 

I have now outlined the general scope of our proposals both for revenue and for expenditure. These 

proposals provide for the continuation of a high level of public services — services of which, I beg to 

submit, Saskatchewan people are proud. They provide as well for a substantial direct investment 

designed to encourage employment and to increase income. To finance our proposals has required 

additional borrowing and some increase in tax rates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have referred at various points in the address to relationships between governments and 

to goals of government which are in my opinion valid. Reference has been made to means of achieving 

these goals and to our level of achievement in Saskatchewan. Now I express the hope, and indeed the 

conviction, that future budgets will provide for even more extensive services to the people of 

Saskatchewan — services which are a just reward for the investment of effort and money on the part of 

these people. That future budgets can do this, through the mutual co-operation of all levels of 

government, there is not the slightest doubt. 

 

The main pre-requisite is the will to provide the leadership, the will to fashion the public services which 

serve the highest goals of society, the will to develop 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

29 
 

our economy for the benefit of all members of the community. If we in government display this will, 

with sense and sensitivity, the people of Saskatchewan will be willing participants. They will in turn be 

the beneficiaries of public services, which not only quantitatively but qualitatively, guarantee a higher 

standard of living for all our citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move that you do now leave the chair. 

 

DEBATE ON THE BUDGET ADDRESS 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I think we all agree that one year ago when we were 

given notice that the then Provincial Treasurer, was relinquishing his position, that he would be missed 

in this House, but I for one never dreamt that he would be missed, as much as he has been. This is a far 

cry from the election promises of last June. You will recall, Mr. Speaker, that the Government that sits 

opposite toured the length and breadth of this province with a slogan of ―More abundant living‖ but I’m 

afraid that the speech that was presented this afternoon must have been written the night that the results 

of the Turtleford by-election were coming into this city. 

 

We have constantly for many years listened to the people who sit opposite talk about a planned 

economy, of the so-planning of government expenditures to take care of the problems that we are now 

being flooded with. I f this is an example of a socialist planned economy, then I doubt very much if my 

friends opposite will even be able to support this budget, let alone the people on this side of the House. 

 

I have expected the Provincial Treasurer to refer to many of the increases in taxation that took place 

between the election last June and this House coming into Session. Not only have we the increases in 

taxation referred to this afternoon, but we have many and varied increases between June 8th and the 

commencement of this Session. These increases were brought into being without the consent of this 

Legislature, without the consent of anyone other than the Premier and the Cabinet. Now King Charles 

was beheaded for behaving this way, and I suggest, Mr. Speaker, 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

30 
 

that while the people who sit opposite, may not be beheaded . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — They were at Turtleford. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — . . . there is a law against that, a lot of them are going to lose their seats, or a place to 

put them. 

 

Now what taxes were increased between June and February 9th? First of all we had an increase in the 

hospitalization tax. Why weren’t the people of this province told during the election campaign? Why 

were we not told last Session that in order to carry out this service it was going to be necessary to 

increase the hospital tax from $17.50 for the individual to $24.00, or from $35.00 for the family up to 

$48.00? Why were the people of this province not told this? In the event that they were not prepared to 

tell the people, why didn’t they wait until this Session, and come into this House with a proposal to 

increase these taxes? For the simple reason, Mr. Speaker, that when the budget was presented in this 

House, one year ago, the gentleman who presented it, along with his colleagues who sit opposite, knew 

full well that the revenues they were predicting were far from the revenues that they could expect to 

receive. This budget of a year ago, Mr. Speaker, was prepared in such a manner as to enable this 

Government to go t the people of Saskatchewan, and attempt to explain to them how they were going to 

pay for the grandiose services that they were promised last June. The facts have borne this out. There 

wasn’t even enough revenue available to complete the program that was laid down one year ago. 

 

What are some other increases in taxation? What has happened to the rates charged for long distance 

telephone calls? Do you know, Mr. Speaker, that there are places in Saskatchewan today, where it is 

cheaper to get on a bus and driver over to your friend’s place to carry out a conversation than it is to call 

him by long distance? 

 

When we arrive at a situation such as this, Mr. Speaker, then I begin to wonder if we haven’t exceeded 

the ability of the people to pay, for many of these so-called services that this Government are attempting 

to provide. 

 

What about the automobile insurance rates? This has been discussed before, in and outside of this 

House. But, in my humble opinion, the Government that sit opposite 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

31 
 

had every intention of increasing automobile insurance rates; even the manager of that Corporation, 

addressing his agents in annual meetings, told them that there would be an increase. 

 

Premier Douglas: — He did not. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — He certainly did. He told them not at one meeting, but a many meetings, that these 

increases would take place. 

 

Premier Douglas: — It is not true, and you know it. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — It is true, and you know it. 

 

Premier Douglas: —You read the statement and see. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I will refer the Premier, if he thinks it isn’t true, to a statement that appeared in the 

Yorkton newspaper. The manager of the Insurance Office confirmed this increase with his agents in that 

area. 

 

What about court fees? We have an increase in court fees to the extent that apparently the law now is 

only for those people who can afford it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even the rent for you lot down at the lake has been increased, no a dollar or two, but from 

$15 to $60 dollars. This happened between an election, and this House coming into Session. 

 

Now this more abundant living, Mr. Speaker, no doubt is being provided for some people. Most of them 

sit opposite. But, the average citizen in the province of Saskatchewan is being taxed to death. 

 

Now, what is happening with the increases that were announced today? (I want to thank the Provincial 

Treasurer for being so kind as to have placed a copy of his address on my desk). I would have liked to 

have had it this morning, but I didn’t get it. The increase in taxation, Mr. Speaker, is another example of 

planned economy. When this Government came into power, the gasoline tax was 7 cents a gallon; today 

it is 14 cents a gallon. The automobile today is used by far more people than some 16 years ago, and is 

becoming a utility or an object which is used today, not for luxury, but 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

32 
 

people today must use an automobile. Today most of us must use it in order to make a living. But here 

we have an increase from 7¢ a gallon to 14¢. 

 

Lo and behold what has happened to the truckers and the trucking concerns, who had the initiative to go 

out and to buy diesel equipment in order to compete in the transfer of goods in this country? A reference 

was made that the fuel oil tax in the province of Ontario is much higher than it is on gasoline. Ontario is 

an entirely different picture than the province of Saskatchewan. The only competition with the railroads 

in Saskatchewan is trucks, but the great competition with the railroads in eastern Canada is not the 

trucking industry. It is the fact that there are waterways available in that province. This is adding insult 

to injury, Mr. Speaker. The truckers for years have not been allowed to carry the same load through the 

province of Saskatchewan as they have in other parts of Canada. This is a further step in the 

Balkanization of the province of Saskatchewan. It is estimated that last year alone the trucking industry 

spent $8 million going around the province of Saskatchewan. How much are they going to spend next 

year? 

 

The people in the service industries in this province, cannot afford t have this Government, or any 

Government, bring in taxes that are going to remove from our highways one of the greatest industries, or 

potentially great industries of this province, yet that will be the result of this increase in taxation. 

 

Now I am pleased that the Government, and the Provincial Treasurer, have changed their thinking 

somewhat with regard to local government. I just want to refer to a part of a paragraph on page 25 of his 

speech, when he said this: 

 

―We in the Government of Saskatchewan are as anxious that local governments have adequate 

revenues to discharge their responsibilities, as we are anxious that the Provincial Government 

should have adequate revenue.‖ 

 

This is quite a change in the tune of my friends who sit opposite. It’s only a few short years ago that 

local governments were told that unless they reorganized, they wouldn’t get any further revenues. I want 

to read to you, Mr. Speaker, what was said at that time, and I’m 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

33 
 

quoting: 

 

―Further financial relief, however, should only be made to local governments, which are soundly 

organized and effectively administered. We cannot afford to waste the taxpayer’s hard-earned 

dollars on local government.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, is the Government that sits opposite trying to tell us that local government in this province 

has been ineffectively organized and wasteful? I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Will you ask the hon. Member, what he is quoting from, I didn’t get it. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I’m quoting from a white paper, that was read to the local government conference, 

by the ex-Provincial Treasurer, and I’ll read one that you read to them too, if you like. I have here the 

statement of the Premier, to this conference. He said, that: 

 

―Unless the basic reorganization steps can be anticipated, it seems clear to us, that merely raising 

the amount of direct financial aid will not come to grips with the inherent problem.‖ 

 

In other words, you’ll either be reorganized or there will be no money for you. And, I want to repeat, 

that I, and I’m sure everyone on this side of the House, and I’m sure local governments will be pleased 

to learn that the Government has a least changed their attitude as far as their remarks in the budget 

address are concerned. 

 

Now there are many criticisms, I think, that should be made, but after all, I think probably Wednesday is 

the time to do so. With those few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

The debate was adjourned on motion of Mr. McDonald. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 5 — An Act to amend the Electrical Inspection and Licensing Act 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill to amend The Electrical 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

34 
 

Inspection and Licensing Act, and there are four principles in it. The first is: To permit the electrical 

branch to approve a design of an electrical appliance that might be manufactured in this province. 

Occasionally, we have for instance an oil company, which, might wish to make some appliance they 

need in the field. Obviously it would be unfair to force them to go to the expense and have the delay of 

sending it down to Canadian Standards Association in Toronto. With this small amendment, we could 

go ahead and make the inspection here, and this would be of considerable benefit to those people. 

 

I don’t suppose there would be a dozen in the whole year, perhaps not that many. Ordinarily I might say 

that the Canadian Standards Association do all the approving. 

 

The second point referred to: passage and freight elevators. That branch, about two years ago, for 

administrative purposes, was moved from the Steam Boilers Branch to the Electrical Branch, so now we 

want to take any responsibility from the Electrical Inspection Act and transfer it to the Passenger and 

Freight Elevator Act, which is also administered by the Electrical Branch in our Department. 

 

The third point refers to a bond for employers. An employer might be Imperial Oil or the Cement 

Company who have four or five full time electricians, and according to the Act they are required to take 

out a bond of $2,000.00, which we feel is superfluous. It has never been necessary, and it does seem a 

little ridiculous, that a firm be required to take out a bond for $2,000.00 to protect themselves against 

work done on their own premises, by their own employees. 

 

The fourth refers to bonds for supply houses, which are also required to furnish a $2,000.00 bond, which 

we feel is unnecessary for the reason that a supply house might have $150,000.00 worth of equipment, 

and a $2,000.00 bond is of little or no value to them. This particular part of the Act has been in effect 

since 1947, and has never been used. Te customer is protected at the contractor level, and the contractor 

purchases from the supply house, so we feel that it is an imposition to ask the supply house to furnish a 

$2,000.00 bond. 

 

Now with the explanation, Mr. Speaker, I would move second reading of Bill No. 5 — An Act to amend 

the Electrical Inspection and Licensing Act. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to. 

 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

35 
 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 8 — An Act to amend the Liquor Act, 1960 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, the amendments which are proposed here fall into two main 

categories. The major part of the amendments are necessary because it has been decided to allow at least 

on liquor store, and I am sure others may follow over a long period of years, in the far north. All of our 

Legislation for setting up liquor stores or any kind of liquor outlet, has been designed on the basis of 

being in the organized areas of the province where there are municipalities, where townships can 

petition, and where most can be organized on the basis of a municipal vote, and so on. When we come to 

organize a liquor store, or to allow any type of liquor outlets in the north, then a number of amendments 

become necessary, and most of the amendments here have to do with that provision. 

 

The other amendment has to do with Section 95, which deals with the matter of consuming liquor in 

vehicles. Before it was included in the overall general fine. It was thought that what we should do here 

was prescribe a specific fine to deal with this offence. Therefore, this amendment is included. I think, 

apart from these two changes, in general principle, there is no other principle involved. The general 

details we can discuss more adequately in Committee of the Whole. 

 

I would therefore, move that Bill No. 8 – An Act to amend the Liquor Act, 1960, be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mrs. Mary J. Batten: — I wonder if the hon. Member would sit down, so I could ask a question? 

 

Is there any change in the law, or will the law be exactly the same as it was under the old section, so far 

as it governs consumption of alcohol in vehicles? 

 

Premier Douglas: — I am sorry, insofar as . . . 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Will it make any difference in the proving of a conviction? Why was it though 

necessary, outside of the increase in penalty? Was that the only reason . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — That was the main purpose, to make 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

36 
 

a specific penalty, rather than coming under the general penalty clause which was pretty high. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I wonder if I might be permitted to adjourn that debate. 

 

The debate was, on motion of Mr. Thatcher, adjourned. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No, 9 — An Act to amend the Liquor Licensing Act, 1959 

 

Premier Douglas: — The amendments here are very minor the matter of making it possible to take 

votes in the far north, and to determine who would be eligible to vote. As hon. Members will remember, 

the discretion formerly lay entirely with the Liquor Board, or the liquor licensing authorities, and while 

this may have been necessary at one time, our feeling was that as soon as possible the people of the area 

should have some opportunity to express an opinion for or against having a liquor outlet. This is an 

effort to make such provisions so that the people surrounding a point, which is opposed to have a liquor 

outlet may have an opportunity of exercising their power to prevent it or to authorize its operation. 

 

With this explanation, Mr. Speaker, I would have second reading of Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend the 

Liquor Licensing Act, 1959. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might move the adjournment of this debate. 

 

The debate was, on motion of Mr. Thatcher, adjourned. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 14 — An Act to amend the Commercial Agents Acts, 1958 

 

Hon. R.A. Walker (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, this is an amendment to 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

37 
 

the Commercial Agents Act which, to some extent, extends the application of the Act. The House will 

recall that in 1958 the old Hawkers and Peddlers Act applied to transactions in the sale of goods, 

including the sale of goods where there was also an accompanying agreement respecting the installation 

of the goods. That would, of course, apply to cases like the sale of lightning rods where they’re installed 

as part of the sale, except that lightning rods were expressly exempt from the Act. 

 

Take the case of a new roof put on a building. The roofing materials were sold together with the 

installation services. Now the old Hawkers and Peddlers Act applied to that kind of situation. In 1958 

we were anxious to restrict the application of the Act, because we felt that the services which were 

included with the goods, were not so likely to require statutory protection for the public. Our optimism 

was perhaps unjustified, because within a year we received a number of complaints from members of 

the public who had been taken in by unscrupulous contractors (I suppose could call them) who went 

from house to house doing that very thing – installing roofs to old buildings and doing an unsatisfactory 

job of it. We had no means of curtailing their activities, of preventing them from operating. They 

weren’t required then to have a bond, because they weren’t covered by the Act. 

 

The Government now wishes to readopt the principle which was contained in the Hawkers and Peddlers 

Act, and which was not carried into the Commercial Agents Act. In other words, we wish to continue to 

revive that application of the Act, and incorporate it in the Commercial Agents Act. The experiment 

lasted three years, and it was demonstrated that that feature of the Act was in fact necessary for the 

protection of the public. 

 

The number of complaints was not large; I think I received two or three, as a matter of fact, but the 

Government feels, while it does increase the number of work required by the staff, it does increase the 

number of people who come under the Act, that it will add a useful measure of public protection. 

 

The only change of any consequence is the alteration in the number of exemptions. The old Act 

exempted a number of specific commodities. For example, it exempted binder twine, pianos, organs, 

typewriters, adding machines, sewing machines, or parts thereof, computing 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

38 
 

scales, fire extinguishers. Now those things were expressly exempt. How the exemptions were arrived at 

somehow and why they were put in the Act no one knows, but the exemptions go back a great many 

years. Some of these things are now obsolete, such as binder twine. There is little or no selling from 

door to door of pianos or organs. There is no reason that the Government can see, why people who go 

from door to door selling sewing machines ought not to be in exactly the same position as people who 

go from door to door selling vacuum cleaners. There should be no distinction; there is no basis for 

distinction. So it is proposed to delete those exemptions. 

 

There are some other commodities, however, which we propose to put in as exemptions, such as the sale 

of water from door to door. This is a very commonplace product. We feel the public requires no 

statutory protection as to the purchase of it. The sale of propane gas, is again, so far as it is in the 

interests of the public that it should be controlled, is controlled under The Public Vessels Act, legislation 

of the Department of Labour. We see no reason, either why the Act should apply to the sale of bakery or 

dairy products in a community where the proprietor of the bakery or of the dairy is paying taxes in the 

community where he resides. These trades are trades that are confined to the immediate locality where 

the industry makes its headquarters. We see no need to apply the Act to those agents. With those 

changes in the application of the Act, the other changes are revisions only without any change in 

principle, which could be adequately discussed in Committee of the Whole. Therefore, with those 

comments I would move that Bill No. 14 be now read a second time. 

 

Mrs. Mary Batten (Humboldt): — I would like to ask the hon. Member a question. Have you not had 

complaints about people selling Bibles. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I am not aware of any complaints about selling Bibles. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — I have a question or two to bring up for the consideration of the House. Apparently the 

Attorney-General hasn’t had any complaints about selling Bibles, but I know that there have been people 

complaining although they apparently haven’t complained to the Attorney-General. As you know this is 

a 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

39 
 

sensitive subject and if people come in and make you feel like a criminal because you haven’t an $80 

Bible in the house, you’re apt to buy one. I don’t think there is any doubt that some of these Bibles are 

being sold at twice the ordinary retail price. What’s more there has been a great deal of 

misrepresentation in connection with the sale of these. I’m amazed that the Attorney-General hasn’t 

heard about it, because some of these salesmen are reputed to bring in letters from local clergymen or 

the hierarchy saying these Bibles are a must in every home, and very good people and very honest 

people are taken in by this type of thing, and this is a particularly sensitive subject. You don’t mind 

seeing people being rooked on something they don’t need, but when they’re rooked on the purchase of a 

Bible, it rather hurts everybody’s conscience. 

 

It may be that they can go into the local store or to the local minister and pick up on for just a very small 

percentage of the price they are being sold at. This is certainly something could be looked into. 

 

There is another thing in this Act, that I’m a little worried about, and this is the question of some items. 

As you know sewing machines are now taken out of the exception clause. Then there is a question of 

what a recognized retail store is. The definition is narrowed down so that it no longer can include a 

dwelling, or a mail order office, or display room, a repair or service shop. This doesn’t come up in the 

city too often, but in many small towns and villages and hamlets, - even in the country – there are people 

who have an agency and sell to their neighbours or people in the vicinity. Their greatest use to the 

community is the fact that they have a repair shop. I notice particularly in the case of sewing machines, 

if you have somebody in your vicinity that you take up the phone and call in when you’re in the midst of 

something, and the sewing machine has gone wrong on you, it certainly is a very great service. I would 

certainly hate to see people of that kind put out of business by virtue of having to pay too high a fee. To 

many of these people this is just a part-time business; it’s not a big business, and I don’t think there is 

ever an opportunity, where these people are actual residents of the district, for anything dishonest to be 

going on. I don’t think anybody is ever taken in. They are providing a service on a very small scale, and 

I think it’s a shame to have this service disrupted through taxation this kind. 

 

  



 

February 27, 1961 
 

40 
 

Mr. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, in view of some of the clauses in the Bill, I would 

like to have an opportunity to look it over, and if you will give permission, I beg leave to adjourn this 

debate. 

 

The debate was, on motion of Mr. Coderre, adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:29 o’clock p.m. 


