



















































Hansard: February 16, 1961


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

FIRST SESSION — FOURTEENTH LEGISLATURE 

6th Day 
 

Thursday, February 16, 1961. 

 

The House met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

STATEMENT RE AUTOMOBILE ACCIDENT INSURANCE 
 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to rise on a matter of personal privilege. Yesterday 

when I was participating in the debate, I made the statement that the Members of the Liberal Opposition 

had described the Automobile Insurance Act as the greatest hoax ever perpetrated on the people of 

Canada. The Member for Arm River interjected and said this was a lie. This is unparliamentary. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I said it was a falsehood. 

 

Premier Douglas: — It was a falsehood, I also checked and found that he said also that it was a lie. 

Both are unparliamentary statements. I didn‟t ask for a retraction at that time, out of respect for the long 

years of service which the Member has had in this House. But, I do reserve the right, now, Mr. Speaker, 

to lay on the Table a photostatic copy of the report in the Regina Leader-Post of February 26, 1946, and 

the opening paragraph says: 

 

“Describing the compulsory Automobile Accident Insurance Bill now before the Legislature as, 

quote „the greatest hoax ever perpetrated on the people of any province under the guise of an 

insurance measure‟ end quote. — and condemning the Bill on eight counts A.T. Proctor, Liberal 

Member of Moosomin, Monday attempted to have the legislation give six months hoist — his 

attempt was defeated by a record vote of 42 to 5.” 

 

And I ask this to be filed. 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

2 

THRONE SPEECH DEBATE 
 

Debate on Address-in-Reply 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Kramer, seconded by Mrs. 

Strum: 

 

And the proposed amendment thereto, moved by Mr. Thatcher, seconded by Mr. McDonald: 

 

Hon. Russel Brown (Minister of Industry and Information): — Mr. Speaker, this is the first 

opportunity that I have had, in the House, to offer my congratulations on your election to the high office 

which you hold, and I would like to join with those who have spoken before me, in wishing you well in 

the carrying out of the arduous duties incumbent upon the office which you were recently elected to. 

 

I would like also, Mr. Speaker, to offer my congratulations at this time to those former Members of the 

Legislature who were re-elected last June 8th, and I would like also to welcome and congratulate those 

new Members on both sides of the House, to the Chamber, and to wish them well in carrying out their 

responsibilities of representing the people of the Constituencies which saw fit to send them to this 

Legislature. 

 

Before going on, Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw attention to the packages of potato chips which were 

placed on the Members‟ desks before the House opened. These were sent to me by the principals of a 

new industry recently established in the Town of Rosthern in Rosthern Constituency, and I was asked to 

see that they were made available to the Members of the Legislature, and to draw attention to the fact 

that there is a new industry operating in that thriving community. I am sure that all Members of the 

House, will join with me in wishing this new industry the best of success in the years ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has been my custom in the past years to refrain from participating in the Throne Speech 

debate, feeling that it was more in order for me to participate in the debate on the budget, because at that 

time I have an opportunity to report on the activities of the Departments and Agencies under my 

jurisdiction, particularly do I have an opportunity to review the past year‟s activity of The Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation, 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

3 

and to give the Members of the House some idea of what our plans for development are in the years 

ahead. However, I decided that possibly I should join this debate at this time, particularly in view of the 

approach which was taken by the hon. Leader of the Opposition, when he spoke in the House last 

Tuesday. Now unfortunately, I was not in the House, at the time the hon. gentleman spoke, and I rather 

regret this, because I am sure I would have found it at least entertaining, if not educational. Nevertheless 

I have had an opportunity to peruse the newspaper reports of what he said, and I have also been able to 

obtain a transcript of his speech. I have been able to receive a recording of the speech of the hon. 

gentleman, and I don‟t want him to feel particularly satisfied over this, because I want to assure you that 

over the past years I have made a habit of collecting recordings of speeches made by the many leaders of 

the Opposition, who have preceded him in this House. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Very educational too. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Probably sell them. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Educational . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — I find that they are very valuable as party records for the entertainment of my 

friends, but I am quite prepared to make them available to any Members of the House, who are thinking 

of throwing a party sometime in the future. Mr. Speaker, when I picked these records up the person who 

was kind enough to record them for me suggested that I really didn‟t need to both with this particular 

set, because if I wished to take the trouble to dig out the old ones which I have collected, I would find 

exactly the same tune with exactly the same theme being played. 

 

It is quite obvious from perusal of the hon. Member‟s speech that this is exactly what has happened. It is 

exactly the same tune that we have been listening to here in the Province of Saskatchewan for quite 

some number of years. Certainly it is exactly the same tune that was played last June during the election 

campaign. It is exactly the same tune that resulted in the Liberal Party being able to garner only some 

33% of the votes of the people of this province. 

 

I was interested particularly, in the manner in which the hon. Member delivered his speech, Mr. 

Speaker, because I was decrying the fact, the other day when I was out of town, that I was not close to a 

radio, in 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

4 

order that I could listen to what he had to say. Somebody suggested that I really didn‟t need a radio, if I 

just stuck my head outside the door I would probably be able to hear the screeching and the screaming, 

even from the distance which I was. I found this to be true when I put the records on last night and 

listened to them for a short period of time. 

 

I was interested in reading the press reports on what the Leader of the Opposition had to say, to note that 

he was kind enough to express appreciation to the Government of Saskatchewan for providing certain 

office facilities in the Buildings for the Liberal Opposition. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. 

gentleman should be rather grateful to the Government, because I would suggest that the Liberal Party is 

the only political party in Saskatchewan that has its provincial office accommodation paid for by the 

taxpayers of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, of course that is not correct, and I might tell my 

hon. friend that if he wants to go down to the Westman Chambers he will find our provincial offices 

over there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — I am prepared to accept what the hon. gentleman says, but I have in my hand a 

report of the story written by one of the members of the press gallery, in which he says that, 

 

“The Liberal Party had packed up their belongings lock, stock and barrel, and moved them up into the 

Legislative Building, shortly after the Government made these additional facilities available to them.” 

 

Opposition Member: — Crying about it! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — Not at all. I would not be unhappy, Mr. Speaker, if the C.C.F. Party received the 

same kind of consideration. We have our financial difficulties too. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We think we have been given nothing we are not entitled to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — Mr. Speaker, one of the things which the hon. gentleman takes exception to and 

criticizes is the fact that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation has announced that it is going to go ahead 

an provide a head office 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

5 

building to house the administrative staff, which is located here in Regina. Now, I was prepared to 

become somewhat indignant over the fact that he referred to this as a $9 million building, as was 

reported in the press. However, when I listened to his speech last night on the recording, I believe he 

said something about being corrected and he was not sure exactly what the building was going to cost. 

Regardless of what the building is going to cost, Mr. Speaker, I would like to suggest to you that this 

kind of criticism is rather uncalled for and rather petty. I would like to suggest to you that any large 

business organization, whether a utility or any kind of an industry, certainly requires adequate 

administrative offices, if it is to operate efficiently. 

 

I am going to suggest to you that it is quite obvious to me, that the Leader of the Opposition is not 

interested in the Saskatchewan Power Corporation operating efficiently, because from the many 

statements of criticism which he has levelled at the Corporation over the years, it seems quite obvious, 

that one of his main missions in life is to discredit and destroy this public utility if at all possible. He 

would like to see it removed completely from the scene in Saskatchewan. When he suggests that we 

don‟t need this new head office building he is simply suggesting that we do not need adequate 

accommodation from which to administer this multi-million dollar Corporation. He seems to suggest 

that we should be satisfied to operate from any ramshackle quarters or a couple of pup-tents pitched in 

Victoria Park. 

 

That may be the way in which my hon. friends would be prepared to operate their business, but we have 

somewhat different ideas on this side of the House. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You certainly have. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — I should like to say a word or two with respect to this building, and why we 

decided we should proceed at this time. Not so many years ago, Mr. Speaker, the Corporation was 

serving a very small number of customers here in Saskatchewan, and at that time they had a head office 

building located on Cornwall Street that was adequate for their purposes. Over the past number of years 

almost everyone in the Province of Saskatchewan is aware of the tremendous development which has 

taken place; they are aware of the large program of expansion in transmission lines, which has been 

undertaken. They are aware too that a number of years ago we also went into the business of distributing 

natural gas. As a 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

6 

result of this kind of expansion which has taken place, naturally the staff of the Corporation has grown 

very rapidly indeed. From a handful of employees a few years ago, we now find that it is necessary to 

employ somewhere in the neighbourhood of 800 or 900 people in the City of Regina alone to carry out 

work in connection with the administration of the affairs of the Corporation. Now, over the years we 

have gradually occupied more and more space in various locations throughout the province. We have 

reached the point now where we have people located in about twelve locations in Regina. It is becoming 

absolutely impossible properly to administer a Corporation of this size, when you have your 

administrative personnel scattered to the four winds throughout the City of Regina. 

 

We postponed construction of this building just as long as we reasonably could, deciding instead to 

invest the money that was available to us in other aspects of our operation. The time has finally come, in 

the interests of economy and efficiency, when we can no longer postpone construction of this much 

needed facility. The building of a new headquarters for the Corporation or a utility is not something 

unique to the Province of Saskatchewan. During the past little while, utilities in the other provinces have 

found it necessary also to provide new quarters in which to carry out the expanding activities inherent in 

their operation. Two buildings for the gas utilities in Alberta have been built in the last little while, and I 

think everyone has heard about the very fine building which was constructed by the B.C. Electric in the 

Province of British Columbia. 

 

My hon. friend likes to refer to this new building, in a rather sneering manner, as “palatial”, and he 

would like to leave the impression that what we are doing is simply putting up a marble hall to be looked 

at rather than used. Well I want to assure you, Mr. Speaker, that we have no intentions of putting up this 

kind of a building. The building which we have planned, over a period of some several years, will be a 

building which will be suitable to our needs. It will be adequate, but it will not be fancy, and it certainly 

will provide a market for a great deal of building materials which are produced here in our own 

province. 

 

I don‟t think I want to spend too much more time on the Power Corporation at this time. I hope to have 

an opportunity later on during the Session to review the activities of that Corporation in more detail. 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

7 

I would like to turn to some of the remarks that were made by the hon. Leader of the Opposition in his 

speech the other day, with respect to the question of industrial development here in the province. Now 

yesterday when he made his very capable presentation to this House, the Premier dealt with some of the 

rather ridiculous statements, which my hon. friend made on Tuesday last. There are some things which I 

would like to deal with because I don‟t think these things should be allowed to go unchallenged. Now 

my hon. friend had a high old time, and give rise to a considerable amount of merriment among his 

colleagues, by ridiculing the thirty-two new industries which were announced in 1960, and which were 

referred to in the Speech from the Throne. In particular he selected five of these to hold up to ridicule 

and to exercise his rather perverted sense of humour. Now, what were these industries that he thought 

were so exceedingly funny? Well he mentioned the St. Mark‟s Shop in Lumsden; Concrete Lawn 

Ornaments in Saskatoon; and the Goodhall Memorial at Wynyard, Western T.V. Laboratories in 

Saskatoon, and the Greer Manufacturing Chemists of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, the Premier, as I say, has dealt with some of these. He made some comment yesterday with respect 

to the industry located in the town of Wynyard. The first two of these industries which the hon. Leader 

of the Opposition thought were so funny were not included in the list of thirty-two industries which were 

mentioned in the Speech from the Throne, because the first one was simply an expansion of their former 

activities, and the other one was also not considered to be of such magnitude that it should be included 

in the Speech from the Throne. Now we mentioned the Western T.V. Laboratories in Saskatoon. We did 

this deliberately; we did this because this happened to be the first electronics industry to come into 

production in the Province of Saskatchewan. While this industry may be small, Mr. Speaker, we thought 

that it merited mentioning, because as I say it is the first electronics industry to establish in our province. 

Sure, it may be a small industry, but this is typical of any new industrial area. Many of our industries 

spring from a small beginning. If they follow the pattern as they do in other areas, it can be expected that 

they will gradually expand until they employ more and more people as time goes on. 

 

Now the hon. gentleman has much to say about what he termed, “Aesop‟s Fables” and a great deal to 

say about certain announcements that were made in the publication known as “Industrial 

Saskatchewan.” Well I would like to say a word or two on some of these 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

8 

announcement which the hon. gentleman referred to. He mentioned Hoesche-Works and wondered what 

had happened in this particular case. Well I want to suggest to the hon. gentleman and to this House that 

while your batting average can be high at times, no one can guarantee 100% performance at any time — 

not even the Liberals who sit opposite. When the announcement of this particular industry was made, the 

plant had definitely decided to proceed, and during the winter of 1955-56 they decided to spend upwards 

of $60,000 on preliminary work. Unfortunately, it abandoned its plans to proceed when they found that 

tariffs on certain materials necessary to their operation had been increased. 

 

My hon. friend made several comments with respect to the announcement of a pulp mill. I want to 

suggest that there was every expectation that this mill would get off the ground when it was announced 

back in 1956. However, as sometimes happens, a drop in markets and the general economic conditions 

which prevailed at that time made it impossible for its sponsors to proceed. 

 

Now I know my hon. friend sometimes questions whether or not there is any basis of fact to the 

suggestion that factors other than the political complexion of the Government has any bearing on 

whether or not an industry does in fact decide to establish itself here in Saskatchewan. Well, with 

reference to the pulp industry, I thought it interesting some time ago, Mr. Speaker, to read an editorial 

which appeared in the Leader-Post. Now this particular editorial was not dealing primarily with the pulp 

industry; as a matter of fact, it was dealing mainly with the question of freight rates. But, the writer 

made some very pertinent comments with respect to the pulp industry, and I would like to read you just 

a little bit of what he said: 

 

“The exorbitantly high freight rates are now strangling the development of this province. We pay the 

maximum rates because of our geographical position.” 

 

He went on to point out that Alberta benefits from the competition of ocean rates at the Pacific coast. 

Manitoba is more advantageously situated, closer to the east, and many examples could be cited to 

support the contention that the present railway freight structure in Saskatchewan is retarding our 

development. They use one main example, and he says this with reference to the forest industry: He 

mentions the potential and then 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

9 

he goes on to say that this timber is not rotting in the north as economic utilization is prevented, because 

high shipping costs up to now have caused wood pulp people to shy away from the hazardous 

undertaking of establishing mills in our north. 

 

Now these are some of the basic facts of life with respect to development of industry in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, which my hon. friends across the way, are prone to discount or to pooh-pooh and to shrug 

off, and to suggest that there are really no problems; it is the fault of the Government only that we have 

not more development in the province at this time. 

 

Well I would like to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that rather than the Government attempting, as has been 

suggested, to create a false impression of the development which is taking place in the province, it is the 

Liberal Party, that is making the kind of speeches and the kind of statements which they have been 

making for the last little while, they are using this to imply that all we really need in Saskatchewan is a 

Liberal Government . . . 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — They suggest that all of a sudden the industrial interests of this country would 

come flocking in, and we can expect Saskatchewan to become another Pittsburgh overnight. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — It was the Premier who said it was going to be the Pittsburgh. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — We have recently heard a lot of talk about this elusive climate, that they are 

supposed to know about, which apparently is supposed to be the answer to all of our questions and all of 

our problems. The hon. Leader of the Opposition made quite a to-do about the radio speech which I gave 

some few months ago dealing with the question of development here in the province, and he gleefully 

made mention of his interpretation of what I had to say, and suggested that I was crying the blues over 

the obstacles which confronted us in the drive toward industrialization in Saskatchewan. He forgot to 

mention the fact, of course, that what I was actually doing at the time was pointing out the very great 

strides which we have made in industrialization in spite of the very definite handicaps which we were 

faced with here in the province. Handicaps, Mr. Speaker, which my 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

10 

hon. friends, as I suggest, are prepared to overlook completely. 

 

It would be rather amusing if it weren‟t so tragic, to hear my hon. friends across the way criticize this 

Government for the rate of development in this province. I am going to suggest to you that if any 

political party should stand condemned for their complete inability to attract industry to a province, it is 

the Liberal Party and the Liberal Party of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Back to the thirties. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — You don‟t have to go back to the thirties my friend; they stand condemned by 

their own words. I would like to remind them of a submission which was made by the Province of 

Saskatchewan to the Special Committee of The House of Commons on Reconstruction and 

Re-establishment in 1944. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You read that last year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — In which the hon. Leader of the Government made mention of the situation at that 

time. Here is what he had to say: 

 

Opposition Member: — Come on — the depression‟s over Russ. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — . . . they haven‟t improved. 

 

“Saskatchewan from the point of view of industrial development is in a poorer position than any 

other province in the Dominion of Canada, with the possible exception of Prince Edward Island, 

despite the fact that we had in 1939 — 8.39% of the population, we had only 2.09 of Canadian 

industrial production.” 

 

Thirty-five years after a Liberal Government — worse than that, my friends. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Worse now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — I‟m going to suggest to you, if there is any responsibility for delay in the drive to 

industrialization of this province, it lies at the doorstep of my hon. friends opposite, it is the legacy 

which they laid at our doorstep when they were thrown out of office in 1944. 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

11 

Fifteen years ago, Mr. Speaker, as they admit themselves, there was little if any industry in this province 

which was not directly or indirectly connected with agriculture. Fifteen years ago we had almost no 

primary industry in the province whatsoever. As a matter of fact we didn‟t even have the proper base for 

the attraction of industry. I would remind my hon. friends that they left us a province in which we had 

no electrical energy, so vital to the establishment of industry. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t suppose the Minister would permit a question, would he? I 

permitted a couple. Well now I wonder if the Minister would explain why there are fewer people in 

manufacturing today than there were seventeen years ago after seventeen years of C.C.F. Government? 

 

Premier Douglas: — . . . If you can‟t get that through your head . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Would the Minister mind answering it? 

 

Premier Douglas: — The hon. Leader of the Opposition was not interrupted the other day, and I 

suggest that he sit down and keep quiet. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I‟m asking my question of the Minister, I don‟t need the Premier. I‟d like to ask my 

question of the Minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — Mr. Speaker, I said that the hon. gentleman had that question answered yesterday, 

and if we can‟t get it through his head once, there is no use repeating it. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I haven‟t had it answered at all, and I would like to have it answered now. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — Mr. Speaker, the gentleman had an hour and three-quarters the other day . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — But we haven‟t had any answers. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I am standing, and would you please sit down. If the hon. Member who is speaking 

wishes to answer the question, 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

12 

he will signify by taking his seat, and allowing you to ask your question. You have asked your question 

and he has signified he is not willing to answer it, and he will be able to continue his speech. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — Mr. Speaker, we were kind enough on this side of the House the other day to 

allow the Member to speak for one hour and three-quarters without interruptions. I would expect the 

same kind of courtesy when I have a few minutes on the floor of this House. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You said you‟d answer the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — I would like to go on, Mr. Speaker. I mentioned that when we took office in 1944 

part of the legacy we inherited from my hon. friends over there was a province in which we had no such 

thing as adequate electrical energy. We had no such thing as natural gas, something else which is vital to 

the establishment of industry. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Neither did any of the other provinces. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — I beg your pardon, you‟d better start reading. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Alberta‟s had it for 25 years. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — We had no roads. Our highway system was completely worn out, and again, an 

adequate means of transportation, highway transportation, is something else which is vital to the 

establishment of industry. We didn‟t even have any industrialists in the Province of Saskatchewan at that 

time. We had little if any truck transport capable of servicing industry. While we had plenty of raw 

materials in this province, Mr. Speaker, which we proved shortly after we came into office in 1944, but 

when we came in none of these, or very little, had been developed, and they were not available to 

industry at that time. In short we had little if any of the needs and the requirements that industry is 

interested in when they are considering location of plants and factories. I am going to suggest to you that 

in spite of this legacy, in spite of the drawbacks which we found when we took office some fifteen years 

ago, Saskatchewan can be proud of the rate of industrial growth, and we can be proud 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

13 

of the fact that we have moved ahead in the last few years much faster than many of the other provinces 

of the Dominion of Canada. 

 

My hon. friend across the way spent a great deal of time the other day belittling and condemning the 

work of the Industrial Development Office. He heaped coals of fire on the activities of that organization 

and on the personnel who do the work connected with the operation of that office. Well I‟m going to 

suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, it wasn‟t really the lack of success of the office in bringing new industry 

into Saskatchewan that so greatly disturbed my hon. friend, and brought on, to my mind, this vicious and 

unwarranted attack. No! In my mind it was because of the fact that the office has been successful in 

bringing industry to Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — How many, Russ? . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — He is not happy to see the steady stream of new industry . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Tell us . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — . . . of course, as long . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege, is the hon. Member going to be allowed 

to bray like an ass, all through a Member‟s speech, or are we going to have order, because if this is 

going to work on one side I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, it will work equally well the other way. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I will do my utmost to endeavour to keep order as well as I can, sir, I assure both sides 

of the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — It is quite all right with me, Mr. Speaker, I have been heckled by intelligent 

persons also. 

 

As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, that is what really disturbs them and what they are really concerned 

about, and the real reason why they are trying to undermine and belittle the efforts of the Industrial 

Development Office is the fact that it is becoming increasingly apparent that the office is and has been 

successful in bringing new industries into the province. They are so frightened that the last remaining 

charge that they have been able to drag out, the one of stagnation, is going down the drain very rapidly 

indeed. They are because the people of this province are not so blind 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

14 

as they would like them to be. They are not quite so dumb as they would like them to be. The people of 

Saskatchewan can look around them and can see what is going on. They can see the new development 

which has taken place, and they are beginning to pay less and less attention to what my hon. friends 

across the way have to say. 

 

My hon. friends across the way, may not be prepared to acknowledge it Mr. Speaker, but they should be 

aware of the fact that there is tremendous competition for new industry these days. Every community in 

every province in the Dominion of Canada is going all out in the effort to attract new industry to bolster 

their economy. Again, while my friends are not prepared to acknowledge it, I would like to suggest to 

you that they should know the location of industry is decided on the basis of cold, hard economics. It is 

not, as they would like the people of this province to believe, decided upon the particular complexion of 

the Government in power at the time. Industry must be convinced that a particular location is the best 

one that they can find, economically. It must be the best they can find in order to assure a successful 

operation. You don‟t need to take my word for this. If my hon. friends would pay attention to other 

people they might improve their knowledge of the problems which we are dealing with today. 

 

I was interested in a story which appeared in the Saskatoon Star Phoenix a little while ago. It reported a 

speech which was made by the Industrial Development Officer in the City of Saskatoon. He points out 

these very things which I have suggested — the great competition for industry — the fact that industry 

does not locate in a haphazard manner — are examined very carefully, and every aspect and every factor 

is considered before they make a decision as to where they are going to locate. The gentleman says that 

in picking a general area for a new plant the first step is to take a look at the general economic 

conditions of the whole region. He points out that a region also includes an area ratio from one up to 

three or four provinces. That is why, when industry begins to look for a particular city within that 

region, a matter of 100, 200, or even more miles between likely cities does not hold too much of a 

problem. 

 

These are some of the facts which my hon. friends should familiarize themselves with. I would like just 

to point out this by making a quick reference to an industry which was just recently announced for the 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

15 

City of Saskatoon. I am referring to the multi-million dollar chemical industry recently announced by 

Inter-provincial Co-operatives. This is something which my friends across the way don‟t care to speak 

about. They‟d rather talk about the St. Mark‟s Shop down at Lumsden than to draw attention to the fact 

that there is a first chemical industry to be located in Saskatchewan — a multi-million dollar industry 

that will employ a large number of workers. I want to tell the House this, Mr. Speaker, and I know my 

friends in the co-operative movement will not quarrel with me for doing so. I want to tell you that when 

this industry was first mooted, when the first studies were undertaken, this industry was slated to go to 

the City of Edmonton in Alberta, and it was only after the officials of the Industrial Development Office 

had had an opportunity to spend a considerable amount of time with the officials of Inter-provincial, 

only after they had had an opportunity to review the reports and the studies after months of work, that 

they were able to produce evidence showing that the most economical location for an industry of this 

kind was in the Province of Saskatchewan, and in the City of Saskatoon rather than Edmonton, Alberta. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — This is the kind of effort that is required, Mr. Speaker, in order to bring new 

industry into a province. You can‟t do it by merely getting up and saying, “I am a free enterpriser,” or “I 

am a capitalist” and, therefore, you should all come rushing in. Industry would laugh you down if you 

made an approach of that kind. You have got to go out and work for, and fight for, and prove that there 

is room for an industry, and that in fact a new industry can be successful if it locates in your province. 

 

I have a lot more that I would like to say this afternoon, with respect to remarks which my hon. friend 

made the other day, but I see that my time is rapidly running out, and I certainly don‟t want to infringe 

on the time allocated to some of these new Members of the Opposition across the way. So I would like 

to conclude by once again pinning down this old cry of the Opposition — that it is the political 

complexion of this Government which is hampering and deterring the development of industry in this 

province. 

 

I would like just to refer to a recent discussion 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

16 

that took place in eastern Canada a short time ago. One of my officials in the Department had occasion 

to call on an eastern industrialist to discuss the possibility of his company establishing a plant in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. I am happy to be able to report, Mr. Speaker, that there is a great deal of 

interest on the part of this company, and I suspect that in the future they will be coming into our 

province with a branch of their manufacturing operation. 

 

The interesting thing, Mr. Speaker, as far as I was concerned, was part of the discussion which this 

official had with the official of this company. After the consultant who went down had spent 

considerable time advising the company executives of what assistance the Government was prepared to 

offer in the event that they decided to come into Saskatchewan, he was somewhat surprised at their 

reaction. They said that they were quite well aware of this Government‟s good intentions, but were 

apprehensive as to what might happen to their own plants and installations should the Government 

change in four years time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Nothing to worry about there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — Our immediate answer was that they didn‟t have too much to worry about; that it 

would be a long, long cold day before the Liberal Party again occupied the treasury benches in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Opposition Member: — That‟s a fairy tale, and you know it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — I said before there is much more that I would like to deal with this afternoon, but 

time will not permit. 

 

I shall close then by simply saying that it should be obvious that I have no intention of supporting the 

amendment, but I shall most whole-heartedly support the motion. 

 

Mr. Bernard D. Gallagher (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, on rising for the first time today, may I 

congratulate you on your appointment to the high office of the Speaker‟s Chair. I trust that, as a result of 

your experience in this House, and your pledge of 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

17 

political impartiality, you will add great dignity to this Assembly. 

 

I noticed that the Member for the Battlefords is not here this afternoon, and I regret this very much, 

because I would like to congratulate him and the lady Member from Saskatoon for their fine efforts in 

moving and seconding the reply to the Speech from the Throne. It would seem to me that if they have 

attended school since the C.C.F. Government got into office, they‟ve certainly learned to read well 

under our socialist standard of education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was astounded to come into this House, and see the mover and the seconder of the reply 

to the Speech from the Throne read their speeches word for word. In fact if I had known what the score 

was before I came in here, Mr. Speaker, I might have written a manuscript to read to this Assembly. But 

I can see now, Mr. Speaker, why this Government is so much in favour of having this radio time. This 

might leave quite a good impression back home, and especially so when their friends back home can‟t 

see them standing, reading their speeches, page after page after page. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I find myself today, because of the radio time allotted to me, sandwiched 

between two speakers, and because of that I am going to have to be very brief in my words this 

afternoon, or I‟ll be infringing on somebody else‟s rights. I can assure you though, Mr. Speaker, that 

when I am off the air, I‟ll have plenty more to say to this Assembly. 

 

As the Member for Morse and the Leader of the Opposition said the other day, the Speech from the 

Throne contained much more of what this Government cannot do than what this Government can do. 

Among the many things that were mentioned was the delay in building a mental hospital in Yorkton. I 

think it is a pity, Mr. Speaker, that a Government that‟s so worried about the poor, so concerned about 

the sick and the under-privileged, should have to take such steps as this: to delay the building of this 

mental hospital, especially in view of the fact that this Government can spend millions of dollars in 

building Power Corporation offices, and hiring commissions and continuing committees, and building 

paved highways which we realize are important, but not so important as the building of this mental 

hospital. 

 

I know that the defeated Member from Yorkton made the threat after losing the election, that there 

would be no mental hospital built, but surely, Mr. Speaker, 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

18 

I didn‟t think that this Government was low enough to stoop to this tactic of penalizing all the people of 

eastern Saskatchewan, by not building this mental hospital. 

 

Or was it, Mr. Speaker, the fact that they got too few votes between the international boundary and 

Kelsey bordering Manitoba to elect one single Member, and so now they have decided, because there 

were so few votes on that side of the province, there might not be so much need for a mental hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would just like to straighten out a few of the remarks in the limited time I have this 

afternoon, particularly some of the remarks made by the hon. Member for Weyburn (Premier Douglas) 

who entertained us the other day with some of Aesop‟s fables. I am going to extend to him right now a 

hearty invitation to participate in a story-teller‟s contest which CKOS-TV sponsors every year. I am 

going to warn him, first of all, that the trophy-holder is a pretty tough character to beat and the runner-up 

this year told me the other day that he is going to be back again next year, and just to get in practice I 

saw him sitting in the gallery across the way yesterday from a quarter to three to four o‟clock, so I hope 

he did get some practice! 

 

First of all, in regard to the lack of industries in this province, let me say this: No juggling of figures is 

going to change the fact that the Leader of the Opposition and the Member for Morse stated the other 

day. In fact, I would say that he was mild when he said we were at a stand-still. I think we‟re going 

backwards. We have lost a quarter of a million people in this province since this C.C.F. Government 

came into office, and what is worst of all, most of them are the young people. These are the greatest 

resources this province has, Mr. Speaker, and as bad as it might be to have lost industry in this province, 

it is even worse to lose our human resources and especially our young people. The reason for this loss in 

population is plain and simple. Members of this Government and this party have been going back and 

forth across the country for the past twenty-five years, telling the people of this country what a terrible 

sin it is to make profits; they abhor profit-making. They seem to have forgotten that it was the Liberal 

Governments which believed in the making of profits, both in Canada and the United States which have 

given to the people on the North American continent the highest standard of living of all the countries in 

the world. Even some of their own colleagues will admit this was true, and I am going to quote you what 

one of their gentlemen said: 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

19 

“Canada is a young country. As in the United States, opportunities for the expansion of capitalist 

enterprise lasted longer than in most European countries. Until the First World War, indeed, up until 

1929 the Canadian economy operated moderately well under the so-called „private enterprise‟ system, 

despite its lack of intelligent national planning.” 

 

I took this, Sir, from the book written by M.J. Coldwell. 

 

If Mr. Coldwell thought we had done very well up until 1929, surely he doesn‟t think that Canada 

stopped developing after 1929 — the last thirty-two years have been the greatest years of this country‟s 

history, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Yes, they do a lot of talking about production for use and not for profit. I‟ll bet you there is not one 

Member opposite me here, including the farmers, who would work his farm or operate his business or 

work in his profession, if he did not think there was at least a hope of a profit, even if he didn‟t make a 

profit. This, Mr. Speaker, is why we haven‟t had industry coming into this province. Then the Premier 

says we had fewer business failures in Saskatchewan. He didn‟t tell us that we had fewer business too. 

He tried to leave the impression that the Leader of the Opposition was calling all the people in this 

province stupid because we elected this Government five consecutive times. Well, if this is so, Sir, 

surely the Premier was calling the people stupid when they elected Liberal Governments for thirty-four 

years. 

 

Of course, we heard the usual story about the interdependence of the farmer and the labourer. Yes, we 

know that the farmer depends on the labourer and the worker depends on the farmer. We all know that, 

Mr. Speaker, but it seems funny to me that a Government and a party which is so concerned about the 

labourer hasn‟t got more than one man in the front benches of this Government who can honestly and 

truthfully call himself a true representative of the working man. 

 

The hon. Member for the Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) also had to remind us of the supposedly good labour 

legislation that this Government has passed, and of course he mentioned the Minimum Wage Act. I will 

bet you there is not one of the Members on the opposite side of the House who ever worked for a 

minimum wage since this C.C.F. Government came into power, or if anyone of them has he would 

certainly not be boasting about our minimum wage. I can assure you, Sir, that this is a starvation wage! 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

20 

I know it because I worked for it since this C.C.F. Government came into office. I say it is a starvation 

wage, and the reason why this Government set the Minimum Wage a dollar or two higher than in some 

of the other provinces is because there is a bigger percentage of people who have to work for a 

minimum wage in this province than in other parts of this country. 

 

A lot of the labour legislation that has been put on the Statute Books of this province has been put on 

simply and solely for propaganda purposes, to try and attract labour votes when it comes to election 

time. 

 

Regarding the formation of the New Party which we hear so much about, let me say this, Mr. Speaker. 

There is no such thing as the forming of a new party. It is simply the resurrection of an old party that is 

falling apart at the seams. The aims and objectives of this so-called party which our CCF friends talk 

about are the same as they were in 1933 when the „Regina Manifesto‟ was printed. They are the same as 

the objectives and the dogmas and the ideals that were expounded back in the 19th Century by Karl 

Marx. These ideas were laid down back in the 19th Century, and regardless of what the Premier might 

have said the other say about some socialists mellowing, I‟m going to say this: the top brass of the CCF 

is not mellowing one little bit, and to prove my statement, Mr. Speaker, I am going to quote from a very 

prominent CCF‟er, David Lewis, when he was being questioned on the program, „Press Conference‟ last 

December, 1959. He was asked at that time “What will the aims of the New Party be?” — compared to 

the aims of the CCF when the „Regina Manifesto‟ was printed. I quote: 

 

“As far as I am concerned, the aims of the CCF are the same today as when the Manifesto was 

printed.” 

 

So you see, Mr. Speaker, regardless of what our friends across the way may say, there is no such thing 

as the formation of a New Party. 

 

Before I take my seat I so want to say a word or two regarding the county system. I believe this 

Government would have given us the county system whether we liked it or not as early as 1945, only 

they did not have the intestinal fortitude to do it at that time. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — They don‟t have it now. 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

21 

Mr. Gallagher: — But because they have been elected for the fifth time they have become arrogant. 

This was their original plan and it is the plan they must follow if they are going to socialize the farmers 

of this province. It is not only intended to socialize the farmers of this province; it is another way to 

strengthening their strong political machine, and hiring more of their barnacles and their parasites. 

 

Premier Douglas: — How stupid can you get! 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — This is the chance for the Government to make even stronger the political machine 

they have in this province. They talk about strengthening local governments. What they are really 

interested in is weakening local governments — weakening them to the point where they won‟t have it 

as a thorn in their side. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that every Member in this House who votes against the 

amendment proposed by the Leader of the Opposition is voting to take one more freedom from the rural 

people of this province. 

 

Then the Premier suggested we were criticizing the report of the Committee before the report came out. 

I suppose he realizes by now that some of these Continuing Committee hearings didn‟t go over too well. 

Then he tried to leave the impression that this was a Liberal Committee. May I remind you, Sir, that four 

of the members on this Committee are CCF Cabinet Ministers. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, all the squirming and hedging that this Government might try to do now is not going to 

get them out of this one. They must stand up and be counted, and the uncomfortable part of the whole 

thing is that they are going to have to be counted before the Turtleford by-election. 

 

I am sorry, Mr. Speaker, that I do not have the time today to comment further on the Premier‟s talk. I 

noticed after his usual tirade against the Leader of the Opposition, he suggested the remedies to our 

national problems, and among his suggestions was the enlarging of our industries to increase services to 

raise our standard of living. It seems odd to me that one of his colleagues only a few months ago was 

suggesting that we might lower our standard of living to feed the hungry people of the world. It 

reminded me of the speech the Premier made in Canora last spring, on the day that the Minister of 

Natural Resources was nominated. The Premier was appealing 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

22 

to people not to vote Liberal because he said if they did they would be voting for a Government that 

would do nothing for four years. Liberals never did do anything! I am going to quote from what the 

Premier said: 

 

“I don‟t want to be the Premier of this province just to do nothing. I want to help build a co-operative 

society; one in which the strong will help the weak and the rich will feed the poor.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the hon. gentleman opposite is not helping to build a co-operative society. He talks about 

economic equities and social justice and human brotherhood. These are his pet phrases. Under socialism 

there are no strong to help the weak; there are no rich to feed the poor. Rather than helping to build a 

co-operative society he is leading a crusade to set up in this province a socialist welfare state. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the amendment but I cannot support the motion. 

 

Mr. James E. Snedker (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, first I wish to congratulate you upon your election 

to the high office of Speaker of this House. It is indeed an honour to be appointed the custodian of our 

noble heritage of freedom, and all our great traditions of Parliamentary self-government. May you serve 

them well. 

 

I have the honour to represent a seat formerly held by Mr. Loptson; and I humbly pray that I may be able 

to discharge my duties as fearlessly as did he, and with the same depth of human understanding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to congratulate the mover and seconder of the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from 

the Throne upon their excellent diction and the most efficient manner in which they delivered their 

speeches, and I can assure them both after having listened to them eulogize the Government, that they 

qualify as full-fledged members of the CCF self-admiration society! 

 

In rising to support the amendment, Mr. Speaker, I had considered that, in view of the opposition in the 

country to the proposed changes in local government boundaries, the Government would have shelved 

the whole issue, or at least that they would have indicated in the Throne Speech that they would grant to 

the people in the 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

23 

country a vote — a proper vote. I oppose the proposed changes thoroughly. I look upon them as an 

extension of socialist bureaucracy from the city into the very heart of the country. 

 

I have been astounded to discover, Mr. Speaker, that whereas in 1944 we had but 2,769 civil servants, 

we now possess the astounding number of 6,723 and I am not including any members of the Crown 

Corporations, the Power Corporation, the Timber Board, Liquor stores or any other Government 

institutions. When we include all these, we have the remarkable total of 12,820 Government employees. 

 

Through their period in office this Government has followed a policy of appointing employees more for 

their support of the socialist cause than for the ability to do a job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have been acquainted with some of these gentlemen, and I‟m just going to peel the top 

layer off in regard to the patronage that goes on in this Government in the appointment of former CCF 

Members of the Legislature, defeated candidates, and what have you to jobs and positions. 

 

Mr. T.J. Bentley; CCF member of Parliament for Swift Current 1945-49, defeated candidate in 1949 and 

appointed Director of Staff Training in 1949. When he was appointed as Director of Staff Training in 

1949 he sent this memorandum to all Ministers, and I quote from: Mr. T.J. Bentley: To: All Ministers: 

 

“Would you please supply me with the names of all the field officers in your Department together with 

their addresses in the areas in which they work by Constituencies, if possible.” 

 

Draw you own conclusions. 

 

He subsequently became the Minister of Social Welfare, and is now a member of the Medical Care 

Committee, a position which I do not doubt he is quite capable of handling. 

 

Mrs. Black, wife of the Deputy Minister of Industry and Information: Mrs. Black was employed by the 

Department of Education. A.J. Bright, Socialist M.P. for Humboldt, from 1953 to 1958, defeated in the 

Federal election of 1958, was subsequently employed as 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

24 

Co-operative Management Advisor. Mr. A.L.S. Brown, CCF Member of the Legislative Assembly for 

Bengough from 1944 to 1960, has since been employed by the Crop Insurance Board. Now, are we 

going to have Crop Insurance or socialist insurance? Are we going to have a socialist machine built up 

in the guise of crop insurance or are we going to have genuine crop insurance? 

 

Mr. W.K. Bryden, Deputy Minister of Labour, 1944 to 1948, and I quote from “The Leader-Post” May 

15, 1947: “Mr. Bryden admitted he solicited memberships for the CCF Party during the period that he 

was Deputy Minster. He said that he did this in his own time.” He subsequently left the province and I 

understand he has since been elected as a CCF Member to the Ontario Legislature. 

 

Mrs. W.K. Bryden, joined the Public Service in 1944. N. Buchanan, CCF Member of the Legislative 

Assembly for Notukeu-Willowbunch from 1944 to 1956, quit and was subsequently employed with the 

Power Corporation. Mrs. Marjorie Cooper was member of the Labour Relations Board, and while she 

was employed there her husband was President, as I understand it, of the Regina CCF organization. She 

is now a CCF M.L.A. for the City of Regina. 

 

Mr. Cass-Beggs, General Manager of the Power Corporation — one of his main claims to fame — is a 

defeated CCF candidate in the Province of Ontario — now he is charged with managing the whole 

propaganda machine for the Power Corporation run at the expense of the people of the province. 

 

C.D. Cummings, socialist Member of the Legislative Assembly for Souris-Estevan, 1944 to 1948, was 

defeated in 1948 and then was appointed as Sheriff at Estevan. A.D. Connon, socialist Member for the 

Battlefords, 1944 to 1948, was defeated in 1948 and in a by-election in 1950, then was appointed 

Commission of the Workmen‟s Compensation Board at a salary of $700 per month at the age of 69 

years. 

 

There‟s the list, Mr. Speaker, of socialist propagandists. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — You should have left your speech at home! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — C.S. Edy, Chairman of Moose Jaw City CCF Association, was appointed to the Public 

Service Commission in 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

25 

January, 1946, and later appointed Executive Director of the Finance Office. 

 

L.H. Lewry, CCF Member of Parliament from 1957 to 1958, was defeated in 1958, was temporarily 

employed by the Department of Travel and Information and subsequently temporarily employed by the 

Local Government Board. The Government always finds a roost for these fellows to perch on. 

 

Lloyd, L.L., brother of the Provincial Treasurer, hired by the Department of Co-operation in 1950; 

McCallum, A., defeated socialist candidate in Swift Current 1934, made Deputy Minister of Education, 

salary 1959-60, $12,240. J.O. Probe, an old gentleman whom I knew well, was a defeated socialist 

candidate in Regina in 1940; a socialist Member of Parliament for Regina in 1945 to 1949, defeated 

federally in 1949 and now made the Civil Defence Officer, as I understand, in charge of all Civil 

Defence within the province, 1950 to 1961. 

 

Now, are we having Civil Defence in this province or socialist defence? Which is it? A.O. Smith, who is 

a former CCF Provincial Secretary, is now Executive Assistant to the Secretary of the Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance Office. The Government says it is not in the public interest to disclose his salary. 

Mr. Stinson, resigned as CCF candidate in Weyburn, 1944 and was appointed head of the Purchasing 

Agency. Mrs. Beatrice Trew, socialist Member of the Legislative Assembly from 1944 to 1948, was 

defeated in 1948, has since been employed in various positions; appointed in 1961 to the Committee on 

Medical care, the only lady on the Committee. 

 

The only lady, Mr. Speaker! 

 

I would draw your attention and the attention of all hon. Members of this House, and particularly the 

attention of the hon. Premier of this province to the fact that women are more closely associated with 

medicine than are men. They need and require medical care before, during and after childbirth. During 

our lives when any of us are ill, afflicted or distressed they minister unto us as wives, mothers or nurses, 

and throughout the world the word “women” has been synonymous with compassion and mercy. 

 

That there should be only one woman on a committee of 12 studying a complete medical plan for this 

province is a mighty poor reflection on some of the high flown statements that I have heard the Premier 

of this province make. 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

26 

Valleau, O.W., socialist M.L.A. for Melfort 1938 to 1948; Minister of Social Welfare in the CCF 

Government from 1944 to 1948, defeated in 1948; made chairman of the Workmen‟s Compensation 

Board in 1948 — Valleau, D.S. defeated CCF candidate in Last Mountain in 1948 and then appointed 

temporary Assistant to the Clerk of the Legislature. 

 

Warren, H.K., in 1944 he joined the CCF; was made Chairman of the Provincial Mediation Board and 

subsequently retired. J.A. Young, CCF Member of the Legislative Assembly for Biggar from 1938 to 

1944, appointed Superintendent of Insurance from 1945 to 1956 and Deputy Provincial Treasurer and 

Registrar under The Securities Act from 1947-48. 

 

The CCF Member for Cumberland was employed by the Department of Natural Resources for some 

time prior to his election as a socialist candidate and I suggest that that was a good way to go around and 

spread a bunch of socialist propaganda and get elected at the expense of the province. 

 

The socialist Member of the Assembly for Redberry Constituency from 1952-56, Dmytro Zipchin; 

subsequently appointed as Liquor Store Vendor at Hafford after being defeated in the election of 1956. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have always considered, and I think many hon. Members in this House will agree with 

me, that when anybody is appointed as a Magistrate in any court in this province they should 

immediately sever all political connections and be above and outside politics from then on in. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Such has not been the case. Two thousand, seven hundred and sixty nine government 

employees in 1944 — twelve thousand, eight hundred and twenty socialist job holders by 1960. How 

well I remember some of the high-flown statements made years ago by Members on the other side of the 

House. Mr. Fines said: “I would like to see it made an offence for a Cabinet Minister to promise or 

recommend anyone for a job.” Mr. M.J. Coldwell said in 1944: “The day of the political heeler in 

Saskatchewan will come at an end if the CCF is elected.” “I would sever my connections with the CCF 

were it not so.” Well, I understand that he is retiring. The Premier of this province said: “The time is 

long overdue for taking civil servants out of politics.” We believe it is possible to hire men who are 

efficient and honest, to carry on the 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

27 

business of the province without recourse to patronage and job seeking.” 

 

I believed him when he made the statement. I thought it was good then; I think it is good now; that is 

why I am standing on this side of the House. 

 

This Government has constructed a political machine in the Province of Saskatchewan that would put 

Duplessis to shame or have been the envy of Huey Long of Louisiana. Everybody knows very well that 

in almost every town and village in Saskatchewan, one or more persons have been appointed to the 

Public Service because of CCF political activity. In addition to having built a bureaucracy, socialists 

have infiltrated every organization and every form of local government and have endeavoured to use 

them for their own interests; for the perpetuation of the CCF in power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this isn‟t what the workers in the CCF in the early days envisaged. They looked upon the 

CCF as an inheritor of the old Progressives — more of a farmers‟ party — but within the CCF the 

socialists triumphed. One by one sincere farm people were dropped off until today the socialist machine 

stands supreme in this province. 

 

The people who braced the cold and snow and pinched their pennies to pay the bills to promote the CCF 

deserved better than this. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — I turn now, Mr. Speaker, to the increase in the hospitalization tax and other taxes. I 

find it very remarkable that before the 1948 election, the tax was $10 per family, and after the election 

$30. Before 1956, the tax was $40 — after the election, $45. Before the 1960 election the taxes dropped 

to $35; after the election they rose to $48. All these taxes were raised after elections. Why not be honest 

and tell the people before elections that the fees are going to be raised? Why are they always raised 

afterwards? Hospital fees, court fees, telephone fees, every fee in the land raised after the election — 

never before. I never cease to marvel at the political sagacity of the Premier of this province. Time and 

again I have heard him enjoin us, “To be our brother‟s keeper” and I think that is a pretty good principle, 

but he doesn‟t think of a brother as I think of him. He‟s thinking strictly of a socialist brother that we are 

to keep and he never tells us what it is going to cost to keep him until after the election is over! 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

28 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — I understand we are now to build a building in this City to house the employees of the 

Power Corporation. Some more employees! They now find it incumbent to spend $6 million (I think that 

was the figure mentioned in the press — it could be more) to construct a propaganda mill, at a time 

when the mental institutions in this province are a shame and a disgrace. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Nonsense! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — And also, when I understand that the City of Regina needs no less a sum than $12 

million to undertake the necessary repairs, renovations and expansion of their General Hospital for the 

sick. Surely that should come ahead of anything else! 

 

I quote now, Mr. Speaker, from the brief on treatment of psychiatric patients in Saskatchewan, 

submitted by The Canadian Mental Health Association, December, 1960. On page 5, (and I quote it 

verbatim): 

 

“The fact that facilities for treating mentally ill in Saskatchewan are inadequate really needs no further 

documentation. The evidences are available in the annual briefs to Cabinet by the Canadian Mental 

Health Association, Saskatchewan Division, and in the Annual Reports of Psychiatric Service Branch, 

Deputy Minister of Health.” 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — That‟s crocodile tears! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — You‟ll cry before I‟m finished! On page 6, referring to Yorkton: 

 

“The Canadian Mental Health Association, Saskatchewan Division views with great alarm and some 

discouragement the slow pace of construction of this essential hospital. We are alarmed because it may 

become the Government‟s policy to restrict service to the mentally ill.” 

 

I have a clipping I found somewhere not long ago, that says that: 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

29 

“The Government will proceed with this thing, if, as and when funds are available.” 

 

I think that was the statement the Premier made. 

 

Premier Douglas: — It‟s in the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Well wherever you made it, I don‟t care where. Maybe you didn‟t make it in exactly 

those words, but certainly if, as, and when funds are available. My mind went back to 1939-1940 when 

the question was mooted in this province about bringing in a Hospitalization Plan. The Government of 

that day, which was not a CCF Government, had the draft ready to introduce, and they said they would 

introduce it if and when funds were available. At that time, Mr. Speaker, we were in war up to our 

necks; the personnel to staff the hospitals were overseas; the doctors were overseas; the whole country 

was in the turmoil and ferment of war, but the Premier went up and down the country prior to the 1944 

election, ridiculing the Government of that day, because they said they would bring in a plan, if and 

when funds were available. I remember his sarcasm at that time. I remember it well. I believed it! 

 

Now he is saying exactly the same thing! He will build the Yorkton Mental Institution, if and when 

funds are available. Does he deny that funds are available when he is building a six million dollar 

mausoleum in Regina for Cass-Begg‟s Power Corporation? 

 

The brief goes on, and it‟s a sorry message.”The hospitals are grossly over-crowded.” I am referring to 

mental hospitals.”The following facilities are available in Saskatchewan . . .” 

 

In the Saskatchewan hospital at North Battleford, the number of beds is from 900 to 1,000 available, and 

I am going to give the Government the benefit of the doubt and call it 1,000. Patients in the hospital at 

the time that the brief was submitted were 1,700. The Saskatchewan Government Hospital at Weyburn, 

900 to 1,000 beds available. I give the Government the benefit of the doubt again and call it 1,000 beds. 

The number of patients was 1,560; 2,000 total available beds; 3,260 mental patients; 1,260 too many. 

 

Page 9: “The hospitals make inadequate provisions for the amenities of life, essentials for the 

preservation of human dignity.” 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

30 

Page 10: “Number of indicated personnel in the mental hospitals in Saskatchewan — psychiatrists, 

superintendents, clinical directors and other physicians; requested 105; authorized 46; deficit 59. 

 

“Social workers requested 105; authorized 35, deficit 70. I suggest that if anyone had wanted more 

social workers authorized anywhere else in the country, if they had been for the purpose of socialist 

propaganda, they would have got everything they had asked for. Occupational and recreational 

therapists 84; authorized 34; deficit 50. Nurses — requested 2,235; authorized 1,112; deficit 1,123. 

Nursing Instructors — requested 61; authorized 15; deficit 46. Dentists — requested 5; authorized 3; 

deficit 2. Psychologists requested 49; authorized 14, deficit 26.” 

 

Page 11: “Obviously the standard of care from a personal point of view is less than one-half of what it 

ought to be, and again on Page 14: “There is absolutely no doubt that the standards of care are abysmally 

low no matter what criteria of care are used in the evaluation. The mentally ill in Saskatchewan are 

second class citizens.” 

 

Five hundred thousand dollars was earmarked by the Government, and according to the Premier this 

amount has been spent on the Yorkton hospital. I am not quite sure where it‟s been spent. It‟s another 

indication that the people of this province should beware of any promises which this Government may 

make now or in the future. Quite obviously any promise this Government might make entailing the 

expenditure of money, would be vague and empty on the Premier‟s own admission. The province does 

not now have the money with which to fulfill the commitments which they made at that time. There is 

money for the Power Corporation, but no money for the mental patients. What an indictment of a 

Government whose slogan at one time was “Humanity First.” That slogan has now gone by the board 

and the rallying cry is now “More Abundant Living!” More abundant living for whom, I would like to 

know? The people of this province or the socialist hacks of the Government? But for the mentally ill, 

they halt the construction of the hospital at Yorkton. The Premier says it will be proceeded with, if and 

when funds are available. Tested and trusted, the Government is busted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I understand this thing correctly, people who are mental patients in hospitals don‟t have 

votes. I can only conclude, therefore, that they are not too important to some people. I wish to serve 

notice 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

31 

to all and sundry, that whether they have got any votes, or whether they haven‟t, I‟ll stand in this House, 

outside of it, or anywhere else, and I‟ll fight their cause and battle for them, in season and out till justice 

is done. 

 

I have here a copy of Sessional Paper No. 149, the Session of 1960. This is in answer to a question that 

gives the total cost of the Royal Commission on agriculture and rural life, from the Provincial 

Secretary‟s office, dated March 21st, 1960. The total cost of the Commission was $458,643.48. All that 

amount of money squandered. All that amount of money spent to try and ram something down our 

throats that we don‟t want. 

 

The total cost of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Life was $458,000.00. Then when I looked up 

the Public Accounts for 1959, 1960 and 1961, I found out what the cost of the Continuing Committee 

was, and when you add the two together and you come up with the astounding sum of $698,077.22. 

Some more of our tax money gone down the drain! I viewed with alarm and some apprehension the 

article I read when I picked up this copy of a magazine which the Government employees have printed 

periodically by their association, and it is quite alright that they should do so, it is called the Dome. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I‟ve been relieved. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Well you won‟t appreciate it when I get through. 

 

Now here is what they have to say about the Local Government Continuing Committee, and what‟s 

going to go on out in the country and I quote: 

 

“An indication of the possible effect of municipal reorganization on the civil service became known 

during the Fall of 1960, when the Local Government Continuing Committee sponsored a series of 

province-wide public meetings, to discuss the thinking and conclusions of the committee, prior to 

submitting their report to the Government. Fresh reports at these meetings mentioned that the 

introduction of the whole County System of local government, could mean for example, that programs 

in agriculture, health, education and social welfare, now undertaken by the Government, would be 

assumed by the Counties.” 

 

They were alarmed by this information and I don‟t blame them for being alarmed. I was alarmed too. 

The association sought further enlightenment, and, Mr. 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

32 

Shawcross, of the headquarters staff, attended a meeting that had been arranged by the Federation of 

Labour, who were interested in all developments. Mr. Kinzel, Director of Information for the 

Department of Trade and Industry, chaired the meeting.”Mr. Shawcross reported the essence of the 

information received, as far as we were concerned, in these words:” — 

 

“Of particular interest to the Government employees Saskatchewan Civil Service Association was the 

potential future of the Government employees, working in such regional fields as health, social 

welfare, etc.” “In answer to a question on this matter, Mr. Kinzel noted, that while recommendations 

in regard to starting a proposed county had not been finalized as yet by the Local Government 

Continuing Committee, it was extremely likely that the Committee would recommend that such 

employees as agricultural representatives, school superintendents, field staffs of the Provincial Health 

and Social Welfare Departments, may be hired by the individual counties. The committee feels that 

this would be most desirable, and would recommend that there would be no loss in current benefits, 

wages, sick leave, vacations with pay and pensions etc., etc. 

 

Then the Press clipping — Headline, March 9th: 

 

“Counties would save money, chairman asserts.” 

 

Now if we are going to have to pay all that swarm of Government employees, I fail to see how we are 

going to save money, and I wonder where we are going to get the money from, to pay for all of this. I 

remember somebody telling me at one of the meetings, that were held by the Local Government 

Continuing Committee, (Oh, and right about now is as good a time as any to ay, I listened to somebody, 

I think it was the Premier, commenting on these meetings the other day, and he said that some 

Opposition Members had gone to these meetings to stir up trouble. Well I went to two of them. If I 

hadn‟t gone to any of them he would have stood up in his place and criticized me for not being 

interested.) I considered that this thing should be thought out, discussed, and that a person should go to 

the meetings and ask the questions that he wanted to ask. It was a pretty tough job getting a direct 

answer however. One of the things I did pin down was this. There would be a change in assessment and 

tax base. If we have the country system introduced and these people apparently envisage 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

33 

it, we will be assessed on every cow, every pig, every turkey, every hen, every chicken, every bushel of 

grain, and every building that we possess. Somebody said we won‟t be taxed on buildings. Don‟t laugh! 

Down in North Dakota where they have the county system and I spent about a week down there looking 

it over and found that that is exactly what does take place. 

 

Now the Premier is running a little short of money to run the Government and to look after all these fine 

feathered friends of his, so instead of lugging more money into Regina, they think it would be easier to 

send the civil servants out into the country, to promote the socialist cause. Increased debt, and increased 

taxes will be the result. This burgeoning beehive you‟ve got right here in Regina is ready to swarm. You 

are looking for sixty-five little beehives in the country to start the fresh swarms in. Every one of them 

peddlers of socialist propaganda; every one a socialist dedicated to the purpose of maintaining this 

Government in power. 

 

I took a look at the debenture debt, and what had taken place in connection with larger school units, and 

I discovered that their debt had increased from $1,578,000.00 in 1950 to $6,234,000.00 in 1958. I can 

only conclude that some of our debenture debt, if we get counties, will do the same thing. 

 

At the present time our rural municipalities are comparatively free of debt: only $857,000.00. Counties 

will immediately commence, promoted by the CCF henchmen, a massive program of capital spending 

for machinery, social aid, health and hospitalization, etc., etc., etc. What the Government is trying to do 

is to transfer from the Provincial Government a good share of the cost of their hospital program, medical 

care program, and their social aid program, and everything else from the Government on the backs of 

the counties. It is not that we are so scared of the county system, as that we are scared to death of what 

this Government will do to us with the county system. My hair is standing on end. 

 

Government Member: — What end? 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Mr. Douglas says first comes off the fat, and he states to the Press that he is going to 

take some of the fat off, fat which an efficient Government should never have allowed to accumulate on 

the political body of this province. Then he says we may also have to take off some of the lean. Well I 

know where the lean meat is, it‟s out in the country in the small towns, among the farmers, and he 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

34 

will take it off with a dull knife. Five hundred civil servants are supposed to be transferred to our 

counties, complete with portable pensions, seniorities and all other prerequisites of their organization. 

Five hundred propagandists for socialism, to build an expanding bureaucracy, to build the same 

bureaucracy in the country that they have built in the city. 

 

Now in connection with some of the statements that were made, by the Local Government Continuing 

Committee. I don‟t hesitate to say what I please about it, if the Premier could get up in this House and 

eulogize the Committee, surely I have the right to criticize, and I quote from the paper that is printed in 

the City of Melville, “The Melville Advance.” The quotation is correct, because it was also printed in 

the “Yorkton Enterprise,” and I believe in the “Regina Leader-Post”. On Wednesday December 4th, 

1960, here is what the “Melville Advance” said: 

 

“It would appear that municipalities in the Melville area, could save as high as 23% in administration 

costs, if a county system came into effect.” 

 

Well, I dug around in the figures a little to see what this was all about, and I came up with the following 

statistics: — Cost of administration, and this is what Mr. Nicks of the Committee said, — cost of 

administration for the Rural Municipality of Grayson was 9% of their total expenditure; for the Rural 

Municipality of Cana it was 18%; for the Rural Municipality of Garry it was 15%; for the Rural 

Municipality of Stanley it was 27%. Well we had better take a look at the figures and see what really 

happened. 

 

I discovered when I went to the records and the report of the Department of Municipal Affairs, that these 

are the correct figures, and I had them checked most carefully. For the Rural Municipality of Grayson, in 

1950 and 1951, their cost of administration was 6.370%. By 1954-54, I presume by good management, 

they had dropped to 5.964%. By 1959, they had dropped again to 5.737%, as compared to the figure that 

was given by Mr. Nicks, who said that the costs were 9%. Now I think he had better start getting his 

figures right. For the Municipality of Canada in 1950-51, costs were 14.264% of total. By 1954-55, 

however, they had dropped to 7.761%, and by 1959 they were only 6.756%, as compared to the 18% 

claimed by the Continuing Committee representative. The Rural Municipality of Garry in 1950-51, the 

costs of operation were 7.861%. By 1954-55, they had dropped to 6.122%. By 1959 they had raised 

slightly. I am giving everybody the benefit of the doubt, to 7.476%, as 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

35 

opposed to 15% that the Committee had the gall and audacity to say was the cost of administration. In 

the Rural Municipality of Stanley, cost of administration in 1950-51 was 9.625%, and by 1954-55 the 

cost of administration was 6.498%. By 1959 they had risen to 8.850%. But what a comparison when you 

compare it to the 27% the Local Government Continuing Committee representative said it had cost. 

 

Well then, what about the provincial averages? The provincial average in 1950-51 was 8.332%. By 

1954-55, it had dropped to 6.589%, and by 1959 the provincial average had dropped to 6.355%. I 

thought the Premier would have known this, he is vice-chairman of the Committee. These people just 

can‟t be believed when they come out and tell us what it is costing to administrate our R.M.‟s. When 

you compare their figures to the correct figures the discrepancy is fantastic. It is something like the 

budget that Mr. Fines brought down before the last election, a sunshine election budget, and everybody 

said what a wise man he was. Now all of a sudden we are short of money. Well either he shouldn‟t have 

said the things he did say then, because he must have known that we were going to be short of money, or 

the present Provincial Treasurer hasn‟t got the ability that his predecessor had. The cash and bank 

balances that the Rural Municipalities held as of 1952, $2,199,999.00; for 1958, $4,571,000.00, and the 

total debenture debt of the Rural Municipalities was $257,000.00 in 1958. 

 

The general financial position of our Rural Municipalities, Mr. Speaker, is a tribute and a credit to the 

foresight and good judgment of all our municipal men, our reeves and our councillors, and also to the 

efficiency of our Rural Municipal Secretaries. The very low incidence of indebtedness, of our Rural 

Municipalities will make them a fertile field for the squanderers of the socialist bureaucracy, when they 

get out there in the counties. 

 

Now how is this reorganization to be achieved? I have given some thought to this. I wondered how we 

were going to get it all done, and I presumed that the Local Government Continuing Committee had 

given it some thought too, and they had. I wondered how we would allocate the assets and the liabilities 

of the Rural Municipalities among the counties, how all this would be arranged? 

 

Then I came on a rather remarkable document, “The Local Government Continuing Committee Interim 

Report 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

36 

to the Government of Saskatchewan, upon the Allocation of the Assets and Liabilities of Local 

Government during the Reorganization Period.” Well that‟s what I wanted to get a hold of, so I thumbed 

through it, and read it, and studied it quite carefully as a representative of the people is supposed to do. 

On page 8, I found this, “The Provincial Role” it is headed, the part that the province will play in the 

reorganization, I‟m quoting verbatim from this interim report: 

 

“The province would aid the reorganization process by appointing liquidators, each of whom would be 

responsible for one or more of the former local authorities.” 

 

I don‟t relish the thought of being liquidated. 

 

“The appointment and supervision of liquidators would be under the Municipal Advisory 

Commission, which would provide a short course on the role of the liquidator, and would administer 

the payment of fees.” 

 

I repeat: “would administer the payment of fees and expenses of liquidators, and the expenditures for 

final audits of their work.” 

 

It didn‟t say that the Government was going to pay the fees, but somebody is certainly going to get stuck 

with them. 

 

There is nothing said here about the Government paying the bills. Liquidators would be under the 

Municipal Advisory Commission, in other words under the Government — tried, trusted socialists, and 

they no doubt would get a short talk on socialism before they went out into the country to liquidate. The 

Municipal Advisory Commission would in turn be advised in this function by an interdepartmental 

committee (I don‟t like the phrase “Interdepartmental committee” at all,) with representatives from the 

Department of Municipal Affairs, Education, and depending on the type of reorganization proposed, 

Public Health and possibly other Departments. Well depend upon it, they will all be in there somewhere. 

 

“Where the liquidators,” and I am now on page 9, “found that agreements between councils on the 

distribution of particular assets and liabilities was impossible, they would refer the matter to the 

Municipal Advisory Commission. The Commission might then advise the liquidators on further 

measures.” 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

37 

To bring the councils to agreement, or to bring them to heel — which? They might attempt to mediate 

the feud themselves, or might refer the matter for arbitration to the Local Government Board. In either 

case we would get our necks wrung. 

 

Liquidators, bah! The Order in Council appointing the liquidator would, 

 

“Confer on him the power to negotiate cheques, made to former authorities, after the latter had gone 

out of office, to undertake transfers of land titles, and to undertake other procedural duties associated 

with the transition. All agreements between council will be subject to the approval of the Local 

Government Board, and no agreement would be implemented without this approval.” 

 

That‟s how we are to be liquidated. 

 

When I turn to page 17, it is headed „Summary‟: 

 

“The province should, however, through the Municipal Advisory Commission, appoint and train 

liquidators.” 

 

Trained socialist liquidators! 

 

“To Advise the new counties, to record their decisions, and to authorize the necessary transactions.” 

 

Oh, the audacity of these people to come out to the country and tell us what to do. Talk about freedom 

and democracy in this province, it‟s gone down the drain. 

 

What about our Union Hospitals? I see the Government has got them in the squeeze between the rate 

board and the trade unions. How in the name of common sense can the hospitals pay their debts, and 

keep the things going when the trade unions come along and demand more wages, and the rate board 

says we won‟t give you any more money. Now how is that to be done? We‟ve got a wage hike at 

Yorkton that will cost $28,000.00 a year to our hospital just recently, and I‟m not saying it‟s right or 

wrong, but how do we pay it? With this Government responsible for the hospital plan, how are we going 

to pay the bills if we don‟t have the money to do it? That‟s all part of the Government‟s socialist 

program for the destruction of local self-government. The municipalities first, the hospitals next. 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

38 

Despite all their protestations to the contrary, the CCF seeks to destroy, not strengthen local government. 

 

Our democratically appointed Union Hospital Boards are now in a vicious socialist squeeze engineered 

by the bureaucrats of Regina. Ordered on the one hand to raise wages by the trade union friends of the 

Government they are by the same Government, ordered to reduce their costs. 

 

The socialists seek to embarrass our hospital officials and our Union Hospital Districts to the point 

where the socialist bureaucrats of Regina can march in and take the control of our hospitals away from 

the people. 

 

Yes, you‟ve got the plans made now to go forth and liquidate our Union Hospital Boards at the earliest 

opportunity and run our hospitals directly from Regina. That‟s the plan that is in the gears — a typically 

socialist plan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Ross, did you write that? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — He‟s doing a good job . . . 

 

Mr. Snedker: — I didn‟t need any CCF‟er to write speeches for me when I was a member of that party 

and I don‟t need anyone to write them for me now. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — He didn‟t hear very well! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that local self government should be extended, not curtailed. I 

believe that we should seriously consider whether members of Union Hospital Boards should not be 

elected by the people at large, rather than being appointed by the municipalities. I think we‟ve got 

seriously to consider whether we shouldn‟t have Union Hospital Board members elected directly in the 

country, and by the people, in order that the people might be more closely associated with their medical 

institutions, and in order that we may have an extension of democracy and not a curtailment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — . . . municipalities. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — I beg your pardon, sir; they are appointed by the municipalities the Attorney General 

knows that very well. 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

39 

Now the Government uses as an excuse for their actions regarding the Local Government Continuing 

Committee, and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Life, the argument that many of our 

boundaries in our local government areas are not coterminous, and I admit that when you take a map of 

the boundaries within Saskatchewan, and look at the boundaries of the larger school units they are a 

cartographer‟s nightmare, but I draw to the attention of the hon. Members across the way that they drew 

them. Now they are trying to liquidate the farmers and the municipalities to get themselves off the hook 

they‟ve hung themselves on. 

 

Municipal men must be pardoned, Mr. Speaker, if they look somewhat askance at the protestations of 

friendship by this Government and at the Local Government Continuing Committee. I well remember 

attending a convention of The Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities in Regina last year. 

Municipal men asked to see the maps of the counties which they knew had been prepared, but they were 

denied, in fact it was denied that there were any maps. Later a Government official admitted the maps 

were there, however, they still refused to show them to the municipal people. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — . . . Saskatoon . . . 

 

Mr. Snedker: — And then we‟re asked to listen to the Local Government Continuing Committee with 

an open mind. I was prepared to listen to them with an open mind. I was prepared to listen to them with 

such an open mind, it‟s a wonder my brains didn‟t fall out. When I heard and understood the proposals 

however, I snapped it shut, and it is going to stay shut. When I listened to what the hon. Member for 

Kelsey had to say — “ineffective local government groups were a nuisance and a trouble to the 

Government at any time,” it reminded by of a page from “Alice in Wonderland”, “sentence first, verdict 

afterwards, off with their heads.” 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — On a matter of privilege, I wonder, would the hon. Member tell me from 

where he is quoting me? 

 

Mr. Snedker: — It was in the press. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — “The Leader Post?” 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Well I‟ll read you the whole clipping, and if you wish to correct it, it is perfectly 

alright. Saskatoon (special) 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

40 

“Mineral Resources Minister J.H. Brockelbank urged farmers to attend the public meetings of the 

Local Government Continuing Committee.” 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — What I wanted is the reference, is it the “Toronto Globe and Mail?” 

 

Opposition Member: — You‟ve never read the “Globe and Mail” in your life. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — “Leader Post.” 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — “Leader Post”, well, well. What date is it? 

 

Mr. Snedker: — I can table it, Mr. Speaker, and he can have it. I‟ve got lots more.”Leader Post,” 

December 2, 1960. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Now I will read the quotation so that you will have it correctly, and I hope that you 

won‟t say you were misquoted. 

 

“Mr. Brockelbank said, “ineffective local government groups were a nuisance and a trouble to the 

Government all the time.” 

 

That is the correct quotation. 

 

He also told a Convention that representative government does not mean putting every question to a 

plebiscite. Well you had a plebiscite on marketing eggs; you had a plebiscite to find out what time it 

was; you had a plebiscite on every kind of liquor outlet there is in the province, surely our municipalities 

are more important than that. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — May I draw the attention of the hon. gentlemen opposite to the fact that under the 

Municipal Act we have the right to vote on just about anything under the sun. I don‟t think anybody 

needs to be vexed by what we do. It‟s none of their business. I would not dream, Mr. Speaker, not even 

in my position as a Member of this House of dictating to or telling any of our cities how they should 

operate their governments, and I think I can be pardoned if I resent an ex-mayor of the City of 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

41 

Saskatoon, and a Commissioner, of whatever he‟s a Commissioner of up there, heading a Committee to 

come out and tell us what to do in the country. 

 

Now I submit to hon. Members opposite, that is hardly a good way to get along, and if the people of the 

city think they can escape from the socialist scourge, I can tell them this: They are next. 

 

I now quote from the Provincial Local Government Conference, the opening statement made by the 

Premier, December 11, 1956, page 12, 2nd paragraph. 

 

“I want to make it abundantly clear that the Government will not embark on a program of municipal 

reorganization unless this program is assured of the co-operation of the local government bodies, and 

widespread support of the general public.” 

 

Now as an indication of the widespread support of the general public, the last time I looked up the count, 

the number of municipalities that had voted were 187, and the number that voted against it was 187. The 

number of towns that voted was two, and the number of towns that voted against this thing were two. 

The number of villages that had voted were 26, and the number who voted against it were 26. I am 

informed that 90% of the people who voted, voted against these reorganization proposals. 

 

I listened to the Premier when he was speaking at the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities 

Convention here last year, and he made very much the same statement. He more or less said that if you 

don‟t want this thing you are not going to have it. Well on the grounds of the Premier‟s statement, the 

Member for Weyburn, and the Premier of this province should vote for the amendment. 

 

The Member for Kelsey, the hon. Mr. Brockelbank, said and I quote the speech that he made on 

television: 

 

“It may be found desirable and practical to have a vote of electors in the new units to choose between 

two forms of local government.” 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, I never made that speech on television. 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

42 

Mr. Snedker: — . . . the radio then, I‟ve forgotten which, but never mind, I have a copy of the script. 

What a choice we‟ve got! Do we wish to be hung with a hemp or a sisal rope? Which way do you want 

to die? Do you want to be gut shot or poisoned? In either event, the death of self-government is going to 

be irrevocable and final. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the CCF is a socialist party and socialism cannot be instituted except by the vicious 

use of dictatorial means by whatever group is endeavouring to build the socialist state. 

 

When the socialists came to power in the Province of Saskatchewan, they found themselves to be 

severely limited by the fact that they controlled but one province, and they were forced to operate, 

therefore, within the federal framework of parliamentary democracy. This somewhat cramped their 

style! Their first attempts to socialize industry were a failure. However, since their inception they have 

followed a pattern of the steady erosion of the right of free government in our country, by whittling 

away by bits and pieces the powers and jurisdictions of local government. If their experiments in the 

field of industry have been somewhat of a failure, their construction of socialist bureaucracy has not. 

 

Should Canada be so unfortunate as to allow control of our Federal Government to fall into the hands of 

the socialists, we will find them building the same bureaucracy in Ottawa they have built right here. 

 

I have here some clippings on the grain strike: „Grain Exports Through B.C. Halted by Handlers‟ 

Strike‟, „Wheat Sales Loss Warning,‟ Leader-Post, November 25, 1960: 

 

“The Japanese Consul in Vancouver warned that the Japanese shipping companies and grain importers 

are now discussing cancellation of trade to Vancouver because of the grain strike.” 

 

“Grain Handlers‟ increases will hike handling costs.” (Leader-Post, November 28, 1960.) 

 

Now what does this exponent of socialism, this Mr. Henry Nokes, a visiting fireman or whatever he is, 

from the Province of Ontario, representing, I believe the Canadian Congress of Labour, what does he 

have to say about this? We lost millions of bushels of exports — 20 million it is estimated, in the first 

West Coast strike. We lost exports in the next West Coast strike. In addition to all the disruption that 

took place in regard 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

43 

to that strike, it disrupted our markets and caused great loss of confidence in our ability to deliver, on the 

part of the people who are buying our grain. The West Coast strikes of grain workers cost us an untold 

loss of grain exports, in addition to all the disorganization of shipping, the costs of demurrage for the 

boats involved, and was a contributing factor to poverty on our prairies, unemployment in our cities and 

a general lack of purchasing power and a tight economic situation. 

 

Now here is what this representative, the promoter of the New Party has to say, speaking in Yorkton. I 

quote the “Yorkton Enterprise,” February 9, 1961. 

 

“The West Coast Grain Handlers‟ strike that threatened grain shipments last fall was a matter of 

economic necessity, as far as labour was concerned, and the interest of the farms weren‟t particularly 

taken into consideration.” 

 

I‟ll say they weren‟t. When they struck, they went on strike against the Alberta Wheat Pool, against the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, against the United Grain Growers — all three of them — farmer‟s 

companies, and against every farmer in Western Canada. 

 

West Coast strikes of grain workers cost us an untold loss of grain exports all down the line. We farmers 

realize what has happened to us. We are not in any doubt about it. 

 

The socialists know full well that they can never achieve federal power in Canada as long as the country 

is in any way happy and prosperous. 

 

With their boundless ambitions and lust for power, their firm belief in the socialist faith, and also the 

belief that the end justifies the means, it will be possible to produce by strikes and disruptions the 

economic conditions which they hope will bring them to power. We, as farmers, realize this. The 

socialist bureaucrats know very well that they are going to be found out, hence their haste to saturate the 

country with the exponents of socialism; hence their haste to clap the chains of socialistic dictatorship 

firmly on every farmer in the country, before they go ahead with their federal scheme. 

 

While I am on the subject I would be the very lat to deny any one the rights and privileges of organized 

labour, but let me warn the rank and file of working people that, once they allow their organization to 

fall into the clutches of the socialists, there will be no turning back. They will be ridden with whip and 

spur; and nobody will drive the spur in deeper, or lay the 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

44 

whip on harder than will the Premier of this province, if he ever gets control. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Like „Joey Smallwood‟! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — In the past, unions have operated strictly in the interests of their memberships. From 

here on in every move, every strike, every demand will be at the dictates of political expediency. Mr. 

Speaker, down through endless corridors of time, humanity has ever struggled for freedom, sometimes 

losing, sometimes gaining, but always trying. Our present civilization, while it is far from perfect, has 

achieved a greater degree of self-government and freedom than any of its predecessors. We live in 

another of the world‟s great testing times. Will man make another painful inch forward, or will he take a 

long step back? Across the world in every country the battles lines are being formed in this great drama 

of the ages. In our country, here in this province, in our towns, in our villages, and in our municipalities, 

freedom, and an extension of self-government or dictatorship by the socialist bureaucracy is the real 

issue. Vae Victis. 

 

Premier Douglas: — That would have made good chewing tobacco! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — I will not support the motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Allan R. Guy (Athabasca): — First, Mr. Speaker, I would like to add my congratulations to those 

that have already been offered on your appointment to that high position. As I sat here the last few days, 

I could not help but admire the poise and the sureness of our Premier and of our Leader of the 

Opposition as well as of the two Members who moved and seconded the Throne Speech. I was hoping, 

that when it was my turn to rise and speak in this Assembly I would have some of that sureness. 

However, I realize that that will probably come with practice. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I hope you will be with me, while I practice on this Assembly today. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You made a good start, you are doing well. 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

45 

Mr. Guy: — First of all, I would like to thank the hon. lady Member for Saskatoon for the kind words 

she said about the teaching profession. I would like to thank her on behalf of the teachers on this side of 

the House and of the teachers in Saskatchewan. With these remarks she made, I can heartily concur. 

 

I am enjoying this Session a great deal so far. I am pleased to be sitting across the floor from the greatest 

teller of tall tales that we ever had in this House. I did not realize however, that so much time would be 

spent on the works of Aesop. I could see where his name might come in when the Leader of the 

Opposition made his point. But I was surprised when yesterday the Premier of this province had nothing 

better to tell the people of this province but a story from Aesop. It was a story about the fox and the 

grapes and he intimated that the fox was the Leader of the Opposition. Well, that brought to my mind 

another tale, concerning a fox. Once upon a time a fox and a bear went fishing. The fox told the bear to 

stick his tail down through a hole in the ice and he would catch the fish. The bear very foolishly did so 

and after the hole froze up, he tried to remove his tail, but his tail came off. The moral of this story 

appeared to be, “Never underestimate the wisdom of a fox.” Or better still, I hope perhaps it would be a 

tale to end all tales. 

 

Premier Douglas: — As long as they don‟t put the tail in the wrong place. 

 

Mr. Guy: — I would also, at this time, Mr. Speaker, like to thank the Premier of this province for his 

promise that the automobile insurance will not be increased this year. If the Liberals do only one thing 

this year, they have saved the people of the province a considerable sum of money . . . 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — . . . by criticizing the Government for the proposition of possibly having to raise the rates. 

Following our progress they have it reconsidered and do not dare to increase the rates this year in view 

of the public opinion we have created. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the hon. Member for Yorkton, because of insufficient time, did not dwell on the 

future of this so-called New Party. However, I am sure, that the people of Canada are awaiting with 

anticipation to see what is so new about this New Party. As the hon. Member for 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

46 

Yorkton stated, can one call a party new that will certainly have its basic platform doctrines which were 

included in the Communist Manifesto back in 1848, and which have formed the basis for other new 

parties in Russia and China in this century. Will it be new because it is based on class prejudice? No, we 

have many examples of political parties that have tried to appeal to the certain segments of society. 

 

Perhaps it will be new because it will have new leaders, but again it appears not. Rather it will have 

some broken down socialist who has failed to get the CCF Party off the Federal floor before the final 

count. 

 

At present, according to reports, the race for leadership is a wide open affair. Hazen Argue has already 

signified his intentions of seeking the position in the hope that the Premier of our province will not seek 

the position. But the Premier also, a few weeks ago, stated that if conditions are right, he also will be 

willing to seek this position. The door was open, and I would say he propped it open. 

 

There is also one red horse, I mean black horse, in the race. I understand that Tim Buck was speaking in 

Regina recently and I imagine he will be the popular candidate in many circles in this province. 

 

There is no doubt however, Mr. Speaker, that our Premier will accept the leadership. He is too astute a 

politician to fail to take this opportunity to get off the ship of socialism that is about to sink. Some of the 

rats have already left the ship and have gone to Manitoba. I did not know . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Withdraw! Withdraw! 

 

Mr. Guy: — I did not know, Mr. Speaker, that our Government was so pleased to get rid of some of 

those rats . . . I hear some are in Mexico. I hear they have gone to Switzerland. It is hard to say where 

they have gone but they pulled out of the province at a good time. Our Premier‟s Social Credit 

background no doubt will help him tremendously in manipulating the heavy purses of his labour bosses 

should be accept this position of Leader of the New Party. 

 

But regardless, Mr. Speaker, of who leads this New Party, I cannot see the people of Canada voting a 

political control to the labour unions of this country. 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

47 

Since I was the only Member of the Opposition, in fact, the only Member of this House, whose 

Constituency is wholly in northern Saskatchewan, I was particularly interested in the plans of the 

Government as mentioned in the Throne Speech. It was with some amazement that I heard that our 

Government, while encouraging diversification of farming, was going to give emphasis to pasture 

development in northern Saskatchewan. On thinking it over, however, I suppose that if the Conservative 

Government can turn the farming areas into woodlots, it is not beyond the realm of possibility for the 

socialists to turn our forest and muskeg areas into pastures. I hope they will not use the public money to 

do so. 

 

Northern Saskatchewan, I think we all agree, lies north of the 54° 30‟ parallel or the 55th parallel for 

practical purposes. According to physical maps, this area is being shown as being completely within the 

northern provincial forest area. I have carefully checked the reports of the Department of Natural 

Resources and the Department of Agriculture, and nowhere can I find mentioned the advisability of 

using this land for agricultural purposes and nowhere can I find any mention where sheep or goats or 

pigs or cattle are raised in that area. I do know that a few are being raised at Ile a la Crosse and we had 

one horse in La Ronge a few years ago until some ambitious hunter shot it for a moose. 

 

I am afraid that the vision of the sounds of thundering hooves on the pastures of the north will be 

another mirage of the socialists similar to the one of the skyline in the south stretching from the Alberta 

to the Manitoba borders will one day be filled with the smokestacks of factories and industrial plants. 

 

As I listened the other day to certain Members of this Assembly boasting of the number of votes they 

received last June, I began to wonder what I might be able to brag about. I am proud, therefore, to be 

able to ay that I represent the largest Constituency in this province. But more important than that, I 

would like to say that I have in my Constituency the greatest percentage of voters who represent the 

original inhabitants of Canada and our province. I was thus dismayed to note that so little time and so 

little was said in the Speech from the Throne concerning our Indian and Metis people. Now I know that 

in the Opposition it is my responsibility not only to criticize, but also to be constructive. And so in this 

main part of my speech I would like to say a few words concerning the problems of the Saskatchewan 

Indians not only in the northern area but also throughout the province as a whole. 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

48 

It was not so many years ago that the Indian was thought to be a doomed race. Today, however, we 

know that the Indian is not a vanishing race, but rather they are the fastest growing ethnic group in 

Canada. They have increased from a low of 100,000 to 179,000, with the prospect of increasing to some 

400,000 by 1980. In Saskatchewan the Indian population has increased 37.6% in the last ten years to 

reach a total of approximately 23,000. One-fifth of these being located in the northern area. This 

population increase had added many new problems to the problems already existing and if steps are not 

taken at this time the plight of these people will go from bad to worse. 

 

Many have expressed the view that the conflict between the Indian and the white population has always 

existed and always will. This, of course, is not true. If we look back to the fur trade era of Canada, we 

find Indian and white relationships were friendly and intimate. They had an economical and social 

system marked by mutual respect and assistance. This was ended, however, when it came time to turn to 

an agriculture economy. Now, the Indians, the rightful owners of this land, were becoming a problem. 

The white man tried to solve this problem, at least to his own advantage by negotiating treaties whereby 

the Indians gave up their claims on the land and accepted reservations and Government handouts. At 

that time, no doubt, this was considered the most effective way of providing security and protection for 

these people. Today, however, nearly 100 years later, we find that we created more problems than we 

solved. These years of protective paternalism have robbed the once-proud Indian people of their pride, 

their ambition, their initiative and their self-determination. They have watched while the world outside 

the reserves has whirled by them at a dizzy pace, while on the reserve very little change has taken place. 

Until today they are in a position where they don‟t dare to leave the reserve and face the changed 

economic and social conditions of his white brothers. Instead they cling to the security that the reserve 

has provided. 

 

All thoughtful people realize, I am sure, that the day is long past when Indian people may live unto 

themselves. The reserves cannot handle this boom in population, or provide the economic opportunities 

to enable the Indian to achieve economic equality with the rest of his fellow Canadians. The time has 

come when the Indian people must concentrate on adapting themselves to the white man‟s way of life if 

they wish to become good citizens. There is no country in the world that offers greater opportunities to 

people of all races, 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

49 

creeds and colours than Canada today. But for our Indian people to achieve equality with other 

Canadians will take patience, sympathy and understanding on our part. There is nothing to be gained by 

trying to blame the previous administration for the problems of the Indian nation. Rather we must all 

accept that blame. We were too ready to believe that all was being done that could be done, that they 

were living the kind of existence which they desired, that it was not our obligation but the obligation of 

the Federal Department of Indian Affairs whose responsibility the Indians are under the B.N.A. Act. 

However, we have now accepted the fact that it is our responsibility and that all was not being done that 

should or could be done, and that we had within our boundaries a gross example of inequality and 

intolerance towards our Indian people. We realized that we were guilty of not demanding our 

Governments and our representatives in the Government to right these wrongs against our native people. 

However, this is in the past, we cannot relive these mistakes. Instead we must try to make up for the past 

by our actions in the present and the future, which will show that we are seriously interested in the 

problems of our Indian people and we are determined to proceed with honour and with courage to see 

that the equality to which all men have a right will come to them. 

 

However, this process will naturally be slow because we must be sure of our ground and our policies, as 

we could easily make conditions worse by going blindly ahead without making sure the Indian keeps his 

security and is ready for the changes that will come. The barriers that have grown between the two races 

over the last one hundred years will take more than one generation to beak down. 

 

This acceptance of our responsibility came easier after we had witnessed the contribution of our Indian 

people in the defence of our country during the Second World War. After the war, when they demanded 

greater social benefits it was a Liberal Government who made old age pensions, family and mother‟s 

allowances and blind and other pensions available to these people. It was a Liberal Government that set 

up a parliamentary committee in 1946 to study the problems of the Indian administration which resulted 

in revision of the Indian Act in 1951. But Provincial Governments have been guilty of leaving the 

problems of the Indian people entirely to the Federal Government. However, it seems clear that in view 

of the fact that any benefits derived from Indians participating in jobs outside of the reserves will be to 

the benefit of the province. The province must now be prepared to give some leadership and financial 

assistance to these people. 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

50 

It is hard to believe that the Government we have now in the Province of Saskatchewan with its 

so-called policy of providing more abundant living to all should take sixteen years before they showed 

any interest in the Indian population of our province. And then this interest was conveniently timed to 

coincide with the provincial election. In the 1957 Session of this Legislature the assistant to the Premier 

stated that his Government intended to give the Indians the privilege to vote and to buy liquor, but not 

without the full consent and knowledge of the Indian people themselves. This was reiterated again in 

1959 when the Premier, addressing the Provincial Conference of Saskatchewan Indian Chiefs and 

Councillors, told them of the Provincial Government‟s intention to grant provincial voting rights to all 

Saskatchewan Indians, but not without the approval and consent of the Indian people. Despite these 

assurances the Provincial Government at the 1960 Session of the Legislature without notification of their 

intent or prior consultation with the Saskatchewan Federal of Indians, decided the Indian people should 

have the right to vote in the coming election. At the same time, although they had been asked by the 

Indians to wait until each reserve could vote on the question, the Indians were given the privilege to buy 

and consume liquor. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I do not want to interrupt our hon. friend, but who asked the Government? Who 

asked the vote to be taken to the reserve? 

 

Mr. Guy: — I believe it was the Saskatchewan Federation of Indians. 

 

Premier Douglas: — That is not correct. 

 

Mr. Guy: — However, we shall go on. There were several recommendations coming from Indian 

reserves from this Federation of Indians whose intention it was to ask the Government to wait until they 

were prepared to carry out a vote so that they could find whether the Indian people wanted it. 

 

Now these privileges are certainly due the Indian people, but the manner in which they were given is 

questionable. The liquor privilege at this time has created more problems for the Indian. They are now 

able to purchase it, but according to the Indian Act may not take it on reserves without a vote. But by 

Provincial Legislation they must not drink it outside their dwelling place. The Government should have 

waited until the Indian Act could be changed. 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

51 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I want to interrupt my friend. The Indian Act has been changed. The 

reserves are at liberty to vote any time they like. 

 

Mr. Guy: — That is not what I said. I said that they are not entitled to take liquor on the reserves until 

the vote has been taken. 

 

Premier Douglas: — There is no need to amend the Act then. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Guy: — The right to vote is an important privilege in a democracy and I hope the Indians will take 

advantage of it to make their problems known to the Governments concerned. In the past, the right to 

vote meant the loss of treaty rights, so the privilege of voting has been a touchy subject with the Indian. 

It was natural then, when the Federal and the Provincial Governments literally threw the vote at them, it 

was viewed with alarm. It is not that the Indian people do not wish to vote, as some have suggested, but 

rather they do not understand its implication in regard to their previous rights and privileges. 

 

The Governments concerned might have shown less concern for their own benefit and more 

understanding and sympathy for the Indians‟ wishes in these important matters. 

 

Since two of the main problems facing our Saskatchewan Indians today are the lack of employment on 

or off the reserve, and the need for social and economic integration into the white man‟s way of life, I 

have grave doubt that the CCF Government can or will do anything to assist the Indian in overcoming 

these problems, for they have failed to do anything for the unemployed in the rest of the province, and 

they are now in the process of creating a class party. 

 

The CCF claim that the Indian‟s philosophy lends itself to CCF policies of socialism and co-operation. I 

doubt that this is true, but instead, as the Indian gradually frees himself from the paternalism and 

compulsion of his present way of life, he will follow the philosophy of a party that stands for equality 

for all races and classes, for free enterprise and equal opportunity for all, 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

52 

and he will keep clear of this so-called New Party whose very foundation is being built on class 

prejudice. 

 

Labour showed last year what sympathy it had for the Indian when long-lasting strikes in the lumbering 

and fishing industry affected thousands of Indians on the West Coast by cutting down their immediate 

income and making many ineligible for unemployment benefits due to a shortened season. 

 

In many regards, the lack of employment opportunities for the Indian create similar problems of 

employment to hose which face the whole of Saskatchewan under our socialist Government. Industries 

which could employ a certain number of Indians just won‟t take a chance in locating in Saskatchewan 

under this system. The atmosphere for new industries and expansion of the ones we have is not here. On 

glancing through the last annual reports of the Indian Affairs Department, one notes that on both sides of 

us in Manitoba, Alberta and British Columbia the Provincial Governments were able to find 

employment for hundreds of Indians in their provinces, while in Saskatchewan the only notable groups 

to get employment were four hundred we sent to Alberta to work in the sugar beet fields and a few more 

that we sent to Manitoba t work at Flin Flon and Churchill. 

 

It has been clear for some time that agriculture in the south and fishing and trapping in the north will 

never provide sufficient income for the Indian to raise his standard of living particularly in the 

aforementioned population explosion. The only solution seems to be for the Indian to equip himself for 

life off the reserve in competition with the white man for wage employment. At present this is a difficult 

transition for the average Indian to make for several reasons. If he leaves the reserve for more than a 

year or so, he becomes responsible to take care of himself financially, and he lacks the necessary 

training to compete with the white work force. 

 

Many cases have occurred where young men have tried but have found it necessary to return to the 

reserve in order to secure the security which they desire. Some improvement in the agricultural areas 

could come from courses in farm practice and farm management which might improve present 

production, and abolishing the plan where land is leased out to non-Indians. The working of this land by 

the Indians themselves would provide more work and could increase the revenues of the band fund. 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

53 

In the north of the province the situation is similar: fishing and trapping as an economic base will not 

support the increased population and the prospects of wage employment here are even less likely than in 

the south. 

 

In the north the fisherman‟s income has been further reduced in many areas by having to sell their fish 

through the Saskatchewan Government Co-op Fisheries. While the fishermen in Manitoba sell their fish 

to the highest bidder, who this winter were paying 28¢ for large whitefish, 29¢ for pickerel and 35¢ for 

trout, the fishermen selling to the Co-op in Saskatchewan are receiving 11½¢ for large whitefish, 8¢ for 

pickerel and 17¢ for trout. Heavy administrative cost and the necessity to pay back the Provincial 

Government for the filleting plants which they have taken over, further reduce the fishermen‟s income in 

Saskatchewan. The Indians have been quick to note and to comment on the fact that although this 

organization is called a Co-op, the local members have practically no say in the administration and 

marketing policies. It is still the case of the white man exploiting the Indian. The only answer for both 

the southern and northern Indian is in the development of a larger economical environment whereby 

more employment would be available. 

 

This is the field where the Provincial Government could show considerable leadership without any fear 

of overlapping federal policies. The other western provinces have embarked on programs where Indians 

are employed extensively in the lumbering and mining industries, road construction, development of 

provincial parks and recreational areas, work in tourist resorts, guiding for tourists and in fur farming. 

There is no reason Saskatchewan cannot provide the same opportunities. The hiring of several 

placement officers to help the one already provided by the Federal Government would help greatly in 

finding suitable jobs for our Indian work force. 

 

Providing of economic opportunities, Mr. Speaker, will not be the whole answer to the Indian‟s 

problems at this time. Before the Indian can take full advantage of any increased economic opportunity, 

he must overcome the cultural and social differences that exist between himself and his white brother. 

 

As we have seen, the placement of Indians on reservations, the administration of their affairs under a 

separate Act, the education of their children in separate schools ended social relationships of equality 

which existed during the fur trade era. We realize now 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

54 

that this planned segregation was a mistake. So we are faced with breaking down this segregation and 

integrating once again the two races and cultures. Due to the long time that has elapsed this will not be 

easy as we must be careful that it becomes an integration on an equal basis and not merely subordination 

to the white man‟s way of life. It would be unfortunate indeed if in this process of integration the Indian 

race should lose what remains of its culture and heritage. Much as we would like to see integration 

happen overnight, we must first tread softly, so both cultures will benefit to the fullest extent by this 

mutual union. I think we all agree that integration will come eventually through medium of education of 

both Indians and non-Indians. For this reason, there has been a definite trend in the last few years away 

from the Indian residential schools and day schools on the reserve to day schools off the reserve where 

both Indian and white children attend. The results today have been encouraging and any suggestion that 

the low education of Indian students is due to the lack of ability is completely false. It can in practically 

all cases relate to a late start in school, language difficulties, poor attendance or leaving school at an 

early age. I glanced at the last issue of the “Indian News”, and that will show you what they can 

accomplish if given equal opportunity; eighteen scholarships were given to Indian students last year for 

academic achievement in high-schools and universities across this land. Of these eighteen, four were 

Saskatchewan students. 

 

Perhaps the greatest need for our Indian student today are causes designed to keep him in school longer 

and which will fit him to accept positions in industries. For this we need greatly increased vocational 

and technical training facilities particularly in the north half of our province where they can be trained in 

the skills associated with forestry, mining, fishing and construction work. This would have an added 

advantage in preparing them for employment in an environment with which they are familiar. Other 

features which could be added to our educational system which would aid the cause of integration are 

special classes at Teachers‟ College in the university for teachers interested in teaching in integrated 

schools so that they would be better prepared to meet the problems which exist. More short vocational 

courses for local employment in a known environment, trade training with a grade III or IV entrance 

requirement, and more emphasis on adult education for Indian and non-Indian, aimed at creating a better 

understanding of the social and cultural barriers that exist. 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

55 

We must give credit to the Federal and Provincial Governments for steps already taken which include 

integrated schools, vocational training for northern Treaty and Metis residents in upgrading classes. 

 

I was pleased to hear from the Throne Speech that all major construction and equipping of the 

Saskatchewan Technical Institute in Moose Jaw has been completed. I was very disappointed to hear, 

however, Mr. Speaker, that no further provision for vocational and technical facilities have been planned 

for this time, in spite of the fact that our Federal Government has offered to pay 75% of the capital 

expenditures for the next three years. Labour Minister Starr in the “Star Phoenix” of December 10, 

1960, stated that Saskatchewan estimated they would spend $3,000,000 in the next seven years with 

none of it this year. Alberta and Manitoba will spend $15,000,000 and $6,000,000 respectively. Even 

our small maritime provinces of New Brunswick, Nova Scotia and Newfoundland have estimated their 

requirements for some four to five million dollars. 

 

It is unfortunate that the Saskatchewan Government will not take more advantage of this Federal help, 

particularly in view of the desperate need for vocational and technical facilities in the north half of our 

province. 

 

Although, as we have said, integration depends a great deal on education, there are other factors which 

also must be considered. One of these is the providing of health and welfare services on an equal basis to 

all the citizens in this province. At present, the division of services between the Indian Health and 

Provincial Health services causes confusions. The high order of services provided by the Federal 

Government makes Indians hesitant to leave the reserves. The provinces should be prepared to provide 

equal services to the Indians living off the reserves, so they will not be forced back to the segregation of 

the reserves. The time is probably coming when the province will have to administer all the health and 

welfare services for these people. 

 

The Provincial Government can also be leading the way by assisting the Indians to provide himself with 

better houses and public utilities such as power, sewer and water, and telephone, first class roads, and 

other services which would raise their standard of living. 

 

A final step that must be taken if we are to integrate the Indians into our society successfully, is to 

provide them with opportunities to accept more 



 

February 16, 1961 

 

 

56 

responsibilities in managing their own affairs. This must be done so that they will be able to accept the 

responsibility of living in a democracy. The time must come when Indian agents and superintendents 

will be advisers to the band or municipal councils, rather than the supervisors which they now are. 

 

The organizing of the Saskatchewan Federation of Indians will give some practice in parliamentary 

procedure and a body such as this will be valuable in providing a united voice in the presentation of their 

problems to the Governments concerned, as they proceed to the equal status which is their right. 

 

I was pleased to read in the editorial of the first issue of their newspaper, “The Indian Outlook,” that the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indians was a non-political, non-partisan organization and that they 

intended to keep it that way. This must be if they wish to gain the full support which they need and 

deserve from all the people and organizations in the province if they are going to gain the confidence of 

all Governments, federal and provincial and municipal. 

 

We all know, Mr. Speaker, that it will be a long time before the Indian nation becomes integrated 

completely into the social, economical and political lives of our nation. We know too, however, that that 

day will come when all the Indian people will bridge the gap that separate them, as many have already 

done. In the meantime, let us hope our federal, provincial and municipal Governments and the individual 

members of these Governments, will continue to recognize the obligation which we have to bring about 

the integration of these, the native people of Canada, in such a way, that they will not lose any of their 

privileges and traditional rights. 

 

Policies must be adopted that will eliminate features that discourage self-determination, initiative and 

self-control, so that the Indian nation as they move towards equality, can make their contribution to the 

future developments of Saskatchewan and Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of the weaknesses in the Throne Speech, in regard to these people of northern 

Saskatchewan, I find it is impossible to support the motion, but will be able to support the amendment. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:24 o‟clock p.m. 


