



















































Hansard: March 14, 1961


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

24th Day 

 

Tuesday, March 14, 1961. 

 

The House met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. Douglas T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw the 

attention of hon. Members to a group of young students from St. Anne‘s Separate School at Wolseley, 

under the supervision of the Mother Superior, Mother St. Laurents and Sister Yvonne. I hope that their 

stay here this afternoon will be very educational and I am sure that all Members wish them a very 

interesting day. 

 

STATEMENT RE SECURITIES COMMISSION 

 

Hon. R.A. Walker (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to advise the House that Mr. 

W.W. Cameron, one of the Provincial Magistrates, and Chairman of the Saskatchewan Securities 

Commission, was recently asked to reconsider his resignation which was to take effect on March 31st 

next. He has now agreed to withdraw it. 

 

The substantial drop in the number of prosecutions for securities offences in 1960 as compared with 

1959 is due in no small measure to the effectiveness of the present standard of securities enforcement. 

The retention of Mr. Cameron does not indicate any apprehension on the part of the Government that 

there may be an outbreak of stockateering in the province of Saskatchewan, but we do feel Mr. Cameron 

is one of the most experienced and capable 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

2 

 

securities administrators in Canada, and we are anxious that Saskatchewan shall continue to enjoy its 

present reputation for its high standard of securities administration. 

 

The Government is therefore, glad that Mr. Cameron has reconsidered his decision to resign and has 

agreed to stay. 

 

MOTION RE SURPLUS AGRICULTURAL COMMODITIES 

 

Mr. John Thiessen (Shellbrook): — Mr. Speaker, the Resolution that I am moving this afternoon, 

seconded by Mr. Dahlman is: 

 

That this Assembly, concerned with surpluses in Canadian agriculture products requests the 

Government of Saskatchewan to continue to urge the Federal Government to encourage the sale of 

Canada‘s surplus agricultural commodities to its overseas customers and extend long-term credit to 

underdeveloped countries to enable such countries to purchase food for hungry people. 

 

Whether or not we can bring our minds to the farm surpluses after viewing the steel mill last night, I 

don‘t know. I really want to take this opportunity to thank those who instigated this tour very heartily; 

we enjoyed it. 

 

In studying a little bit on this motion at first I thought this would be an easy one to speak to, but the 

more you look into the statistics of what is happening in the world, the larger you find this field, and in 

looking to see why we have surpluses I found a little article in the ―Reporter‖ of September 17th, 1959. 

This is a long article but it has one little short paragraph in which it says: 

 

―A few figures illustrate the phenomenon; in 1920 the average American farmer worker produced 

enough to supply the needs of 4.1 persons. In 1940 the figure was 10.8 persons, and by 1956 had 

jumped to 20.8 persons. The productivity of the American farmer has thus grown more since 1940 

than it did in the previous 120 years.‖ 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

3 

 

This great growth of farm surpluses is aggravated not only by the American farmer but by the Canadian 

as well. Then looking over the field of what we have for hungry people in the world, I found a little 

article in the January 31st, 1956, in Hansard, where Mr. Coldwell spoke, and he said: 

 

―Sometime ago I jotted down some statements made by the United Nations Secretary General, of the 

technical aid organizations. He is a gentleman who many of us know well in Canada. I refer, of course, 

to Dr. Keenleyside. In ‗Weekend Magazine‘ published by several newspapers in this country, as a 

supplement on Saturdays, in the issue of July 9, 1959, he has some striking things to say. He said, 

‗grim figures illustrate the conditions under which a great part of the earth‘s population lives. Over 

half of the world‘s people are illiterate. Most of the world‘s inhabitants suffer from hunger most of the 

time. Almost two-thirds of the people of the world have an average income of less than $100.00 a 

year, compared with more than $1500.00 in the United States, and this compared fairly favorable at 

that time with what we had in Saskatchewan.‖ 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, leaves most of the people hungry most of the time, all over the world. Then too, this 

resolution was in keeping, we felt, with what the United Nations General Assembly resolution was in 

part – provisions of food surpluses to feed deficient people through the United Nations system. Then, let 

us take a look at what is going on in the world, as far as wheat is concerned, and let us look at the most 

outstanding exporters in the world, Australia, Canada and the United States. I would like to cover, just 

for a minute, the exports that have been made. We find that these three countries have a total exported of 

912.5 million bushels of wheat, oats and other cereal crops in 1959-60. The United States alone shipped 

out 512 million bushels, and out of these 512 million bushels, there was 300 million bushels that they 

sold using foreign currency and loans system to the other countries of the world. 

 

We in Canada exported 279 million bushels, and out of this there was only 13 million bushels that were 

sold on term basis, and we used no foreign currency at all. They were all given away, and some of it sold 

on long term. 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

4 

 

The United States in the last year sold to India, Egypt, Pakistan, Brazil, and Poland, and none of these 

countries has ever before been purchasers of American grain. They made a deal with India where India 

would take in 588 million bushels of surplus grain at 147 million bushels a year. Canada, at the 

meantime, just did a little over 13 million bushels. Then we have also the loss of the free trade areas in 

Europe to worry us. There are three such blocks. The one block is made up of Belgium, France, West 

Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, and The Netherlands. These people are trying to set up an area where they 

can control what they import, and to try and make their land self sufficient insofar as their living is 

concerned. The second block is Austria, Denmark, Norway, Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland, and the 

United Kingdom. All these free trade areas are trying to bring the United Kingdom into their block, 

because these are the people who really do a lot of importing. Then in 1960 they set up a third block, 

and these blocks are detrimental to us, if they can work this free trade system. It is also going to hurt the 

Commonwealth preference system, which was built up in the 1930‘s, in which we were going to deal 

one Commonwealth country with another. To show just how important the United Kingdom market is to 

us, I‘d like to give you a few figures in wheat: 37 % of all the wheat that we exported went to the United 

Kingdom, giving us the first place in England for grain; Aluminum 32% of all the exports; 54% of all 

the barley we sold went to the United Kingdom; Flour – 36%. These are just a few of the items that we 

export mostly to the United Kingdom: tobacco – 80%; flaxseed – 44%; and canned salmon – 77%. 

 

Then we have another thing which is going to hurt us in the long run and that is the inauguration of 

President Kennedy‘s food for peace program. In his message to Congress, he said in part, as follows: 

 

―This administration is expanding its new food for peace program in every possible way. The products 

of our abundance will be more effectively used to relieve hunger and help economic growth in all 

corners of the globe.‖ 

 

―I have asked the director of this program to recommend additional ways in which these surpluses can 

advance the interests of world peace, including the establishment of a world food reserve.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, they have been spending $1.5 billion a year in distributing food surpluses of the States in 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

5 

 

European countries, and the director of this board has recommended that they spent $3.5 billion in 1961, 

and thereafter level off to $3 billion. He has also recommended that these countries who do not want to 

buy with their own currency, who want to borrow money – they will lend it out for forty years, at 2% 

interest. 

 

These, Mr. Speaker, are the things that we are going to have to watch, and which the Federal 

Government is going to have to watch, and do something with. This year, if we read the news and we 

see the T.V. programs, we find that we are doing a fairly good job of selling grain in the last three or 

four months. This, of course, is only a short term thing, and has mostly to do with weather in the 

European countries. The countries in Asia have had a very dry year and their crops are pretty well all 

written off. France, actually is only getting a 40% crop. Italy is importing grain, this year again, about 80 

million bushels they figure they‘ll use. Argentina, and other major countries who have exported some 

grain, this year will not have any to export at all. Russia has made a deal with Canada, in buying some 

grain, China too, has had crop failures in which they need to import large amounts. The total of our 

exports may reach some 325 million bushels this year. However, this is vital to keep in mind: these 

improvements are by no means more than a one shot fear. 

 

The world‘s demand situation is basically still critical as far as Canada is concerned, and the danger 

looms from all sides. One swallow does not make a summer, and one good export season does little to 

dispel the clouds of uncertainty that loom in the distance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we feel that the Federal Government must of necessity go out and take foreign currency; 

they must deal with all these nations, and do something on the lines of what the United States is doing. 

Because we have most of the people hungry most of the time, because we have many farm surpluses in 

this country of ours, I move this motion. 

 

Mr. H. Ray Dahlman (Bengough): — Mr. Speaker, in seconding this resolution, I am of course, aware 

that much has been done in the way of credit and distribution of our farm surpluses, but we feel that not 

enough has been done yet. I think that we can say that we‘re not only in a cost-price squeeze, but we‘re 

also in an export-trade squeeze, between the 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

6 

 

give-away program of the United States, and ourselves trying to maintain stability in the international 

trading of grain. 

 

I think that we have to review some of the things that have been attempted in the past, for instance in 

1945, Sir John Boyd Orr, then the Director General of Food and Agricultural Organization for the 

United Nations, proposed the World Food Bank. It was an ambitious program in which humanitarian 

ideals would have cut across trade restrictions, and created a pool of food for needy nations. But, it 

seems that the plan wasn‘t too well accepted, because most nations backed away from the idea, because 

they did not want to relinquish the control over the distribution of their own surpluses. Only recently 

have the major surplus producing nations shown signs of accepting responsibility for have-not countries. 

 

I think that it goes without saying that we recognize that we have tremendous surpluses of food on one 

hand, and millions of people on the verge of starvation on the other. Our problem is, how can we bring 

these two together? I think most of us, in this country at least, realize that if all surpluses of food could 

be distributed, then the supply would be inadequate, and there is little new arable land to be found 

anywhere in the world, Mr. Speaker. Fertilizers, better seed, irrigation, improved tilling methods, 

chemical control of weeds and insects can increase the average yield per acre. Our ability to produce has 

greatly increased, but food production is barely keeping up with world population growth. At the present 

birth rate the world population of 3 billion will likely be doubled in the year 2000. Science is 

contributing also to the rapid growth of population, and medical knowledge and skills have greatly 

increased life expectancy of people all over the world. Fifty-five per cent of the people live in Asia and 

seven per cent in North America. Years ago, when a country was unable to support its citizens, many of 

them migrated to less populous countries, but because of our restricted immigration laws, this is no 

longer possible. 

 

I think that anyone who believes that all people have a right to live, must then accept the responsibility 

of providing food for those who need it. I think it goes without saying that food producers all over the 

world can‘t justify a condition of starvation, and justify curtailment of production. The farmers of this 

country would like to produce in abundance, and then find the ways of distributing that food. 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

7 

 

I think that in the House of Commons, Prime Minister Diefenbaker, when he turned down the petition 

for deficiency payments, thought that the deficiency payments program might tend to create 

unmanageable surpluses, which we didn‘t agree with, but on another occasion when he spoke to a 

plowing match at Chrysler, Ontario, about a month later he had this to say: if the west is going to win 

the cold war, then we will have to produce and find ways of distributing that surplus of food. I think we 

have control on that, that we have to establish a trading policy that will adequately distribute the food to 

the needy countries, and in our opinion, long term credits must be one of those programs. 

 

I think we also have to establish that there is nothing in the way of our physical handling of grain that 

would restrict us in our distribution of surpluses. We‘ve done much, as I say, in the way of the Colombo 

Plan, where we have as a gift sent $56 million each year, for the past three years. This isn‘t adequate. As 

a matter of fact, some of our old Wheat Pool men in our western agricultural federation, I think it was 

William Cummings, a Saskatchewan Wheat Pool director, who said that it is not too much to ask that the 

Federal Government provide 100 million bushels of wheat to this program. He believed that the people 

of Canada are waiting for some kind of leadership, and that they were ready to support that kind of a 

program. I think that most of us will agree that our farmers and our local businessmen, feel that we 

should be getting rid of the surplus and not carrying it at home. 

 

In 1958, the fall of 1958, I believe it was, when the Wheat Pool field staff made a survey, in preparations 

for their march to Ottawa. In surveying the farmers these are what they felt were the most important 

problems as far as the farm problem was concerned. The first three are cost-price squeeze, high costs, 

low price for farm produce, and limited deliveries of grain. The farmers placed the latter in the fourth 

category, whereas the business men listed the limited deliveries of grain as being the number one 

problem, so I think that we more or less agree on this, that we‘re producing more than we can consume, 

and rather than curtail production, we should continue to produce as much as we can, and then find ways 

of distributing same. 

 

We also will argue, of course, that as long as we have surplus of grain, we‘re also going to be a threat to 

the livestock industry. I think that goes without saying, that a farmer who has to find ready cash to 

manage his own personal farm operations, is going to turn to the 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

8 

 

production of livestock. Well, it would be much worse if we got into a position where we produce more 

livestock than we can consume; we would also ruin that industry. I think that in order to keep the surplus 

of grain moving into the world positions where it will be consumed, we‘re going to have to resort to 

long-term credits, and in doing that we‘re helping the hungry people of the world. A surplus of food is a 

headache to us, and a bellyache to people who are in lack of it. While we are also doing this, Mr. 

Speaker, we‘re building up potential customers. These have-not countries that are now on the verge of 

becoming economically aware of world conditions and the potentials that we have, will be in a position, 

then, to take advantage of any assistance that we can give them, at the present time in long-term credits. 

 

We have the best quality of wheat in the world. If it weren‘t for the quality of wheat that we have, then it 

would be much harder for us to dispose of the same. Our high protein wheat is much needed in countries 

where the climate is warm. I think that we should go along with the thinking of our farm organizations, 

and our federation of agriculture, that we want full production and full consumption. When two-thirds of 

the people are under-fed, I agree with Mr. Charlie Gibbings when he said this: 

 

―There is only one sensible way to get rid of a surplus of food, and that is through the bellies of the 

hungry people.‖ 

 

I think we‘ll go along with that, and anything that we can do, Mr. Speaker, in enhancing our ability to 

supply the needs of these hungry people is our job. I don‘t think that future generations would forgive 

us, if we didn‘t find ways and means of moving this surplus of food to the needy people. 

 

I also want to refer to Mr. Coldwell. I remember, it is a good many years ago now when he made this 

statement. We had a surplus of food at that time in the world, as a matter of fact, we were deliberately 

destroying it to create an artificial scarcity, and he said: 

 

―When you‘re saying the Lord‘s Prayer, ‗Give us today our daily bread‘ I think we should pause and 

add another line, ‗give us the intelligence to use it‘.‖ 

 

I think that is something which we have to consider. Even this might seem sort of an unorthodox way of 

dealing 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

9 

 

in an international way, maybe it‘s not good business ethics, but I don‘t think that we in this country 

would need any moral rebirth, I think that most of us agree now that the international trading of wheat is 

done by Governments rather than by private grain companies, or what have you. I think that it‘s much 

easier now, for us to establish these credits between nations, and with that Mr. Speaker, I don‘t think that 

this motion needs very much clarification, I ask the Members to support it. 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to. 

 

MOTION RE MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF URANIUM CITY 

 

Mr. Allan R. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, the resolution that I am moving this afternoon, 

seconded by Mr. Thatcher is: 

 

―That this Assembly, concerned with the present difficulties of the Municipal Corporation of Uranium 

City, requests the Government of Saskatchewan to give every consideration to providing assistance, 

financial and otherwise, which will improve its sagging economy and enable it to meet its 

commitments at this time.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak to this motion, I would like to acquaint Members of this House, both 

sides of it, with some of the problems facing Uranium City at the present time. Now, I‘m bringing these 

problems to you, not simply because Uranium City is in my Constituency, but rather because I believe 

that the problems affecting this area are also going to affect the province as a whole. 

 

To those of us who live in the southern part of the province, the problems of this northern area are 

sometimes considered far away and inconsequential. But, I can assure the hon. Members that these 

problems, of the Uranium City council, and the people who are trying to solve them, are of major 

proportions to them, and I can further assure the Members of this House, that politics does not enter into 

their request in any way for help in solving these problems. Although there have been some who have 

suggested that if the Constituency of Athabasca had returned a Member on the Government side these 

problems would have been given more consideration, 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

10 

 

I do not believe this, and I hope that no Government would sacrifice a community for one Member in 

the Legislature. Rather, I believe that perhaps this Government is not fully aware of the desperate 

financial circumstances in which the Municipal Corporation of Uranium City finds itself. Therefore, I 

would like to outline some of the major problems existing. 

 

Now I must confess that my knowledge of financing is very limited, but I will try and present the picture 

as it has been presented to me by members of the council and others from that area. While most 

municipalities are faced with problems of expansion, the Municipal Corporation of Uranium City is 

faced with the opposite problem, that of shrinkage. This means that while expenditures remain relatively 

constant, due to a large capital debt, which must be paid off, the incomes are decreasing rather rapidly. 

Due to a falling off of the demand for uranium, mines have closed until at present there are only two left 

– Gunnar Mines Limited and Eldorado Mining and Smelting. The population of the area has decreased 

from 4600 in 1969, to 3200 in 1960. Many businesses have closed down, and of course, this has affected 

the financial situation in many ways. 

 

The assessment is down $1½ million, resulting in a decrease in tax income of $60,000 per year. The 

same mill rate as last year on this decreased assessment will leave a deficit of from $40,000 to $50,000 

this year. On the other hand, people will not pay a higher rate in view of the future. Besides, the per 

capita tax of $112.00 is, I believe, $43.00 higher than the provincial average for towns of the same size. 

At present, both mines are contributing in taxes all that the traffic will bear. Particularly in view of the 

fact that these two mines will be paying $50,000 to $60,000 more in royalties this year to the Provincial 

Government, although production, I understand, will be down. Due to the uncertainty of the future of 

this area, people are letting taxes go unpaid until uncollected tax arrears have reached $105,000 by 

December 31st, 1960. This has increased from $71,000 in 1959. At preset the Municipal Corporation 

has a capital debt of $3 million on a $12 million assessment. Debt charges on this amount $244,000 a 

year or ten mills on the tax rate. 

 

The hospital which was built before incorporation for a million dollars is a good part of this debt. 

Another debt that must be paid off, is a debt of $174,000 which was charged by the Government for 

assets in the town at time of incorporation. Interest at 4% is paid on this, and 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

11 

 

this year the first payment of principal is also due: $24,000. The cost of education is high, due to higher 

building costs, and teachers‘ salaries are approximately $1,000 more than the Saskatchewan average, 

due to their more-or-less isolated position. 

 

The final problem is the fact that recently Gunnar Mines have stated their desire to secede from the 

corporation due to high taxes and so on. The corporation is trying hard to keep them, but it is realized 

that a split in the community would not be good for anyone concerned. Without knowing all the facts on 

both sides, one cannot say which is right or which is wrong, however, I do feel that probably both have 

sufficient reason for their attitude at this time. 

 

Now, those are some of the problems. What are some of the solutions? Well, I wish I could suggest the 

answers to the problems s easily as I was able to set them out. You probably read a few weeks ago, 

where the town of Elliott Lake in Ontario is suffering from similar difficulties. At that time, the Premier 

of the province of Ontario suggested that their Government would possibly cancel all the debts and 

interest payments involved. Now this would be a fine solution, but I doubt very much that 

Saskatchewan, being less wealthy than Ontario, could afford this approach to that problem. Another 

possibility would be the cancellation of all debts occurred before the incorporation of the town. Possibly, 

it may not be very good analogy, but I think a precedent was set with the procedure under the B.N.A. 

Act, when the newly-formed Dominion Government took over the debts of the provinces. Another 

approach would be the scaling down of the capital debt and interest payments over the next few years, 

with a possibility that if conditions didn‘t improve, the Provincial Government would have to make 

grants to cover the interest payments at least. 

 

An increase over the minimum educational grant which has been received by that area would also ease 

the burden of school administration. Since I believe the high tax rate is the main reason for Gunnar‘s 

wish to secede from the corporation, possibly a better financial picture could be worked out with lower 

taxes for them. They would possibly then reconsider. I would like, at this time, to say that the council in 

Uranium City are doing their very best to make ends meet. They are being as efficient in their operation 

as is humanly possible, as shown by the fact that last year they were $13,000 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

12 

 

below their budget from public health due to skimping and efficiency of operation. 

 

Well those are some of the financial problems, which exist, and perhaps a few possible solutions. 

 

Another problem, of course, is the slow-down in the economy due to the uranium markets. We all know 

that we cannot possibly assist Uranium City indefinitely merely by paying out money. We must help the 

area by providing means whereby their economy can be changed from one based on uranium to a much 

wider base of base metals, gold, tourism and so on. Access roads to open up the area for prospectors and 

tourists could be of immediate help, and greater advertising of the tourist potential of the area is greatly 

needed. 

 

Finally, I would like to say that possibly there could be a meeting in the very near future between the 

Government and the Council, Gunnar and Eldorado management, Department of Natural Resources, and 

any other interested people, where a very frank discussion of problems could take place, and a real 

attempt be made to solve them. 

 

Now, in closing, I would like to say that the people of Uranium City and area are not looking for 

handouts, but they would appreciate thoughtful consideration given to their problems in view of the fact 

that the Provincial Government over the years has received more than $5 to $6 million from this area. I 

hope that the Members of this House will pass the motion unanimously, thus showing the people of 

Uranium City, who pioneered this area, and who now, because of their faith in the area, are facing 

financial ruin to remain there, that we recognize the contribution to Saskatchewan that these people have 

made in the past, and our hope for greater glory in the future. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I move the adjournment of the debate. 

 

The debate was, on motion of the Hon. Mr. Brockelbank, adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATE RE NUCLEAR WARFARE (Mrs. Strum) 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

13 

 

Mrs. J.E. Cooper (Regina City): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak on this resolution, I would first like 

to congratulate my colleague, the lady Member from Saskatoon, for the very excellent presentation she 

made when she introduced this resolution, and I agree wholeheartedly with the things she had to say. It 

is not my intention, Mr. Speaker, to repeat many of the things that she said on that occasion; I might 

refer to one or two of them because of the lapse of time, that has occurred between the time the 

resolution was moved and today. 

 

What I would like to do this afternoon is to refer to some of the statements made by the Member for 

Moosomin with which I cannot agree, and to say something more about an organization that was 

mentioned by the mover of the resolution, that is the Voice of Women. 

 

Now, the Member for Moosomin, when he was speaking on this resolution, expressed his very great 

hatred and revulsion of war, and he expressed it very sincerely, and very effectively, and I‘m sure every 

Member of this Legislature would agree with those sentiments. But, however, he went on later and said 

this, and I‘m quoting: 

 

―If we are ever involved in a conflict, I believe in total war.‖ 

 

With this, Mr. Speaker, I cannot agree. I don‘t think that the Member from Moosomin has really 

visualized the full impact of what total war would mean today. Total war in the last war was horrible 

enough, but what would it mean today? It would mean nuclear warfare, biological warfare, germ 

warfare, and we know already cultures exist that could spread germs whereby the death might be a 

slower death than by atomic warfare, but nonetheless horrible. These are things that are involved in total 

war. Total war actually, Mr. Speaker, is total destruction. Atomic war is not war against an enemy; it‘s 

war against civilization itself. It‘s no respecter of persons or geography, or neutrality; it doesn‘t 

distinguish between right causes and wrong causes; the just and the unjust would suffer alike, and total 

war would destroy that very freedom which it seeks to protect, and what is left of the world would 

probably not be fit for human habitation. 

 

Referring to this article by Phillip Wiley, part of which was quoted by the Member from Saskatoon, he 

points out that all-out war with the megaton fission 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

14 

 

now possessed by the United States and Russia, would bring about the eventual slaughter of nine-tenths 

or more of all the people who live in the north temperate zone, and of course, we are in that group. Also 

he shows how futile it is to think that civil defense efforts could possibly cope with this. And in the face 

of all the scientific knowledge we now have, in face of the fact that we can be attacked by bombers, by 

submarines, and by missiles, and satellites, and I would like here to refer to a little article by Drew 

Pearson, from the Los Angeles Mirror: 

 

―One year ago the Russians looped a missile 7,767 miles into the Pacific. Before the warhead plunged 

into the ocean, it ejected an instrument package. Retro rockets slowed down this second capsule then a 

parachute dropped it gently upon the Pacific swells. A Soviet ship was waiting nearby to fish it out. 

The feat required split second timing and left all the experts agog.‖ 

 

So a satellite could carry atomic bombs from the soil of an enemy, right onto our soil. There is no 

protection against a thing like that. To suggest that we have protection against total war is Maginot line 

thinking, and would probably prove just about as effective as the Maginot line did. Not only this, but 

this outdated thinking is really very, very dangerous because it‘s an escape from reality, and it is apt to 

produce an apathy to make people rely on protection that simply wouldn‘t exist. It is apt to make people 

prepared to spend millions of dollars on fallout shelters which probably would be of no value 

whatsoever in case of war. So I say that this kind of thinking is one of the dangers that we face in the 

situation today. 

 

As pointed out before, the people in the civil defense business, and I‘m not criticizing them, Mr. 

Speaker, I think they‘re doing the very best they can under impossible odds, but it has been pointed out, 

and was pointed out by the Member for Saskatoon, that not only would bomb shelters have to be stocked 

for a few weeks, but for months, because there would be not just one H bomb attack, but repeated 

attacks. She also described for you, the tremendous fire storm that would ensue, when everything 

combustible was ignited – huge gas tanks exploded, skyscrapers toppled, gas mains broken, water mains 

broken, and the heat generated by this kind of conflagration would turn a bomb shelter into a veritable 

crematorium. Even for those people who were 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

15 

 

not exposed to so great heat, when they tried to emerge from these shelters – How could they emerge? 

How could they find their way over the radioactive rubble that would be there? What would they eat? 

What would they drink? Where would they go? Then there is the problem, the impossible problem of 

evacuating large cities, because the time would be so short between the warning and the time the attack 

actually took place, and under panicky conditions it would be virtually impossible for successful 

evacuation. Further still, there are the after-effects of the radiation, and the fact that these after-effects 

would continue for such a long time. Rain would bring down increased loads of hot materials and wash 

down the water sheds, concentrate on the farms and the rivers and the reservoirs and it would get into 

the algae on the lakes and the rivers. It would infect the plants and animals and make them impossible 

for use, and it is pointed out also that in heavily bombed areas, they would be a death trap for men to 

decades to come. 

 

:Now, in testimony given before the United States Congress, by military men, it has been pointed out 

that the first serious H bomb assault on Russia would eventually kill most of the Russians, including 

Siberia, about half of the people of Japan, and possibly a high percentage of the people in the 

Philippines, and that a Soviet attack on the United States would be just as devastating. We know that 

even the testing of atomic weapons has a very dangerous effect. I‘m sure all of you will remember the 

case of the Japanese fisherman. When the Americans exploded an atomic bomb in the Pacific, many 

miles away were these Japanese fishermen, but the radioactive fallout struck them, and they were 

terribly burned. Of the twenty-three, the wireless operator died, the others are still in the hospital, and 

one of the fishermen who is lying in the hospital sent this message through a reporter to the world, and 

this was the message he sent: 

 

―Our fate menaces all mankind, and tell the authorities that, and may God grant that they will listen.‖ 

 

And, so Mr. Speaker, I say if ever again the nations engage in war, may God grant that it will not be 

total war. 

 

Then Mr. Speaker, the Member for Moosomin, defended the attack on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, on the 

grounds that it saved lives, and this was a justification. Now, this is the justification, Mr. Speaker, that I 

could never 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

16 

 

accept, in view of the fact that the hundreds of thousands of innocent men and women and children, 

were attacked without warning, without chance of evacuation. The deaths of innocent people were so 

much greater this way. Recently, Mr. Speaker, other facts have come to light surrounding these incidents 

of this bombing at Hiroshima and Nagasaki that I would like to relate to this House. I have been reading 

an extremely interesting and a very well-documented book by Dr. Robert Jung, who is an historian, and 

a man who writes widely on scientific matters, and in his book he gives a description of what happened 

in connection with the bomb, and he states that even from the viewpoint of ending the war quickly, or 

saving lives, this attack was completely unnecessary. He states that Japan was ready for capitulation, and 

I want to read just a very small bit of what he had to say. He said: 

 

―The intelligence services of both army and navy of the United States, were in fact at this date already 

convinced that the final downfall of Japan could only be a question of a few more weeks.‖ 

 

Alfred MacCormick, military intelligence director in the Pacific theater war, recollects, and this is a 

quote: 

 

―We had such complete control over the air of Japan that we knew when and from what port every 

ship was put to ea. The Japanese no longer had enough food in stock, and their fuel reserves were 

practically exhausted. We had begun a secret process in mining all their harbours, which steadily 

isolated them from the rest of the world. If we had brought this operation to the logical conclusion, the 

destruction of Japanese cities with incendiary and other bombs would have been quite unnecessary. 

But General Worthington declared at Washington that this blockading action was a cowardly 

proceeding, unworthy of the air force, and it was discontinued.‖ 

 

And then he goes on to say: 

 

―Not only could the blockade have succeeded, but there was an even better chance at that time, for 

clever diplomacy, because Japan was ripe for capitulation.‖ 

 

And he points out that the Japanese Emperor had already sent an emissary, sometime before, to 

Moscow, Russia, to mediate, asking Russia to mediate with the United 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

17 

 

States for the end of the war. But, that Russia wasn‘t anxious for the war to end so early, because it had 

been agreed at Yalta in the previous February that Russia was to enter the war and they wanted to be on 

Japanese soil when the war ended so they could share whatever spoils there were, or share in any 

division of power there might be. So instead of transmitting the messages as they should have been 

doing, they were stalling in every possible way, finding excuses not to meet the ambassador and they 

kept on stalling. But Washington knew what was going on, they knew about these manoeuvers because 

they had decoded a secret Japanese code, and had been reading ever since the middle of July, the urgent 

instructions from the Prime Minister Tojo, by radio to Moscow, which read: 

 

―Japan is defeated, we must face the fact, and act accordingly.‖ 

 

Truman, instead of exploiting these indications of Japanese weakness, issued a proclamation at Potsdam 

which made it more difficult for the Japanese to capitulate without losing face, and also the American 

historian Butow says, and he has made a meticulous study of all the incidents surrounding this period of 

time, he says that he believes that the war could have been brought to an end by discreet diplomatic 

channels. But, he writes this way: Had the allies given the Prince a week of grace, to obtain his 

Government‘s support for acceptance of the proposals, war might have ended the latter part of July or 

the first part of August without Soviet participation.‖ But he adds that the possible reason the American 

Government remained blind was the knowledge that it possessed the bomb, and instead of patiently 

waiting to undo the knot, it appeared more convenient to cut with a slash or two of their shining new 

weapon. 

 

Then the story goes on, and I‘m not going to take the time of the House to go much further with it, but it 

tells of the struggle and the arguments between the scientists and the military men, as to how to use the 

bomb and whether to use the bomb, and under what conditions the bomb should be used. But, again it 

tells how preparations had been made sometime before, and certain cities and it names the cities, had 

been left free of other kinds of attack because if they were going to be attacked, they were going to be 

attacked by the atomic bomb. Research would be easier if you could compare the effects of this type of 

bomb with others, if it was a previously unbombed area. And, in conclusion he says this: 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

18 

 

―The sum of a thousand individual acts and blunders eventually caused an act of collective 

abandonment of conscience, horrifying in magnitude.‖ 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are certain conventions even in war, such as the Geneva Convention, in which 

we set up standards of savagery beyond which we will not go, and I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this act 

broke the spirit of these conventions, and showed supreme contempt for human life. It was the uttermost 

in violence, and I think when the history of this period is written, it will be one of the blackest pages in 

our history, and one that we will all certainly wish, Mr. Speaker, that we could erase. 

 

Now then, the Member for Moosomin went on to say this. He said that he insisted that the Government 

of Canada spend whatever money necessary to defend Canada‘s way of life, and to equip the armed 

forces with the most modern weapons available, and that, of course, includes atomic weapons I presume. 

Now then, why should Canada and Canadian forces be equipped with atomic weapons? We know that 

there are enough atomic weapons stockpiled today to end our civilization if they were used. And, then I 

would like to pose this question. Would Canadians having atomic weapons, or having atomic weapon 

bases on our soil, would this really protect us, or in the long run would it assist our allies? Now, situated 

as we are between two giant atomic powers, much greater atomic powers than we would ever be, I 

cannot believe that having atomic weapons ourselves would either protect our forces or our people, or 

deter enemy attacks. In fact, having atomic bases on our soil, would most assuredly invite atomic attacks 

on our soil. What is more, every additional nation that accepts these weapons, enlarges the chances of 

accidental war, and if Canada is to have atomic weapons, why not other countries, India, Africa, 

Norway, Sweden. Now we know that there are eleven additional countries that are capable economically 

and technically of producing and of having a successful nuclear war program. These include Belgium, 

China, Canada, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, West Germany, India, Italy, Japan, and Sweden. Now 

then, if all these other nations had atomic power, certainly it would give these smaller nations the power 

of waging war all out of proportion with their true industrial power. For instance Cuba could threaten the 

United States, or Turkey could threaten Russia, and of course, accidental war which is not a figment of 

the imagination but a great possibility would be a greater possibility. 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

19 

 

Now, we may not think that accidental war could occur, but there are many ways in which it could 

occur, and apparently there are many times when it almost did occur. I would like to quote a little bit of 

a story that was published first in the ―Manchester Guardian‖ and then in Omaha, and in the ―New York 

Times,‖ and it reads this way. This is the story as written in the ―Manchester Guardian:‖ 

 

―Do you know that the world nearly ended last week? The early warning radar system at Thule picked 

up signals which were analyzed by computers as the flight of missiles coming over the horizon from 

Russia, and heading in the direction of America. The famous red telephone rang at Strategic Air 

Command Headquarters in Nebraska. All over the world S.A.C. crews stood in their planes. Someone 

in Nebraska signalled for confirmation. There was no answer. Thule must have already been hit.‖ 

 

What restrained the free world from launching its retaliation weapons during this next half hour, I do not 

know, unless there was an old fashioned deterrent such as incredulity and funk. Whatever it was, it came 

in handy, for it turned out that Thule had picked up not a squadron of rockets, but a large earth satellite, 

which the intelligence had apparently failed to inform them about and by the time this little error was 

discovered, they were prevented from passing on the information because of the interference of an 

iceberg. 

 

Now, this matter was discussed in the House of Commons, and there was some disagreement and some 

confusion, as to what actually did happen. But this is just one small example of how war by accident 

could be provoked. It could be provoked by mechanical failure, and machines are not perfect, or by 

human failure, and human beings are not perfect. It could be by radar signals misinterpreted, by 

misreading orders, code orders from one country or another, or by spur-of-the-moment decisions on the 

part of the military commander, who thought they were threatened, and acted without getting sufficient 

confirmation from higher quarters. 

 

Again, I say that every country that has nuclear weapons, adds to the great danger. If all the small 

nations such as I mentioned were to have nuclear warheads, and to be nuclear nations, war, I believe, 

would be almost inevitable, and it would complicate the very difficult problem of reducing armament; it 

would complicate the 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

20 

 

questions of inspections; and it would make it much more difficult to abolish atomic weapons, because 

that many more countries would have vested interests in their retaining such weapons. I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, Canada, perhaps more than any other country, is in a position to give moral leadership in this 

line, because we are a very highly respected nation in the councils of the world, we have no territorial 

ambitions, no aggressive intent, and the other countries of the world know this, and would believe it 

more so if we were to renounce our atomic weapons. We are in a position to give great leadership to the 

world, leadership that is so badly needed at this present time. It is because of all these worries, Mr. 

Speaker, and because of the terrible concern that women all across this country are feeling, and because 

women in particular, as mothers who are concerned about families, concerned about our children, and 

concerned about little children even yet unborn, it is because of this anxiety that the Voice of Women, 

an organization that was formed to try and see if there is any part that we, as a group, could take in 

promoting the peace and getting rid of the threat of nuclear war. 

 

I would like to say a word about how this organization began. Its growth has been almost spontaneous. It 

was started actually by a group of Toronto women. Lotta Dempsey, who is a news commentator, and an 

editorial writer with the ―Toronto Star‖, wrote an article in May 1960, after the collapse of the summit 

conference in Paris, in which she urged collective action by the women against the threat of 

thermo-nuclear war. About this time, a mass meeting was to be held in Toronto, with Hon. Phillip Noel 

Baker, Nobel prize winner, as the speaker. This group of women, in response to the request by Lotta 

Dempsey, prepared a plan of action to mobilize women, and went to this meeting and were given 

permission to present their suggestions at that time. The response was so very enthusiastic that they went 

ahead, and they presented a brief to the various leaders of government, to all political parties, and this by 

the way is a non-partisan organization. Again, they got the finest response, and I would like to read to 

you the statements of the leaders of the political parties, about this organization, Voice of Women. This 

first one is from the Hon. Howard Green, he says: 

 

―The whole future of civilization is at stake. There is a very strong public opinion stirring against 

tensions in the world, and against the 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

21 

 

growth of nuclear weapons. It needs the Voice, and the Government welcomes the general public 

taking responsibility to speak out in these matters.‖ 

 

And then from the Hon. Lester Pearson: 

 

―There has never been a problem of this magnitude in the history of mankind. I can think of nothing 

more important than the organizing and stimulating of public opinion in the world toward the end of 

removing these tensions and fears, and stressing the peace. And in that work, women, who are 

sometimes forgotten, have a great role to play.‖ 

 

And from Mr. Hazen Argue: 

 

―To prepare to fight a nuclear war is an act of madness, for to do this is to prepare for suicide. Canada 

must instead devote her energy to preventing war by lessening the tension in the world that would lead 

to war, and the Voice of Women can help mightily in the cause of peace.‖ 

 

And, we also have a statement from Mrs. Lester Pearson: 

 

―I‘m indeed interested in the Voice of Women. I think it is the most imaginative and worthwhile 

project. If we, the women of the west, could succeed in reaching the women on the other side of the 

curtain, that is Russia and China, with no political overtones, but only as mothers of young children 

whose lives and well being are at stake under this terrible threat of atomic fallout, not to mention 

bombs, I think we could start a chain reaction toward peace instead of war, and it‘s well worth the try. 

I am sure many mothers and grandmothers in Canada feel helpless and horror struck under the terrible 

threat that hangs over us, and would be anxious and enthusiastic to do what they could to stop it. I 

would be honoured and pleased to be an honorary sponsor of the Voice of Women, and I would like to 

do what I can to help. Yours most sincerely, Marion Pearson.‖ 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

22 

 

The organization has now been set up. Its honorary sponsors, Mr. Speaker, are Mrs. Hazen Argue, 

Senator Muriel Ferguson, Mrs. Egmont Frankel. Senator Nancy Hodges, Senator Elsie Inman, Senator 

Olive Irvine, Senator Marianna Jodoil, Mrs. Lester B. Pearson, and Mrs. Harry S. Quart. Its active 

officers include, and I won‘t read them all, Mrs. W.D. Tucker, who is the president and is a 

representative to United Nations on UNESCO, and a university lecturer at the University of Toronto. 

Mrs. Fred Davis, whom you know. Mrs. G.N. Swanston, Miss Muriel Jacobson, Mrs. Pierre Berton, Dr. 

Marguerite Bailey, Miss June Callwood, Miss Toby Robins, and others. 

 

Now this organization hopes to work through existing organizations, women‘s organizations, and also to 

form small groups throughout communities all across Canada, and this is already being done. They have 

prepared a very excellent bibliography of literature, books and pamphlets on foreign affairs, and on 

affairs of nuclear war. They are hoping to make studies, and they intend to try and institute large scale 

correspondence between women of various countries, and we hope with women in the iron curtain 

countries, talking about things of mutual interest, not of political things that divide. They hope to reach 

beyond the border of Canada, as I say, into all parts of the world and spark this great movement. 

 

Now, this organization has had excellent support from the radio and the television and the press, and it 

has tried not to speak too much on political matters, but it‘s been asked where it stands on certain 

matters, and it has taken a definite stand on two or three which I‘ll just mention. On disarmament they 

say, ―We would support universal controlled disarmament‖ and here, I would say that universal 

controlled disarmament is unrealistic, and impossible as long as China, a nation of 650 million people, 

remains outside of the United Nations. 

 

Then on the question of nuclear arms for Canada, this is the statement: 

 

―While recognizing the psychological power of a nuclear deterrent, we feel that the spread of nuclear 

weapons to countries other than those already involved, increases the possibility of war breaking out 

and compounds the problem of disarmament. We feel that a large group of non-nuclear nations in the 

United Nations can bring great influence to bear upon the nuclear nations in disarmament 

negotiations.‖ 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

23 

 

For this reason, on July 28th, the following telegram was sent to Mr. Howard Green, Mr. Lester B. 

Pearson, and Mr. Hazen Argue, by the central committee of Voice of Women. It says: 

 

―Voice of Women unanimously declare themselves opposed to nuclear war, therefore, we suggest any 

proposals that will keep Canada, free from nuclear involvement, thereby strengthening Canada‘s 

leadership among the non-nuclear powers, is right.‖ 

 

This view is supported by a large number of members at this time, and we wrote letters to Ottawa on the 

subject. 

 

Commenting on their statement, I have a little press clipping, an article from the Quebec 

―Chronicle-Telegram,‖ and it says, ―Women call out for peace.‖ I would like to read this article; it‘s 

short: 

 

―Last week a small news item announced the creation of an organization known as Voice of Women. 

The movement was launched in Toronto, and it hopes to become international with its aim of banning 

nuclear weapons and war in general. At the time we did not pay too much attention to it, for such 

movements are not new. The Voice of Women, however, would appear to be much more articulate 

than other organizations, which have set forth similar aims. This week we have received a copy of a 

letter which apparently is being sent to every Canadian newspaper. Its purpose is to arouse Canadian 

public opinion against any effort to equip Canadian forces with nuclear arms. The spread of nuclear 

arms statistically increases the chances of nuclear war, the communication states. If Canada joins the 

nuclear club, why not India, why not Norway, why not Denmark, Sweden, why not Africa? In the past 

we have frequently written in the same vein, so that we have in effect endorsed and advanced the 

efforts of the Voice of Women, but we are not alone. External Affairs Minister Green, Opposition 

Leader Pearson, and CCF Leader Hazen Argue have all encouraged the Voice of Women in its effort 

to arouse public sentiment against nuclear weapons. Certainly if the world is to have peace, those who 

feel strongly enough about it, must speak with as much determination as those who speak to promote 

war and armament. The cause of peace may well be lost by simply 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

24 

 

doing nothing. It has happened time and again in the pat. We have witnessed movements such as this, 

tumble before pressures which have been often used in disguise as patriotism. Yet such movements do 

express the urgent desire on the part of the people, we believe the majority, only those who stand to 

gain something out war, are constantly rattling the sabre. If for no other reason, than it represents a 

spirit across the nation, that is large and inarticulate, the Voice of Women challenges Canada to 

renounce nuclear weapons. It is a challenge that Canada should accept, for never before has the world 

needed sane leadership as it needs it today. With nuclear weapons, Canada is part of the mad mob; 

without them, this country can lead the world through the torturous maze to peace.‖ 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don‘t know how effective the Voice of Women will be. It depends on how it 

catches the imagination of women, and how large a number of women can be mobilized to join this 

organization, and whether or not it can reach out into other countries. But, I do say this, Mr. Speaker, if 

it keeps the singleness of purpose, and keeps the ideas and the ideals which it is starting out with, if it 

refuses to yield to the kind of pressures that will be used against it, if it becomes a really potent force, if 

it can do these things, then its possibilities are almost unlimited, and I for one, Mr. Speaker, am willing 

to give it a try, and help it in every way I possibly can. 

 

In conclusion, I would just like to refer once more to a little bit of Phillip Wiley‘s article, because I think 

it sums up my philosophy, and the hopes and the aspirations of the Voice of Women better than I could 

possibly do. At the conclusion of his article that appeared in the ―Rotarian‖ he says this: 

 

―The difference between free men and communist-dominated people will have to be fought out in 

non-military ways. The reds will use every stratagem of bluff, or rocket rattling, of subversion of other 

people, of dishonest propaganda, of economic conquests to win the world to communism. The free 

world has liberty to offer, and equality if it will. If the free nations can perform an honourable and 

peaceful winning over by education, by loans, by private investment, by personal contact, of the 

uncommitted 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

25 

 

people, they can eventually destroy the red chance to create a red world. But, if free men fail the 

world, we shall eventually lose our own liberty, and become slaves too. That, not H-war survival, is 

the challenge of the future. And it‘s my belief that free men will eventually understand this too, and 

meet its challenge. But, as long as we continue to think mistakenly that we can engage in and win an 

all-out war, we shall fail to fight properly the only real war in which we and our children and possibly 

theirs will be embattled, the so-called war for men‘s minds. Such is the real battle which the mainland 

China, and a dozen other whole nations already lost. We can fight back effectively only by such means 

as free men use, by education, by economic aid, by personal contact, and by practicing that equality 

which currently uncommitted people, whom we may win to our side, which currently they see we do 

not now practice. Perhaps, when we can see no martial victory is possible, perhaps then we shall make 

so mighty a free and peaceful world, as to gain back for the world, the peace and freedom it yearns to 

own. That, not how to take quivering shelter when bombs fall, this is the battle that will rage, whether 

free men fight back or not, till freedom is gone or till freedom is won.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the resolution. 

 

Mr. Ian H. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak to the motion of the hon. 

Member from Saskatoon and I think that I will take her motion clause by clause. 

 

After listening to the lady Member from Regina, I couldn‘t help but sit here and think that there would 

be many a Communist leader, if he should hear this talk of pacifism, smile to himself and realize that the 

west would certainly be weakened should we all follow that line of thinking. 

 

First, her resolution says reduce the defence budget substantially, the savings to be used by 

under-developed countries. Mr. Speaker, who then, may I ask will defend Canada‘s boundaries? Some 

people in Canada 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

26 

 

have the idea that our defence is the responsibility of the United States. Now, again I ask, where is our 

national pride? Canadians have the duty to defend Canada‘s boundaries and they have the further duty to 

pay for the equipment to defend this country. We know that this equipment goes out of date. Every piece 

of equipment used in World War II was very soon obsolete, but this can‘t be helped and we must be 

prepared at all times. We can‘t afford to sit back and find ourselves faced with the possibility of another 

war, and have our soldiers go out to the front with no arms whatsoever, as they did prior to World War 

II. The future will have to look after itself as far as defence spending is concerned, but we must be 

prepared at all times. Each year new devices are developed and we must, insofar as we can, keep abreast 

of the times. 

 

I can point to the Russo-Finnish War of some twenty years ago, and each Finn alive today must look 

back with pride to the soldiers that were sent out to defend that small country against the big Russian 

bear. They had very poor equipment and limited resources behind them, and yet they fought and held the 

Russian bear at bay. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it‘s not the size of the dog in the fight that counts, but the size of the fight in the dog. 

Canada must have a program of national defence, and while we can criticize the program, I can say that 

most of us here right now are not even remotely qualified to pronounce on these decisions of the experts. 

I might say, let‘s leave it to the military to decide what weapons we should have and when we should 

have them. I agree that helping out under-developed countries is a responsibility which all the wealthy 

nations have, but for goodness‘ sake, not at the expense of our defence budget. 

 

Refusal of all nuclear weapons on Canadian soil and to Canadian forces everywhere, is ridiculous, to say 

the least. It‘s like sending troops in with bows and arrows, if they don‘t have up-to-date equipment. 

 

Now, I have done some reading on nuclear weapons and weapons of destruction, and there are two types 

of nuclear striking power which must be considered. One is the total destruction bomb of the megaton 

variety, such as the type which was detonated over Japan, and on the various testing grounds of the 

world. These are very definitely weapons of total destruction. A war 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

27 

 

with such vicious tools would certainly mean the destruction of this earth. Canada is situated between 

two giants of world power today, and any missile war between them would certainly involve Canada. 

We must arm our forces at home and abroad, with the best equipment available. Now, there are other 

atomic weapons of atomic variety, such as the kiloton weapons, and from what I‘ve read, these weapons 

can be developed and tested underground. They are a low power weapon, but in the event of war, if we 

do not have these weapons, we will be caught flat-footed. 

 

Who knows how far Russia has gone with these developments? One thing we do know is that Russia 

cannot be trusted, and that agreements signed by that government are not worth the paper they are 

written on. What Mr. Khrushchev does or says today doesn‘t mean a thing tomorrow. While Russia 

makes overtures and peace moves, let them prove to us that they are sincere with their disarmament 

talks. There is no doubt that Russia has a vast stock of arms, nuclear and otherwise. I‘d say to Russia, if 

you‘re sincere with these peace proposals, open up your doors and let us have a look, and until this is 

done in good faith, no pressure should be brought to bear on the United Nations for disbanding nuclear 

arms. 

 

The Communists have yet to show us that good faith: all you have to do is to ask the Hungarians. The 

only good faith that Russia knows is might, power, and force. Russia understands this. They are not so 

prone to understand peace talks in the way we know it. 

 

Now, as for the recognition of Red China by the United Nations, it has yet to be proven that this will 

assist world peace. Remember, the Communists of China are no more honourable than the Communists 

of Russia. I heard Chinese delegates get up at our National Convention in Ottawa, and they denounced 

the very idea that we should be prime movers in sponsoring admission of Communist China to the 

United Nations. They claimed that the Communist red regime did not represent the Chinese people. 

They control them; they don‘t represent them. The admission of Red China to the United Nations would 

only serve to give the Red Chinese more prestige, and when the smaller countries of the Far East take a 

look at that, they will simply look at the western world and feel that they have certainly been let down. 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

28 

 

Again, I say, neither China nor Russia have demonstrated their willingness to show the world their 

sincerity at attempting true world peace. They talk about peaceful co-existence. The average person in 

this country thinks that when Mr. ‗K‘ says that he‘s in favour of peaceful co-existence, that it means that 

he‘s ready to settle for the status quo and live in genuine peace and friendship with the rest of the world. 

The Moscow conference has made it quite clear that while Mr. Khrushchev is eager to avoid nuclear war 

which might reduce the Soviet Union to ruins, he and his Communist pals haven‘t any intention of 

abandoning the idea of world domination. He spelled out that the business of co-existence does not 

mean the rejection of class warfare. On the contrary, it‘s a form of class warfare between socialism and 

capitalism. Indeed, the peaceful co-existence helps class struggle by producing favourable opportunities 

for development of class warfare in the capitalist countries and the national liberation movement among 

peoples of colonial and dependent countries. 

 

This peaceful co-existence is really the old Communist anti-imperialism under a new name. Very few 

people will buy Communism when they understand it. In no case has the Communist government 

attained power through popular support, save the government of Kerala, and that was very short-lived. 

In every other case, power was seized through infiltration of labour and by gaining control of the army. 

Then they stay in control by fear and the menace of the secret police. The very essence of success lies in 

deception and complete ruthlessness. 

 

I would say when the Members rise to vote on this motion, that they exercise a free vote, rather than 

vote on party lines. I would suggest that some Members opposite voted against admitting West Germany 

to NATO a few years back, and if they should support the idea of admitting China and recognizing Red 

China, we would get an idea of just where their sentiments lie. There is one other factor which we in 

Canada sometimes forget, and that is the offending of the United States. In recognizing Red China and 

getting so chummy with the Communists, we run a very great risk of offending that big, friendly brother 

across to the south of us. After all, whether we like it or not, we depend on the United States in a great 

many ways, economic, geographic, physical, cultural, and we just simply cannot afford to risk offending 

the United States by aligning ourselves with the peace fronts and the Chinese Communists. We can‘t be 

too ready as Canadians to open our arms to the red side of the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can‘t support this motion. 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

29 

 

Mr. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, the few of those who have spoken on this motion 

have given me the opportunity to sort of look back at the few months that I spent in hospital while I was 

overseas, and I feel that some of the experience that I have gained at that particular time is of some 

importance in the respect of this motion. 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, I would like to answer what was said by the lady Member for Regina, in her 

description of the horrors of war. I think it is all the more reason I believe that it would be utmost folly 

to be without the deterrent equipment just as it was, for our preparation say of gas during the war against 

Germany. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that if Russia were ever to think that we did not have the weapons to 

defend ourselves or have weapons for reprisal I am sure that we would be dominated by the Communists 

today. That has been quite clear and expressed on many, many occasions by Mr. K. himself, on the ideas 

of dominating the world through the Communist way of life. 

 

There are a few little things I would like to mention in this respect, Mr. Speaker, and I as a veteran feel 

that having read the ―Legionary,‖ there were several articles that had appeared in it which I feel should 

be brought up to the House, and I would recommend many Members of the House to read it. One of the 

articles – I won‘t read all of it, Mr. Speaker, I‘ll just refer to part of the article and I would suggest that 

every Member of the House do read them. In order to impress upon the House some of the points that I 

would like to bring out, I would like, with your permission, Mr. Speaker, to read the odd paragraph. I am 

quoting from the ―Legionary‖ of June 1959, and it‘s an article by Mr. Wilson Woodside. He is well 

known. Mr. Wilson Woodside is a National Director of the United Nations Association of Canada, and a 

former associate editor of ―Saturday Night.‖ Here is a point that I would like to mention from his article, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

―Suddenly a lot of talk of neutrality has sprung up in Canada. It isn‘t really a new sentiment, we‘ve 

had it before the war. It‘s been called the policy of non-commitment. Twice in the year following the 

war MacKenzie King told me with all emphasis in private conversation that a man could make no 

greater mistake than to commit himself too clearly in advance, yet 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

30 

 

as the cold war set in, I saw his Minister for External Affairs, Louis St. Laurent, rise in the United 

Nations Assembly to propose that the Atlantic Nations commit themselves to a common defence 

policy, which evolved into NATO. Ever since then our policy like that of the U.S.A., has been to 

commit ourselves so clearly in advance that the Soviet leaders could not fool themselves, as the 

Germans twice did, and think that they have to get away with Europe without our doing anything 

about it. We keep an air division and an army brigade group in Europe as a physical sign that we are 

committed. It is notable that there never has been any real opposition to the participation in NATO, 

whether in parliament in the press or among the public. That is because it is natural for Canada. It 

gives us an ideal balance between Britain, France and the U.S.A.‖ 

 

I felt, Mr. Speaker, that it was rather important to bring this point up. Another one, again from Mr. 

Woodside, this is March 1960, titled: ―Why the Russians are Ready to Talk.‖ Let‘s read it and let‘s 

understand it before we go too far. Then I take the ―Legionary‖ of July 1960, where they mention total 

preparedness at their National Convention. We must be prepared, we must be prepared as we prepare 

ourselves against diseases and such. Now, I would like to read another paragraph from the ―Legionary‖ 

of February, 1960. 

 

―An enemy will only fear nuclear retaliation if he is certain that his opponent will unhesitatingly strike 

back, and if he is convinced that enough of the opposite side‘s retaliatory force will in fact, survive an 

all-out nuclear strike to cause vital damage to his homeland. For it must be remembered that the power 

to deter is proportionate to the power to strike at any second, in such force as to inflict upon the 

aggressor, damage beyond a scale which he may be prepared to accept.‖ 

 

This is one point that was in this article. Another article that I would suggest, and I am not going to read 

it, Mr. Speaker, because it is quite lengthy, appeared by Mr. Waldren in the ―Western Producer,‖ March 

9, 1961. It‘s one that should be read well. One that we should take note of here. 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

31 

 

―The rise of Hitler during the 30‘s provided a striking example of what we mean. During that period of 

England there were men and women, a minority it is true, but a substantial number nonetheless, who 

saw with remarkable clarity, what was brewing.‖ 

 

and he goes on and on. 

 

―The people of Britain, in their unshakable complacency would not listen. They called the people and 

were notifying the people to be prepared.‖ 

 

―The masses of the world to be prepared – they were being called as war mongers, for the fact of 

preparedness.‖ 

 

―They preferred to believe those who told them that it couldn‘t happen, but it did happen.‖ 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that as we protect ourselves against diseases, I think we should protect ourselves 

against man-made aggressors, be they nuclear or otherwise. I think if we protect ourselves against the 

inevitable snow, the rain, and the cold, we should protect ourselves in war. I fully realize, Mr. Speaker, 

only too well the follies of war, but I still personally see the need of armaments for defence, defence, 

Mr. Speaker, both internal and external. 

 

I would like to ask many Members of the House, do you know what it means to try to defend yourselves 

when you haven‘t sufficient arms or weapons to do so? I believe, Mr. Speaker, that fire should be fought 

with fire. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — . . . Fire storms. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — You had better pass that advice on to the Regina Fire Department. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I have seen, Mr. Speaker, on the shores of England, the British attempting to defend 

themselves, trying to deceive the enemy with telephone poles to appear as guns to deceive the enemy 

from aerial photography, trying to show them that they were defending themselves. I have seen the 

farmers of Britain, Mr. Speaker, on the shores of England 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

32 

 

with pitchforks and axes, prepared to defend themselves, because they listened to people who said that 

they shouldn‘t defend themselves. It was too late Mr. Speaker, quite often. 

 

I‘ve seen, Mr. Speaker, the supreme sacrifice by the few to defend the many; of the air force in England 

trying to defend themselves, a handful against the mighty and the big. Sometimes I wonder what despair 

and what hope, were in the hearts of many of the mothers in England, who could see the enemy up there 

and nothing to defend themselves with. I‘ve seen despair in the eyes of many women and many children, 

who had lost practically all hope. I have also seen tears in the eyes of mothers who have lost their loved 

ones. But at least they had one hope of probably meeting in the life thereafter. It‘s one act of hope, and I 

sometimes wonder which is the worst to take. I too would agree most whole heartedly Mr. Speaker, in a 

reduction of defence, but with the wolf at our back door dare we? That wolf is just knocking at our back 

door. Inadequate defence, Mr. Speaker, oftentimes reminds me of a little fairy tale of the three little pigs. 

One built the house of straw, and what happened? The big bad wolf came in and ate him. Then the next 

one built one of wood, and what happened? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — They used bricks. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Yes bricks. Well today we are out of the houses of bricks, we must have better houses. 

We must be prepared. 

 

I too, Mr. Speaker, would like to help the under-developed countries to have an opportunity as a nation 

to practice our Christian virtues of charity. I sometimes ask myself, Mr. Speaker, that defenceless we 

would have nothing. We could not assist our under-developed countries if we ceased to exist. 

 

I would like to deal with Clause (b) of the motion, Mr. Speaker, refusal of all nuclear weapons on 

Canadian soil and to Canadians anywhere. As I explained a few moments ago on some of the articles 

that I have read, that we would unhesitatingly strike back if the enemy was convinced that there was 

enough on the opposite sides to retaliate. Not just one, but enough. I‘ve been in the field of battle, Mr. 

Speaker, where we didn‘t have sufficient weapons; where we didn‘t have sufficient ammunition at 

times. I‘ve seen the look of despair of some of the people who were in uniform, and many Members 

across have seen the same thing. It‘s 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

33 

 

a terrible situation to find yourself when you have the job to do to defend something, and you haven‘t 

got the equipment or the necessary tools for defence. Our NATO allies, Mr. Speaker, all those who have 

seen this overwhelming force of an enemy ravage their country, have seen the need, have asked for the 

need for a permanent deterrent force to defend their lands, their freedom, our lands and our freedom. 

They too have asked for something to eat and something to drink and it wasn‘t there. Are we as 

Canadians, Mr. Speaker, and I‘m speaking of my personal opinion, are we as Canadians going to welsh 

on our promise to them our NATO allies? Are we going to welch on our approach or assure them of 

some form of freedom? 

 

Clause (c) of the motion, Mr. Speaker, I would whole heartedly probably support. Honest and sincere 

attempts are being made today by our nation, our country, only it is unfortunate that evil forces are not 

prepared to let us carry out these attempts of disarmaments. I believe that an honest and sincere attempt 

is being made on the part of all parties concerned, and a willingness to see that a plan is carried out and 

is fool-proof. But I say that it shows distrust on the part of the Communists to let the people of the 

world, or independent commissions thoroughly assure the world that disarmament is taking place. They 

have denied the right of inspection, and the only arguments they have given, Mr. Speaker, is that it could 

be used to spy within the country. If there is disarmament there would be no need of spying. What a 

weak argument. This nation today is the cause that we are not disarming and carrying out our true 

Christian principles of charity. These nations, Mr. Speaker, who parade to be the friends of the 

underdogs, would just as soon stab you in the back the moment your defence is down, through their fifth 

column which is established throughout the world. Other totalitarian governments have taken this same 

stand in the past by organizing well organized fifth column elements. We have from the iron curtain, Mr. 

Speaker, the very same organizations throughout this world. Sometimes I wonder, the bullies are only 

waiting for our moment of weakness to strike. We must never show our weakness. As I said a moment 

ago, Mr. Speaker, having spent eight months in the hospital and being wounded, I‘ve had a tremendous 

amount of time to think. I am personally aware, Mr. Speaker, of the need of having peace on earth, but 

in order to have it we must have deterrents until such time as we all learn to live with our fellow men, 

not only here but throughout the world. 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

34 

 

I will probably be accused of being a war-monger, but we cannot carry on our rights as Christian people 

under the present threats. If there is no defence, Mr. Speaker, we are doomed by the force in the hands of 

unscrupulous totalitarian groups. For that reason, Mr. Speaker, you will notice that in clause (b) 

recognition to the Government of Communist China. I personally at the moment do not believe that we 

should recognize Communist China, because they have been quite open in their determination to go out 

and impress upon the world by force their way of thinking. Until such time as they are prepared to do it 

in a democratic way, then I‘m not prepared to talk to them. Consequently with some of the clauses in 

this motion that I favour and some that I don‘t, I cannot in my personal belief go ahead and support such 

a motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I certainly didn‘t intend to participate in 

this debate at this particular time, but I do want, at this moment at least, to make some reply to the 

observations made by the hon. Member from Gravelbourg, and the hon. Member for Souris-Estevan. 

 

The last statement made by the hon. Member for Gravelbourg was to the effect that we as Christian 

people in order to defend our Christian way of life, must be well armed to do so. I assume that would be 

accomplished by use of military weapons to be successful in this kind of defence. What could be further 

from the truth? What could be further from the principles laid down by Christ himself? Did the Apostles 

run around and arm themselves for defence against their adversaries? No they didn‘t, they were 

promoting a philosophy of human brotherhood and love as a means of survival, not only individually but 

for mankind as a whole. This has been the struggle throughout the centuries ever since the dawn of 

human history as far as I can see. This I want to suggest to this House is the road to human survival, I 

don‘t care to pursue this today. This I think is an important debate and I hope to adjourn it, but before 

doing so I would like to suggest to this House, Mr. Speaker, that there are other alternative methods of 

defence against what we term Communism, and that of all the methods of defence that we could employ 

that would spell failure, it is in the field of military weapons, Mr. Speaker. 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

35 

 

I feel very keenly about this, Mr. Speaker, particularly in view of the fact that in the next conflict there 

will be no survival for anyone. Everyone acknowledges that. And why people persist in these old 

outdated arguments against the principle of disarmament in light of modern circumstances; I have great 

difficulty in understanding why we still talk about defence in terms of nuclear weapons when this is not 

possible any more. I too am as much concerned about human suffering as everyone else is, and that we 

must by all means avoid human suffering. We must by all means avoid military conflict and destruction. 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the principles that we stand for, the principles of Christianity, and principles 

that are basic to our way of life are good and that if we believe in these principles we can best promote 

them, not through war, but through peace. I feel that the struggle against Communism is going to be 

settled, not in war, but in peace. These are the arguments that I would like to expand upon a bit later on 

in the debate in this House, and I therefore move the adjournment of this debate. 

 

The debate was, on motion of the Hon. Mr. Nollet, adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATE ON MOTION RE PURPLE TAX FREE GAS (Mr. D.T. McFarlane) 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to spend a few minutes this afternoon in 

reply to some of the statements which were made when this resolution appeared on the floor of this 

House two weeks or more ago. It was on the last day of February when this resolution was first moved 

and spoken to. 

 

Now I realize, Mr. Speaker, that in order to answer some of the statements that were made at that time in 

the debate, if you had to look just at the words of the resolution on the Order Paper, and then listen to 

what I say, you might think at times I was out of order. But I will try and relate my discussions either 

directly to the resolution, and to the statements which were made at that time. The statements were made 

that the economic position of the farmers after seventeen years of CCF were getting worse all the time. 

Well now I would like to point out a few of the things that have been done over the past seventeen years 

by this Legislature 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

36 

 

to bring a little more security to the farmers in this province. I would also like to point out some of the 

reasons why security hasn‘t been attained as it should have been by the farmers of this province. 

 

In the first place, we have the seed grain cancellation which was taken off the backs of the farmers of 

this province by this Government in the first term of office between 1944-1948. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Tell us another one. Tell us another one. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — I‘ll tell you a few more yet. In 1944, when this Government came to office, there 

were seed grain and relief debts, some of them dating back as far as 1917, and a few smaller accounts I 

believe even older than that, and including the 1937-38 seed grain debt, which was riding on the backs 

of the people of this province. The farmers of this province, in order to get the seed grain for 1938, had 

to have their loans guaranteed by the municipalities. The municipalities in turn had to have a guarantee 

by the Provincial Government before the banks would put up this money. In turn, the Federal 

Government had to guarantee the province‘s credit, because as has been stated in this House on many 

occasions, this province from 1932 up until after 1944 wasn‘t able to borrow a dollar of money on its 

own credit, so they had to have the backing of the Federal Government. Now after this Government was 

elected, one of the promises that was made in 1944, was that something would be done about the seed 

grain debt. And, this Government cancelled $30,368,000 in seed grain debts, including from 1934 to the 

1937-1938 grains. And, in addition to that, they paid back to these farmers who had paid off in the 

whole their 1938 seed grain debt, 50% of the amount he had paid to municipalities, so that they would 

have the same benefits of the policy which was enjoyed by the farmers who hadn‘t paid up until that 

time. So in addition to the $30.3 million which was paid by the Treasury, another $1,666,000 was paid 

in reimbursements, to there was a total of over $32 million under one Act of this Legislature when that 

settlement was arranged. 

 

One other thing that this Legislature did to bring security to the farmers was to put on the statute books 

of this province the Farm Security Act, of which I may say, every Member of the Opposition present and 

voting, voted against the Farm Security Act in 1944. 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

37 

 

I have right here the Journals and the Statutes for 1944 showing the Farm Security Act, and what date it 

was passed, and the recorded vote on it. The Farm Security Act, was assented to on November 10th, 

1944 and every Liberal Member that was in the House voted against that Farm Security Act, on a 

recorded vote. So, that is how we find that some of our friends opposite talk for security to farmers but 

when the chips are down, vote against them. 

 

Now, some of the reasons why we haven‘t had economic security over the past number of years for the 

farmers has been due to the inflated costs of agricultural production. 

 

The costs of agricultural production have continued to go up and up and up all the time over the past 

number of years, and it is no wonder that the farmers cannot keep up with the cost of production when 

the price which they obtain for their farm products is going down and down. As an example, back in the 

latter forties, when price controls were removed, the combine, one of the best made self-propelled 

combines of that day, cost less than $3,000. Today, that same combine, a comparable combine, would 

cost around $8,000. If you get the largest, best made self-propelled combine today, it will cost you over 

$10,000. But what does that mean in terms of taxation to the farmer. If a farmer, farming land with an 

assessment of $10,000, bought himself a self-propelled combine back in 1946-47, it would mean an 

additional taxation on his land, if he averaged the cost of the combine over a ten year period, of thirty 

mills of taxation for ten years, or three hundred mills if he paid it in one year. That‘s what it amounted to 

if his land was paying for it. But now, the same combine, $8,000 would be eighty mills per year for ten 

years, or eight hundred mills for one year. In other words, an increased cost of fifty mills of taxation for 

that piece of equipment on the farmer‘s land. And, at the same time, we find that the returns of the 

farmer have been going down, while his costs have been going up. 

 

In 1945-1946, the average price for the bushel of wheat in Saskatchewan was $1.64 a bushel. In 1949, it 

had gone up to $1.61 per bushel. But for 1958-1959, the same quality of wheat was only worth $1.29 per 

bushel, yet everything else was going up. Oats tell somewhat the same story. In 1945, they were 50¢ a 

bushel. In 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

38 

 

1949, 74¢ a bushel, but by 1958 it was only 51¢. Barley in 1945, 65¢. In 1949, $1.28, and by 1958 it 

was 77¢. 

 

So you can see, Mr. Speaker, that due to the Federal Fiscal Agricultural policies, the farmer has not been 

getting his fair share of the national income, and that is why he is hard up. It‘s not the matter of whether 

he can use tax-free gas in his truck, or whether he doesn‘t. That isn‘t what‘s causing him his difficulty. 

 

Even if the figures were true, which were stated here some two weeks ago, that the average was oh, 

some $90 per farm that he would save if he could burn tax-free gas, even if it were $100 per farm that 

they would save at the end of the year, the average farmer would save at the end of the year, the average 

farmer of this province, if you or I, Mr. Speaker, or someone else had to go to them and say that we 

realize that you‘ve paid a little more on gas tax than you should have, here‘s a hundred dollars back, 

would that farmer be well off? I‘m sure he wouldn‘t. The farmers would still be hard up. That $100 is 

neither here nor there, in the salvation of the farmer. What the farmer has to have is some security 

whereby he can get back for himself a fair share of the national income and a fair share of the cost of 

production. 

 

Now, another statement that was made was that we should put more purchasing power in the hands of 

the farmer. Well, Mr. Speaker, it was not so very long ago, in this Legislature, that a resolution had been 

moved, not by this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, but it was moved by the Member from Gravelbourg, 

asking this Assembly recommend to the Government of Canada, that some means be devised whereby 

the Canadian Wheat Board will receive for distribution a sum not less than $2.10 per bushel of wheat 

sold for human consumption in Canada. That resolution was moved by the Member for Gravelbourg. 

We on this side of the House did not quarrel with that motion. He moved his motion. The Member for 

Rosthern at that time moved an amendment, asking that the . . . 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Mr. Speaker, I want to report that the hon. Member is not speaking to this 

resolution. I wasn‘t allowed to mention anything beyond the budget, or any other debate of this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — This is a former Session. 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

39 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — And you were all aware of that fact, Mr. Speaker, the Member for Rosthern of that 

day Mr. Elias, moved an amendment. He said that the $2.10 may or may not be a parity price, but he 

wanted the Canadian Government to give a parity price, but he wanted the Canadian Government to 

give a parity price for the first thousand bushels delivered from each farm by each farmer. Then, the 

former Member for Bengough and myself moved a sub-amendment. We did not delete one word from 

the original motion which was put before the House by the Member for Gravelbourg, or the amendment 

thereto by the Member from Rosthern. We just added to it. We added these words to the end: 

 

―and further, that the Government of Canada, through the medium of such means as the Agricultural 

Prices Support Act, undertake to establish a permanent marketing program which will assure to the 

producer, for all the wheat sold into commercial channels, a fair price that will bear a parity 

relationship to the farm costs.‖ 

 

The debate continued on the motion, the amendment and the amendment to the amendment and the 

recorded vote showed, Mr. Speaker, that every Member in the Opposition, the three Social Creditors 

who were present that day and every Member of the Liberal Party, voted against the sub-amendment by 

Mr. Brown and myself, asking for a fair price that will bear a parity relationship to the farmers‘ cost of 

production. 

 

We weren‘t too much amazed and surprised that they had voted against our sub-amendment, but what 

did amaze me, Mr. Speaker, was they not only voted against our sub-amendment asking for a parity 

price, but everyone to your left that day, Mr. Speaker, voted against the amendment which was moved 

by the Member for Rosthern. We on this side of the House voted for it because we thought the farmer 

should have at least a parity price on the part that was used in Canada. But then when the vote came on 

the motion which was moved by the Member for Gravelbourg himself, every Liberal in the House voted 

against the motion. So that is the way, Mr. Speaker, they talk about trying to bring more purchasing 

power to the hands of the farmer, but when the test come up they vote against it. 

 

Now, they say that taxes are too high in Saskatchewan, and that some help should be given to these tax 

costs. Well, I have here too the statistics for the farm taxes on land owned by the farmers from 1945 to 

1950. 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

40 

 

And it is true that there has been some increase in taxes, Mr. Speaker. It‘s true that taxes have gone up. 

But taxes have gone up less by proportion, than the other costs of the farmers‘ production. His combine, 

his tractor, and his repairs have gone up to a greater extent than have his farm taxes. About the only 

thing over the past number of years that hasn‘t gone up too excessively when you consider the rest of the 

economy, has been the farm fuel which the farmer uses in his tractors. So, it is plain to be seen that we 

have been taking steps to keep down the cost of production where we had the control of it. 

 

Another thing that we have done in this province to help to bring down the cost of the farmers‘ prices, is 

that we removed the education tax on farm fuel which had to be paid prior to those who sit to your right 

now, Mr. Speaker, having become the Government. We removed the education tax on farm machinery; 

also, the education tax on second-hand goods, used cars and used trucks, was removed by this 

Government which included not only second-hand farm equipment, but prior to this, when you went to 

an auction sale, if you bought a box of junk with a few old broken down horse collars in it, or an old axe 

with no handle on it, you still had to pay the education tax. That was all removed. 

 

In addition to that, some nine years ago now, we removed the public revenue tax, which was another 

saving to our farmers of this province. So, those are some of the things which we have done to help the 

farmers of this province. 

 

Now, the resolution says that if the necessity for farmers to have to use taxable gas was removed, and 

give then direct use of purple gas, it would be so much more handier and economic for the farmers. 

We‘ve been asked to bring in Legislation on this side of the House to do the same for the farmers here as 

what has been done in Alberta. Well, I took the trouble to go into the library and search the Alberta 

Statutes, and then I also got the copies of the Alberta Gazette, which brings down the Rules and 

Regulations under which the Alberta legislation was issued, and as to how it applies to the farmers. And, 

I have read this very carefully and I have had others check it along with me, and the best I can make out 

of it, is that a farmer can only haul his own products. He cannot haul products for anyone else other than 

what‘s produced on his own farm. 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

41 

 

In this province here you can haul, not only your own products, but you can use your farm truck under a 

farm truck license to haul, for compensation, from other farmers or from municipalities or other given 

lines. And, I will not take the time to read all these lists of the different things, Mr. Speaker, but I‘m sure 

that any Member who wants to find out what they are, he just needs to get one of the application forms 

for a farm truck license, and look on the back side of this sheet, and you will find a number of items 

which can be hauled by farm truck licenses of this province, and receive compensation. In Alberta that 

cannot be done. You must only haul for the products that you produce on your own farm. 

 

But, even assuming that we gave the truck owners the right to haul their own products here, as they do in 

Alberta, or even assuming that we gave them the same right to haul the same things then as we now 

have, would it still be fair? Some of the farmers have an old truck. They can‘t go very far. You couldn‘t 

get them to haul produce for hire. What about the farmer who has no truck at all? He has a car. Should 

his car then because that‘s the only vehicle he has, be allowed to use purple gas? And, if you allow it for 

the farm trucks, what about the ―C‖ license in the towns and cities, some of the ―C‖ licenses that never 

go any more than ten to fifteen miles away from their base? Some of them travel very little, if any, on 

the public highways. They stay on the streets and lanes of the towns or cities. 

 

We could just create a lot of hard feelings among the farmers and the urban dwellers, and I say, Mr. 

Speaker, that as a farmer of this province, we are not out asking for a charity handout that way. We have 

fought and will still fight for a fair share of the national income, so that as John Diefenbaker himself 

said, the farmers should have parity and not charity. These are the things that we should have for the 

farmers of this province, and as for the purple gas, to just remove the necessity for the farmers to use 

taxable gas, doesn‘t do those things. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — It helps a lot. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — It doesn‘t accomplish the object of bringing any equality or security to the farmers. 

 

I might say too, Mr. Speaker, that with this purple gas that is used today in the province, I can assure 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

42 

 

the Legislature that there is no acme dye companies which are selling the purple gas to the Provincial 

Treasurer for the gas of this province, nor is there any political party reaping great income through the 

sale of purple dye. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is a lot more that I could say on this resolution but I don‘t want to stray from 

the resolution and I will not answer any further of the comments at this time, that were raised by the 

Members to your left, but I will say that I‘m going to continue to fight, not for a petty little handout like 

this that would cause trouble and dissension among all of our societies, but fight for a fair share of the 

national income for our farmers, because after all, the farmers should have the right to enjoy the same 

standard of living as any other occupations or calling in this Dominion. I shall not support the motion. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must inform the Members that the hon. Member as mover of the motion is now 

closing the debate. Anyone who wishes to speak must do so now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, my speech will be very 

short, but I just wanted to give to the House the reason why I will vote against the motion. I do not 

consider that the people of my Constituency elected me for the purpose of helping to keep the promises 

made by the Liberals last June. I wasn‘t for it then and I‘m not for it now. 

 

Mr. D.T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, there were a few statements made by 

the first speaker on this resolution this afternoon that I would like to take issue with. I‘m not going to 

bother very much with the statement by the last speaker, because I know that if there was anything that 

would be in the interests of the farmers, regardless of whether it is to help the Liberal Party, or the 

farmers back home, he naturally would oppose it. He engaged in a vicious personal attack to try and lead 

public opinion otherwise on this matter. 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

43 

 

I was very interested in some of the remarks made by the Member for Wadena, who I am sure is a farm 

Member, representing a rural Constituency. He talked about the amount of seed grain debt that had been 

written off by his Government. He didn‘t go into conditions leading up to that situation, in those years. I 

am not going to go into them now. At this time, I would like to point out that the Federal Liberal 

Government wrote off an amount of some $87 million to try and help the farmers to recover from that 

disastrous period of drought and economic conditions in the 1930‘s. And, when that which included the 

revenue from the municipalities . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — . . . farmers, I‘m only going to go back to last year, the most recent year when the 

farmers of this province really suffered under economic conditions due to crops unharvested under 

snow, I would point out to him, that when his Government saw fit to try and do something for the 

farmers, that first thing they tried to do was to try and set up the most severe means test that any group 

of farmers in the province ever had to pass at any time, in order to qualify for a mere pittance of help. I 

have stated before, the relief orders and the amount of money that the previous Liberal Government had 

to spend . . . 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, can the mover bring in new topics that weren‘t 

discussed by the speaker in closing the debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I believe that is quite true. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Are you referring to the amount of money that was spent by the Federal 

Government? 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — I referred to the Provincial amount only, Mr. Speaker. I made clear that this was by 

this province, and I have the dates for each right amount. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — I just want to point out that all that your Government, the Government that you 

represent, saw fit to give to the farmers last year when they were really hard pressed was a paltry $3 

million. And, because of that, after 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

44 

 

the policy was instituted 544 more farmers who had applied for help, were refused the same. 

 

Then he goes on to say, with regard to his statement that his Government cancelled education tax on 

used cars, that there‘s no longer education tax on cars. Well I would suggest to him that he go down to 

the eastern part of the province, to some of the farmers there that buy a car in Manitoba, and see if they 

have their education tax cancelled on the second hand cars. And then I suggest the most ridiculous 

statement of all was this: He said ―what would happen if the farmer had a truck, and if the farmer was 

allowed to use purple gas in the farm truck? What would happen to a farmer who only had a private 

car?‖ Well I would like to remind the Member, that in Saskatchewan today, there are 87,542 farm 

trucks, and I believe that if you were to check on the number of farm units in the province today, the 

estimated figures, would come around 80,000 or 90,000 farm units. So if that is the policy of this 

Government to discriminate against the 87,542 persons, or thereabouts, I would suggest his is a most 

ridiculous comparison. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — May I ask the hon. Member the source of his information on 87,000 trucks? 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — In the votes and proceedings, the question was asked ―How many farm trucks or 

vehicles were registered in Saskatchewan in 1959?‖ The answer is 87,543. Now if this information is 

wrong then I suggest to the Minister in charge . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Some farmers have two trucks and some have three. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — As I was pointing out, I mentioned that Mr. Speaker, it seems to be the old line of 

defence taken by the Members to your right. Every time this subject is brought up in this House ―trying 

to improve the lot of the farmers‖, they almost without exception get up and say that we‘re creating two 

separate classes of people. I want again to mention some of the things that took place in other debates, 

but I will have a chance to do that later. But every time in this House when we have asked some of you 

to help the farmers, you said you would be creating two classes of people. I would suggest to them in all 

sincerity that it‘s about time that they realized that the farmers in the province are the backbone of the 

economic 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

45 

 

prosperity of this province. As soon as they recognize the plights of the farmers, and as soon as they 

bring down some constructive and practical policies to help the economic status of the farmer, the 

sooner this province is going to be in better shape for all the people concerned, and then maybe when 

this is done, instead of a government trying to legislate prosperity to the benefit of all concerned, then 

the people will be in a position to look after their own affairs better, and may be able to carry a 

government program of increased spending. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because I introduced this motion, and because my colleagues feel, because I know the 

farmers of the province feel that if this motion was accepted by all Members of the House, it certainly 

doesn‘t solve all the economic problems of the farmer, but it would at least help in reducing his cost of 

production, I suggest to every Member that in the interests of agriculture in Saskatchewan, each one 

support this resolution. 

 

The question being put, it was negative on recorded division 14 to 30. 

 

Yeas – 14 

 

Messieurs 

 

Thatcher McFarlane Horsman 

Barrie Gardiner Coderre 

McDonald Foley Snedker 

Danielson Boldt Coderre 

Cameron Klein  

 

Nays – 30 

 

Messieurs 

 

Dewhurst Brown Johnson 

Williams Thurston Meakes 

Brockelbank Blakeney Thiessen 

Lloyd Erb Snyder 

Walker Turnbull Stevens 

Nollet Stone Kluzak 

Kuziak Whelan Dahlman 

Cooper (Mrs.) Thibault Semchuk 

Davies Berezowsky Perkins 

Willis Kramer Broten 

 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

46 

 

Point of Order regarding the admissibility of Mr. Klein‘s amendment to Mr. Whelan‘s motion on 

unemployment. 

 

The Orders of the Day having been called for resuming the adjourned debate on Mr. Whelan‘s motion 

on unemployment, and the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Klein. 

 

RULING ON PROPOSED AMENDMENT 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Before we proceed with this motion, I must draw to the attention of the Assembly that 

there was before the House at the adjournment of the debate on this motion, an amendment proposed by 

Mr. Klein, that the word ―Government‖ in the third line be deleted and the words ―and Provincial 

Governments to take under consideration action‖ be substituted therefor; and the word ―provinces‖ be 

deleted in part (b), and the words ―junior governments‖ be substituted therefor. 

 

At that time, I did not make a ruling as to the admissibility of this amendment, but since that time I have 

given the matter a good deal of consideration, and I find it is a very difficult decision to make. I had 

thought that the better time for discussing this motion might be under the budget debate, where the 

finances of the province were under consideration, but whether or not that were so it still does not 

preclude the discussion of these things under a separate motion. Even if these things had been discussed 

in the budget debate it would not, I feel, preclude an amendment of this kind. 

 

There is a question, however, that does come to my mind, in regard to it. We have in this motion a 

discussion of various things; which are urged for the attention of the Federal Government, which is one 

distinct class of matters for discussion. Now, this amendment proposes to add to that consideration of 

the same matters by the Provincial Government. It is a rule which must be observed, that an amendment 

which brings up something which could best be considered as a substantive motion in its own right, 

cannot be admitted as an amendment. I would like to have some guidance from the Assembly at this 

time on how the hon. Members feel as to whether this amendment should be allowed as an amendment, 

or whether it should better be considered as a substantive motion in its own right. 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

47 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, on the point of order, on the question which 

you have raised with the Assembly. It seems to me that your reasoning as to the desirability of 

separating the references to the two Governments is sound. The resolution as originally introduced was 

directed as a series of requests to the Federal Government. Introducing the Provincial Government not 

only amends, but to some extent changes the character of the original resolution. It seems to me that it 

certainly would simplify things if they could be discussed separately, rather than to try and discuss the 

two in the same resolution. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say that this is a most difficult 

decision for you to make. However, I would like to point out the reason that we think the amendment is 

in order. As you know, discussions from time to time in this House and elsewhere, have suggested that 

the Government of Canada should so handle the financial affairs of our nation, so that we could prevent 

inflation, in times of buoyancy and full employment, and create circumstances so we could create full 

employment in times of recession. Because the Government of Canada, until recently, has had the power 

to exercise this privilege unto themselves, then under those conditions, the amendment to the resolution 

might be better considered by itself. In view of the circumstances, we find ourselves today in a position 

where the provinces have been granted the authority to enter certain tax fields, it makes it almost 

imperative for Federal and Provincial Governments to co-operate together if they are going to control 

the economy of Canada. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, no longer should we look to any one government as having the power to control 

our economic destinies. We must look to Provincial Governments across Canada in co-operation with 

the Federal Government. Therefore, I would suggest to you, that in light of these circumstances that the 

amendment would be in order, because it would not be possible for either Provincial Governments 

independently or the Federal Government independently to do what the resolution asks to be done, and 

therefore I suggest to you, that in view of these circumstances the amendment would be in order. 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

48 

 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, on the point of order, might I point out to you, 

that in motion #3 on page 2, it follows the same line of thought in that the exemptions to be rescinded at 

the end of the current crop year, that in co-operation with the Provincial Governments concerned a more 

practical solution be found to any problem that may be involved. This resolution was readily accepted. I 

think that there is a joint relationship between Dominion and Provincial undertakings. It‘s hard to draw 

the line between what is strictly federal and what is strictly provincial, because we have co-operation 

today between the Federal Government and the Provincial Government in regards to highways. The 

joint undertaking of the Trans-Canada. The joint undertaking of power plants, such as the South 

Saskatchewan River development. I think they are closely allied. They are inter-woven, and I would 

submit in my opinion that what is applicable to motion 3 on page 2, would be equally applicable to this 

motion here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, may I just comment further. May I point out 

that first of all the Member for Moosomin is not quite accurate when he suggests that certain powers 

have been given to Provincial Governments in recent events which they did not previously have. This of 

course, has not as yet come to pass. We have no powers today that we did not have yesterday or last 

week, or last year. Secondly, may I say that even when the situation to which he refers comes to pass, it 

does not in any sense dilute the power, either political or economic, of the Federal Government if it so 

wants to assert it. I think the difference in the two resolutions to which the Member from Moosomin has 

referred, is that in the resolution under No. 3, the subject to the resolution under No. 3, there is indeed 

concurrent legislation necessary in regard to this particular field. As a result it must be considered as 

joint provincial and federal. This is certainly not true in the case of the resolution before us here. 

 

Mr. Karl Klein (Notukeu-Willowbunch): — Mr. Speaker, the fact that the winter works program was 

instituted to help alleviate unemployment, and that it would be the joint responsibility of Federal 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

49 

 

and Provincial Governments, and therefore if you are going to discuss unemployment both these 

agencies must be brought into the discussion and assure joint responsibility. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I do not desire to make a debate out of this, but I 

cannot concur with the remarks of the Provincial Treasurer. It is quite true that this suggestion should 

not be implemented at the moment, but I think that we all agree in this House, that it looks very much 

like it might be. I want to point out that unless you have co-operation between your senior and junior 

governments I would suggest that the Federal Government no longer have control, because it‘s quite 

possible to have your Federal Government going in one direction offsetting inflation, and have your 

province go in the opposite direction because there is a provincial election on. Unless . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — On a point of order. Your remarks . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Continue on a point of order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — He sure strays from the point of order. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald: — Unless you have co-operation and joint effort then the whole purpose of 

government is being destroyed, both Provincial and Federal. 

 

Mr. G. Herman Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words. This 

resolution has to do with employment or the remedy for unemployment, and I can‘t understand how you 

could deal with that problem without taking in the two bodies of government who are interested in 

unemployment. We have in the province today hundreds and hundreds of projects that were undertaken 

by joint efforts by the Dominion and the province, and the municipalities. It says here, 

 

―this Assembly regrets that unemployment in Canada has reached the highest level since the 1930‘s, 

and urges the Federal Government to provide a substantial contribution to assist in 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

50 

 

the construction of highways, schools, power plants and power lines, telephone facilities, and similar 

development projects. Provide for low interest rates to the provinces undertaking such projects as 

housing and hospital construction. To undertake a long range economic planning to guarantee the 

maintenance of full employment in Canada.‖ 

 

I can‘t possibly see how you can deal with this matter intelligently, when the two governments are 

co-operating, and the municipalities are also tied up in this plan, and this is what they ask for. What they 

really ask for in this resolution is an extension of that plan, which is now in effect, and I think it‘s all 

right. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I would thank the Members for their assistance in this matter, and if the House would 

be good enough to have this Order stand I shall be prepared to rule on the amendment the next time it is 

called. 

 

Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. MacDougall re the 

Abolition of the Mineral Tax on Farm Land. 

 

Mr. Arthur Kluzak (Shaunavon): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment briefly on this resolution 

which calls for abolishing the 3% an acre mineral tax which would reduce the farmer‘s cost of 

production, and thereby make his operation more economical. I am particularly surprised that this 

resolution comes from the Member from Souris-Estevan, where there has been a great deal of oil 

development and mineral rights that must be of real value. I don‘t know what occupation the hon. 

Member follows, but it‘s quite evident that he‘s not a farmer, and certainly not a financial wizard when 

he suggests that a tax of $4.80 on a quarter of land would have any appreciable value as to a farmer‘s 

cost of production. Certainly a farmer‘s cost of production today is very high and this small amount of 

money, I‘m sure, would make no difference in the final analysis in the year. 

 

The Member for Saltcoats, I believe, got quite mixed up in the script that had been prepared for him by 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

51 

 

the ghost writer when he spoke on the resolution the other day. I know that he spends a lot of time on 

dissecting the script, because he has hardly been in his seat long enough to have warmed it up yet. 

However, he suggested that he would rather not have the mineral rights than pay the tax. Then he went 

on to say that they were of no value but that the farmers wanted them, but didn‘t want to pay the tax. 

Then he finished up by saying that the farmers that sold these rights should have had several times as 

much money for them as they received. I would say that he was really confused. I would guess that the 

ghost writer of the script was probably a shareholder in the C.P.R. or Hudson Bay Company, and 

probably that‘s whose interest he was looking after. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — What are you reading from? 

 

Mr. Kluzak: — Much of the area that I represent had been homesteaded in 1907-08 and 1909, and 

many of these homesteaders went a hundred miles and further from the railway to take up this land, and 

for a good many years they remained that distance, in fact, it was eight years later that they got a railroad 

within fifty miles, and they remained that distance for quite a number of years. They really went through 

a lot of hardship pioneering in that area, and when they proved up their homestead they didn‘t get any 

mineral rights with them. However, later on in the twenties when they purchased some of the Hudson 

Bay land, it was quite clearly defined in the contract and in the deed that the mineral rights remain in the 

name of the Hudson Bay Company. I don‘t know what the Hudson Bay Company contributed to the 

pioneering of that area. I‘m sure it wasn‘t very much and I see no reason why they should be holding 

mineral rights at no cost to them. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Farm lands . . . 

 

Mr. Kluzak: — The Hudson Bay Company and the C.P.R. own the greater part of the mineral rights in 

question. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — No, they are excluded under this motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Kluzak: — I would suggest that there are many other ways that farmers could be induced in saving 

several times this amount of money and that would be through the patronage of co-operatives 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

52 

 

which many of the Members of the Opposition are very much against. They have protested very 

vigorously against the patronage of co-operatives in some of the meetings that we have had, particularly 

the mover of the resolution and the hon. Member for Yorkton. In fact, he was going to execute not only 

the Department of Co-operation but the Minister as well, when he spoke on this Department. I would 

like to give you an instance on how farmers can make savings on patronizing co-operatives. For 

instance, the farmer who delivers his quota of grain say seven bushels to the acre to the Pool Elevator, 

which has over the years paid dividends of 3¢ a bushel, would receive a cheque or a patronage dividend 

of 21¢ an acre or $33.60 on a quarter of land. Now, this is seven times the amount of this tax, and the 

Opposition of course, don‘t believe in this type of patronage. I would dare say that if I paid $1.00 for 

every membership card that they have in the co-operatives, that I could buy them all for $5.00, the way 

it sounds at some of these meetings. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I bet you I‘ve got more than you have. 

 

Mr. Kluzak: — There are also the savings the farmers are making by buying the Saskatchewan 

Government Automobile Insurance, which amounts to a great deal more than this tax, and this is also 

something that the hon. friends across the way would like to throw into the fire. So I would suggest that 

the mineral rights and the surface rights have no bearing on each other. The farmers who are paying 

taxes on mineral rights certainly have no bearing to the surface rights in connection with their farming, 

and therefore, I cannot support this resolution. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to make one observation, and 

the point was raised by the hon. Leader of the Opposition when he said that this resolution only deals 

with the farmers. Well, I can recall when this tax was first introduced, and I think that all hon. Members 

will agree that there are companies in this province who received large grants of land, the Hudson Bay 

and the C.P.R. and had the mineral rights granted with the title. It was thought at that time that these 

companies ought to pay some tax on these lands. When the question of law was considered, it was then 

determined that a tax cannot be discriminatory. For example you couldn‘t apply the tax to the company 

lands alone, but we had to apply the tax on the farm lands as well, that is on mineral rights 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

53 

 

owned by individual farmers, and this resolution, if passed, could not be implemented unless an 

exception was granted to all the other large mineral owners as well, the Hudson Bay, C.P.R. and the 

C.N.R. is one too, the C.P.R. more particularly, this is the weakness of the amendment and of this 

particular motion. Furthermore, the other weakness is, as has already been pointed out, this might be of 

some benefit if exemption of farm owned land could be implemented legally to the farmers concerned, 

but it certainly wouldn‘t benefit at all, the great number of farmers who don‘t own their mineral rights, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — If the Minister is finished. I thought he was finished when he 

sat down, but apparently he wasn‘t. 

 

I only want to say a very few words in regard to the resolution which seems to be a perennial one. I was 

rather amazed at the Minister of Agriculture‘s concern for the Hudson Bay and the C.P.R., and the big 

landowners. He said it would be discriminatory, and we can‘t have discriminatory legislation here. In 

view of the statements that have been made to the House, I thought it was rather exceptional that 

someone said the other day if you do that you will be setting up a privileged class. I presume by that 

they meant that these farmers, when they were relieved of the burden of paying these taxes, would then 

become a privileged class. I thought it was rather strange thinking. I can recall a year or two back when 

we asked why the Government didn‘t purchase butter in place of margarine, and the Minister at that time 

said that margarine was cheaper, and therefore they weren‘t going to subsidize the farmer. Now I 

wonder who are you discriminating against? Let‘s get the record straight when we come to 

discrimination. The only ones I can see that are being discriminated against are these farmers who have 

no choice in the matter at all. Then they go on and say it‘s so very insignificant, it‘s only $4.80 a quarter, 

it doesn‘t mean anything to the farmer, why should we tamper with the legislation now when it‘s such 

an insignificant amount. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — $800,000. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — How much? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — $800,000. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Well, do you think that‘s insignificant? 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

54 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — He thinks that it‘s very insignificant; the Member from Shaunavon says it‘s a very 

insignificant amount. I suggest that these two Members get together and decide whether it‘s significant 

or not. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Here is an answer to a question – I think the Minister said that you had better find out 

whether it‘s significant. ―What was the total revenue from the mineral tax in the fiscal year 1959-60?‖ 

Answer is $1,387,511.62. This includes the production tax as well as acreage tax. ―What is the total 

amount of arrears in payment owing by provision of the above tax?‖ Arrears to January 31st, 1961, 

including arrears under production tax as well as the acreage tax was $402,311.70. As the Minister for 

Mineral Resources points out, the great bulk of this $1,387 million odd, comes from the landowners that 

the present Minister of Agriculture was concerned about, the Hudson Bay and the C.P.R. So if you 

exempted these farmers from it . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the hon. Member, and I don‘t think he . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Has the hon. Member a point of order or privilege? If you have a question I 

think it can be . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — He‘s just got an interruption. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege. The hon. Member I think has 

misinterpreted my meaning entirely. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! If the hon. Member could bring in a statement of that kind or a 

correction of that kind at the close of the hon. Member‘s speech it would be very acceptable. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — All I did, Mr. Speaker, was remark on the Minister for Agriculture‘s sympathy for 

the Hudson Bay and the C.P.R., on the one hand, and supporting the other Member who said it would be 

discriminatory on the other to remove it from 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

55 

 

the farmers and not from these others. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — What the hon. Member did was to misquote the Minister of Agriculture . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Could we have the point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — On the point of order that the Minister for Agriculture raised, Mr. Speaker, it was 

simply that the Member now speaking has misquoted him. This was the point of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I understand from my perusal of the rule books, that a misquotation is not actually a 

point of order, but can be raised at the time with the consent of the Member who is speaking, or 

otherwise when the hon. Member sits down. I don‘t think it‘s exactly a point of order. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Speaker, I intended to speak only two minutes, but I‘ve had eight minutes of 

interruptions, and I‘m afraid to get my message across again it would be necessary for me to summarize 

it. I agree that $4.80 is an insignificant amount. I agree that if you remove the tax it would be an 

insignificant amount so far as the revenues of the province are concerned, but I don‘t agree that it would 

be discrimination against the Hudson Bay and the C.P.R. I think that if we remove this tax we will 

remove the discrimination against the farmer and the farmers only. For that reason, I‘m going to support 

it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, before we close may I make my position 

clear. Here is the point which I meant to make, Mr. Speaker. Taxes cannot discriminate. If you tax the 

big corporation you must also tax people in similar positions, the small farmers. This is the point I 

wanted to make, according to law, and certainly I want to make it clear that I have no favoritism at all 

for the Hudson Bay or the C.P.R., these people ought to be taxed but to do so one would also have to tax 

the farmer as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. Member can clear up a misrepresentation, but he cannot produce any new 

material. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Well I wish to thank him, Mr. 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

56 

 

Speaker, he made his position even more clear. 

 

The Assembly recessed at 5:30 o‘clock p.m. 

 

The House resumed at 7:30 o‘clock p.m. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words on the motion 

of the hon. Member from Souris-Estevan, and my remarks have been precipitated by some of the debate 

which we heard earlier. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture expressed the view that no tax on minerals, which was on a per acre basis, 

could be validly waived for farmers and at the same time apply to other landowners. The Member for 

Maple Creek apparently took issue with this view. He apparently felt that it was quite possible to 

discriminate in a taxing statute in this way, and to levy a tax on the Hudson Bay Company, and 

Canadian Pacific Railway, but to waive this tax in respect of farmers – this acreage mineral tax. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I agree with the view of the law stated by the Minister of Agriculture 

and disagree with the view of the law stated by the Member for Maple Creek. I think the Minister of 

Agriculture was correct when he said that a mineral tax which applied solely to certain classes of 

mineral owners, such as incorporated companies, or the Hudson Bay Company and the C.P.R., but 

purported to exempt in some manner farmers, would not be upheld by the courts. With this in mind, I 

think we can look at this resolution with a new light in our eyes. 

 

Who pays the mineral tax which the hon. Members opposite would like to see abolished? Well, we 

know that one of the big taxpayers is the Hudson Bay Company. The Hudson Bay Company has sold 

hundreds of thousands of acres in this province, and have retained the mineral rights thereon. Similarly 

the Canadian Pacific Railway has sold many thousands of acres and has retained the mineral rights 

thereon – certainly hundreds of thousands of acres. There are of course, a fair number of acres of 

mineral rights held by farmers as such, but it will be known to you, Mr. Speaker, and to all 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

57 

 

Members of this House, that in a large number of cases these mineral rights are leased to oil companies. 

And when they are leased to oil companies, the standard form of lease, which is almost universal in this 

respect, provides that the oil company will pay 7/8 of the mineral tax. Therefore, when they are leased to 

an oil company, the amount paid by the farmer is not $4.80 a quarter, but 60¢ a quarter – 1/8 – and it is 

in order to save the farmer 60¢ per annum per quarter section – that this resolution is on the Order Paper. 

But having regard to the fact, Mr. Speaker, that a large amount of the tax is paid by the Hudson Bay 

Company, a further large amount by the Canadian Pacific Railway, and probably the bulk of the tax by 

oil companies who have leases on freehold mineral rights, I think we can easily appreciate what group of 

people this particular resolution would benefit, and what group of people it would not benefit. With this 

in mind, Mr. Speaker, I think that we can rephrase the resolution and say that we could suggest that 

consideration by given to abolishing the three cent mineral tax on land owned by the Canadian Pacific 

Railway, or land owned by the Hudson Bay Company, or land leased by oil companies, and incidentally, 

but only very incidentally, Mr. Speaker, on land for which the farmer was responsible for the mineral 

tax. Since this relief to farmers would be the very smallest effect of this sort of a resolution, I think we 

can then obtain a clear idea of who Members opposite are proposing to benefit, and who they are 

purporting to benefit. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Can‘t you read the resolution? 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Ah! But this is not, I‘m suggesting, possible. If the hon. Member for Maple 

Creek is prepared to argue . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — That‘s a bad case to defend . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — No, I think not. I see the hon. Member for Humboldt is not in her chair, but I 

think she would support my contention. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — No she wouldn‘t. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! I would draw the attention of the hon. Members that it is proper for 

them to address the Chair, and not any of this across the House remarks. 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

58 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said having regard to the effects of any law which will 

abolish the mineral tax for farmers, which lead to abolishing it for the Hudson Bay Company, the 

Canadian Pacific Railway and all the oil companies, it is therefore, Mr. Speaker, rather clear why this is 

on the Order Paper, and in particular I would suggest why it has been put on the Order Paper by the hon. 

Member for Souris-Estevan . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that the people who will benefit from such a move, are people for whom 

I have no particular sympathy in respect to their taxpaying ability, and the Hudson Bay Company, the 

Canadian Pacific Railway and the oil companies . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Keep going we can win if you continue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — As I say, in view of the fact that these are the people who will benefit and not 

the farmers, I, Mr. Speaker, will be unable to support the resolution. 

 

Mr. G. Herman Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I sure didn‘t have any intention of saying 

anything on this topic at all, but I remember when that Bill was brought down in this House, in spite of 

my friend over there (he‘s a newcomer to this House) and I think the organization in which he has been 

active as an official has been asking that this very thing be brought about. 

 

I remember Mr. Phelps coming into this House with this Bill, way back in the 1945 Session, and he said 

this ―First of all we thought we would expropriate the mineral rights‖ but he said on second thought, 

―we thought we would do it this way because no farmer will pay this tax and we‘ll get the mineral rights 

anyway.‖ That was the statement of the Minister. Now I am going to tell him that he needs a little better 

education on the background of some of this legislation, which is on the statute books now. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Hear! Hear! 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

59 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, there is nothing in the world to prevent this Government or any other 

Government if they want to do something for the farmer, to say that we‘ll exempt from the tax the first 

two sections, and that will satisfy everybody, or one section. Just the same as some other legislation 

makes that exemption, you are only paid for two hundred acres when you have a thousand or two 

thousand acres or whatever you have. Under the P.F.A.A. Act they are only paid so much. You have the 

same chance here to exempt and say that you exclude from the Act anyone who has ownership of one 

section, or two or three sections. You could make it anything you like, and then that wouldn‘t benefit the 

Hudson Bay Company or anybody else that has a large acreage of land in this province. There is the 

remedy for you, but then these fellows never wanted to do anything for the farmers. They piled every tax 

they could on them from the day that they came in this province until the present time. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Let me ask you who voted against the elimination of the 14¢ a gallon gasoline tax 

for the farmers‘ trucks, which is a charge on production of this province, Mr. Speaker? They stood 

solidly and voted against the farmer on that occasion. They have done it on every occasion and they are 

still at it, but the time will come when they won‘t have a chance any more to speak and vote against the 

farmers‘ interest in this province. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — The Minister of Co-operation . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — It‘s a poor excuse for any person to say that it can‘t be done. If you should try to help 

the farmers out on this particular subject, then you could continue to tax the Hudson Bay Company, and 

the railroads, and anybody with a large acreage of land, and the mineral rights in that acreage held by the 

owner of the land. So that is no excuse at all, because it can be done simply by an amendment to the Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Would the hon. Member permit a question? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, does the hon. Member take the view that the exemption 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

60 

 

proposed by him would still require oil companies to pay the taxes where they have taken a lease on 

freehold acreage? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The lease held by the oil companies? Oh no – no – not by any means. Because, when 

a farmer has leased this out, the oil company pays the lease. But a simple amendment of that Act, this 

Bill or whatever you like to call it, to exempt the farmer holding up to one or two sections, or whatever 

you would like to fix it at, would solve the problem. You talk about an economic unit, well I would say 

Mr. Speaker, this should go with an economic unit. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You asked his opinion and he‘s giving it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, I think that Mr. Nollet, here on my right, expressed the correct view 

of the law when he said earlier, that the court would undoubtedly hold to be unconstitutional any 

legislation, which exempted from this Act people by description of their occupation. I must disagree 

with my learned friend from Arm River that it should be constitutional. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that there is a very distinct possibility that even if farmers were exempted, not 

by name, but by exempting one section of land, or two sections of land, it‘s even then doubtful, if the 

court would be able to hold that that was intra vires. 

 

But, my hon. friend has missed the real point of the argument of the Minister of Education. His point 

was, by exempting the farmer from this tax, you would in effect be exempting the farmer from 60¢ 

worth of tax, and exempting the lessee oil company from $4.20, in every case where the land was under 

lease. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Read what the resolution says. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — . . . that‘s the excuse that the oil companies . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — . . . and if as my hon. friend from Arm River suggests, that all parcels of land 

owned by one owner of less than a section or two sections of land were exempt from the tax, this would 

have the same effect of relieving the lessee oil companies of the tax. Let‘s just get this right now, Mr. 

Speaker. The lessee oil companies do not pay the tax 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

61 

 

on their own behalf, they pay it on behalf of the farmer. What they do in effect, is to return to the farmer 

7/8ths of the tax which he pays, for the oil companies who have land under lease in this province 

wouldn‘t have to pay this 3¢ tax, because they‘re not owners of mineral rights; they merely have a lease 

on mineral rights. They agree to take 87½% of the tax, which the farmer pays, leaving the other 12½% 

on the shoulders of the farmer. In other words the oil company is not a taxpayer, under this lease. He is 

merely agreeing to reimburse the farmer for the tax which the farmer has paid, and if the farmer has to 

pay no tax, then the oil company has to pay no tax. It is as simple as that, and when it is suggested that 

this resolution is for the benefit of the farmers, the truth of the matter is, as the Minister of Education 

points out, to give the farmer 60¢ here, you‘ve got to give the oil company $4.20. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You‘re dreaming Bob. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — My hon. friend, if he doesn‘t realize the facts is merely displaying his ignorance 

of the standard forms of these agreements. If he has read one of those agreements, and has understood 

them, then he knows that what I am saying is true. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Have you got any land? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, I‘ve never laid an egg, but I know a lot more about omelets than 

hens do. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You‘re sure attempting to hatch one though. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — He‘s laid more eggs than anybody on the Government side. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I don‘t take second place in my knowledge of them to the hon. lady from 

Humboldt. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that this legislation which will benefit a farmer, whose land is under 

lease to the extent of 60  per quarter section per year is not going to solve the problem of agriculture. If 
the farmer pays 60¢ a year to this tax, this is the price of a large pack of cigarettes each year. Now, for 

the Opposition to take up the time of this House, by proposing a resolution of this type, to take the time 

of the House on such frivolous subjects, then it is in my opinion a reflection upon their good sense. The 

fact is, 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

62 

 

Mr. Speaker, that 60¢ a year is not going to be of any benefit and the farmers in my Constituency won‘t 

appreciate this, and my hon. friend, getting up in this House, and implying that they are so poverty 

stricken that 60¢ a year is going to balance their family budget . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is what the Attorney General . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — This is the kind of debate, which you might hear proposed in Egypt or Persia 

where 60¢ a year would be a very substantial accretion to their wealth, but my hon. friends have far too 

low an opinion of the solvency of agriculture, and of the sense of the people who engage in that 

industry. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that to give these people a refund of 60¢ per quarter section, and to 

give the oil companies a refund of $4.20 per quarter section, explains, I think, better than any other 

statement that I could make the real reason for this resolution. 

 

The hon. gentlemen opposite seem to feel that the Treasury of this province, the revenues of this 

province, and the services which the province renders out of this income, is not important, because every 

time they turn around, they try to undermine or destroy every basis from which the cost of services are 

provided. 

 

Take a million dollars off the revenue, $1,300,000 as the Member for Maple Creek pointed out . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I didn‘t point out to take $1,300,000, I said you take 

a pittance off. Well, he‘s not putting words in my mouth. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I must point out to the hon. Member from Maple Creek that a correction of that 

kind can be made after the hon. Member sits down. That is not a point of order. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Brockelbank said that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I may have misunderstood my hon. friend. He may have referred to it in some 

other connection altogether. 

 

The point is that there is about $800,000 a year in revenue to the province from this source, and in some 

years it has been more than that because of the payment of large sums of arrears accumulated during the 

period when the constitutionality of this tax was in question. 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

63 

 

And, in some years it has been a million dollars, but the revenue is about $800,000 plus the tax on 

operating wells. Now if to benefit 80,000 farmers, say a dollar apiece, to hand out $80,000 to the 

farmers of Saskatchewan, and thereby give $720,000 to the Hudson Bay Company, to the C.P.R. and to 

the oil companies – if this is my hon. friend‘s measure of the public interest, then I think we ought to be 

grateful to them for having revealed it here in this Legislature, in this debate. 

 

My hon. friends never tire of arguments and proposals to impair the province‘s revenues and impair its 

financial solvency they insist on proposing that this Government ought to put itself in a position where it 

is not able to render services . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You‘re in that position now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — . . . and every time you take a million dollars or $800,000 out of the tax revenues 

of this province, you curtail to that extent the amount of services which the Government can provide. All 

to enrich the coffers of the supporters of friends opposite, the oil men. I have as much sympathy for the 

oil companies, and their desire to produce oil and make a profit, and to operate successfully, as they 

have, but I don‘t believe that the welfare of the people of this province ought to be subverted for that 

purpose. 

 

So, I think that the Legislature ought to defeat this resolution. I hope that my hon. friends opposite who 

profess to believe that the effect of this resolution can be put into effect will consult with a lawyer, a 

good lawyer . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that he consult with a reputable lawyer and get an opinion 

on the constitutionality of the resolution, and I‘m not asking him to take the legal advice of the Minister 

of Agriculture. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I will vote against the resolution. 

 

Mr. Douglas T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I never expected the position of 

the farmer would ever be degraded to the degree that it 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

64 

 

has been just now by the comments and the words coming from the Attorney General. I have always 

wondered why agriculture in this province received such a small allotment of the provincial budget. It 

has never been registered more clearly than it has been just now. I can sympathize with the Minister of 

Agriculture, when he meets in Cabinet, and he goes to his colleagues and tries to wring something out of 

them for the benefit of the farmers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — It‘s worth 60¢. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — In view of the statements made by the hon. Attorney General, and previously the 

attitude taken by the past Provincial Treasurer of this province, now, for any man to get up, in an 

agricultural province and refer to an Act such as this, or a situation such as this as a trifle and frivolous is 

a disgrace, and I suggest in the interests of the people of this province, we should have somebody else in 

that capacity in that Department. 

 

The whole crux of the situation that we are faced with in Saskatchewan today in regard to mineral rights 

was voiced on the part of this province, by the Members of the Government who sit on your right Mr. 

Speaker. It goes right back to the time when they were first elected in 1944. I think that the Member for 

Arm River did well in pointing out to some of the younger Members what really took place in the first 

Session under a CCF Government, because it was the avowed policy of the Government of that day to 

make sure that mineral rights eventually reverted to the Government, and eventually ended up in the 

hands of the Government. That is why this Mineral Taxation Act was passed. 

 

What has been the result of that Act, Mr. Speaker? When they brought down this tax 3¢ per acre, or 50¢ 

per acre on those areas that were classed as production areas, they had two things in mind: first, was to 

extract every last cent they could possibly drain out of the farmers of the province who wanted to try and 

protect their mineral rights, and the other thing was, that if they couldn‘t get them that way, they could 

have them in their own hands, and any future development in oil, minerals or anything else that took 

place, they would hold title and receive the benefits of this. What has been the situation? After this Act 

was passed the farmers faced with having to pay 3¢ per acre mineral tax, then fell easy prey to some of 

these people who today cause 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

65 

 

trouble in this province. So a great many farmers leased their mineral rights for as low as 10¢ an acre. 

Those farmers who did not lease their mineral rights, and received nothing for them who do not believe 

that they should pay the tax, these farmers who are in a position where they have arrears of taxes, the 

mineral rights to their land reverted to the Crown. 

 

Now, the most serious situation of course, is the situation in this respect, Mr. Speaker, that because of 

the fact that sometime in the future of this province some mineral development may take place because 

of the fact that the farmers no longer hold title to their rights, their sons and heirs of the family, who take 

over that land in the future are also deprived of any benefits that may accrue from mineral development 

at some future date. So, I think that this has been a most sinister piece of Legislation, and then they try to 

scoff it off lightly by saying ―Oh, it only amounts to 60¢ per acre.‖ 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Per quarter section. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — . . . 60¢ per quarter section. That may be true of those people who have leased their 

mineral rights to oil companies, but it certainly isn‘t true to those people who are still struggling to hang 

on and protect their mineral rights, who are still paying $4.80 a quarter. Those are the people we are 

concerned with in this resolution. 

 

And then the Attorney General has discounted the fact that he said this legislation would be ultra vires, 

that it wouldn‘t stand up in a court room. Now, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, if that is correct, then the sinister 

and the ulterior motives went right back to the day they put this type of legislation on the books of this 

province because they knew that the farmers couldn‘t get out from under this type of legislation. And it 

goes right back to the original piece of legislation. 

 

Now, before I go on, I want to take issue with the remarks made by the Member for Cumberland, when 

he got up and said that if we were to pass this resolution we would be setting up two classes of farmers 

in this province. He said because farmers own their mineral rights, and mineral development took place, 

and they cashed in they would be at an advantage to other farmers. Well, I would like to say this; I 

would like to ask him what his position on this would be, because he lives in the northern part of the 

province, because he lives close to the Pre-Cambrian Shield where we have rich 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

66 

 

mineral deposits, and if he went out to stake himself a claim in the Pre-Cambrian Shields and his claim 

paid off at some future date, and he was in a position to cash in. Well then, would he consider himself as 

a special class of citizen? Knowing my socialist friends across the way, I am sure that if that happened, 

they would take full advantage of any development that took place, of that type. So I say if some people 

are allowed to do that, in that type of condition, then by all means the farmers who have title to their 

mineral rights and the title to their land should not be deprived of that title, and they should not be taxed. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — May I answer that question? I pay my tax and royalty. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — I want to point out the situation today. He tried to make much of the fact that it is 

only 60¢ per quarter section, to those farmers who have leased their land. They say that this hasn‘t cost 

the farmer very much, but I wonder if they ever stopped to figure out the tremendous expense the 

farmers have gone to in this province to try and recover their mineral rights, and some of the 

concessions that were made because of this tax. I am sure that they realize it was only a few days ago 

when they had an organization meeting them they were going to try and ask restoration to the farmer 

some of the privileges and rights that were given up due to the result of some of their legislation. Further 

to that, farmers have each year given these organizations money to try and restore those rights. Further 

to that, it cost the province money, because they set up a board to renegotiate and try and restore some of 

these rights to the farmer. This all adds up, Mr. Speaker, (yes it is on the Order Paper) this all adds up to 

an increase in farmers‘ cost of production. So now he is in a position where he is trying to get some of 

his rights back and they set up this Mineral Contract Renegotiation Board. Mr. Speaker, and what has 

been the result of that? 

 

Government Member: — Why don‘t you tell us about your national policy? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — We‘d like to see the rules obeyed. 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

67 

 

Mr. Speaker: — We have had discussion of this. I don‘t think it should be brought in here. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Mr. Speaker, because these are further costs imposed upon the farmer, because of 

this legislation, and so we have this board set up, and this was another cover to try and pacify some of 

the farmers who were trying to protect themselves. So we have the applications that were sent in here, I 

have the figure here, 2,315 applications sent in to have their contracts looked into, and what has been the 

results of that board? To date only four contracts have been renegotiated. In other words there are only 

four farmers who have had their mineral rights renegotiated. So I say that every piece of legislation this 

Government brought in, every action taken by this Government, tends to further discriminate against the 

farmer. 

 

As I pointed out, I am in full sympathy with the Minister of Agriculture, when he goes into Cabinet with 

his colleagues, and tries to bring up the conditions of the farmer to these people, including the Provincial 

Treasurer of former years, and after getting the opinions of the Attorney General, I don‘t see where 

farmers in the province are ever going to get a break by this type of Government. It never has been, and 

it never will be a party or government for the farmers. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I will have much pleasure in supporting this resolution because I think it is one 

resolution which will attempt to keep some of the farmer‘s hard earned money in his pockets. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — May I ask the hon. Member a question before he sits down? The hon. Member 

suggested that anybody that has claims up in the north, who is assessed taxes, should be relieved from 

paying those taxes . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — What‘s that got to do with this? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Please answer the question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — . . . a question was raised, and I believe the hon. Member does have an opportunity to 

make a statement in the closing speech. I think that was in order. 

  



 

March 14, 1961 

 

68 

 

I want to again inform the hon. Members that the hon. Member from Souris-Estevan is about to close the 

debate. 

 

Mr. Ian H. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I don‘t propose you to go to the henhouse 

and collect all the eggs that have been laid across the way, but I would just suggest at this time that the 

hon. Members opposite can show their good faith and support this resolution, and to relieve themselves 

of all this confusion. I see that they vote according to party lines rather than according to good sense, 

most of the time, and I would suggest that they support this motion, in view of the fact that the farmers 

would benefit by their support. 

 

I now move the closure of this debate. I support the motion. 

 

The question being put, it was negative on a recorded division: 15 to 25. 

 

Yeas — 15 

 

Messieurs 

 

Thatcher Cameron Klein 

Batten (Mrs.) McFarlane Horsman 

Barrie Gardiner Coderre 

McDonald Foley MacDougall 

Danielson Boldt Snedker 

 

Nays — 25 

 

Messieurs 

 

Dewhurst Brown Meakes 

Brockelbank Blakeney Thiessen 

Lloyd Erb Stevens 

Walker Turnbull Kluzak 

Nollet Stone Dahlman 

Kuziak Thibault Semchuk 

Cooper (Mrs.) Berezowsky Perkins 

Davies Johnson Peterson 

Willis   

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o‘clock p.m. 

 


