



















































Hansard: October 13, 1961


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

SECOND SESSION — FOURTEENTH LEGISLATURE 

3rd Day 

 

Friday, October 13th, 1961 

 

The House met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

Before the Orders of the Day: 

 

QUESTION RE SODIUM SULPHATE DEPOSITS 
 

Mr. W. Ross Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are 

called I should like to direct a question to the Minister of Mineral Resources. Could the Minister state 

whether the government or any agency thereof has recently purchased the sodium sulphate deposits at 

Ingebright Lake near Fox Valley. If so, could he tell the House whether the purchase will have any 

effect on the operations of the sodium sulphate plant at Chaplin? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the hon. 

member‟s question, negotiations have been in progress and they may be completed, but I wouldn‟t like 

to make a definite announcement right now. I might have something to announce in a day or two on that. 

 

QUESTION RE WATER DRILLING 
 

Mr. Douglas T. McFarlane (Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are 

called, I have a press release from this morning‟s paper stating that a joint water drilling program has 

been entered into between the provincial, federal and municipal governments. I would like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Agriculture, and ask him if this is in effect immediately in this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Yes, Mr. Speaker, it is in effect now. 

 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

2 

STATEMENT RE PROCEDURE 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I would like to make a statement with regard to procedure in the debate on the 

Address-in-Reply. If it is all right I will make it now; otherwise I will leave it until the end of the debate. 

 

Yesterday a point of order was raised, questioning a practice of this House which has pertained for some 

time, namely that of permitting debate on both the Address-in-Reply and the amendment thereto, at the 

same time. In my opinion the point of order requires not so much a ruling on the practice as an 

explanation of its purpose. 

 

The Speech from the Throne is traditionally a general statement of government policy, as well as a 

general outline of proposed legislation. Following the speech, the House has an opportunity to debate in 

general terms the policies and the legislative proposals of the government on the motion for an 

Address-in-Reply. This debate provides the House with an opportunity to test the government on the 

motion for an Address-in-Reply. This debate provides the House with an opportunity to test the 

government on a want of confidence motion, moved as an amendment to the Address-in-Reply, and in 

this House such an amendment has long been regarded simply as a non-confidence motion, without in 

any way restricting the generality of the debate. Thus, after an amendment has been moved to the 

motion of the Address-in-Reply the House continues to debate the general policy of the government and 

not simply the specific substance of the amendment. 

 

I must therefore rule that the point raised yesterday was not well taken, and debate will continue on the 

amendment and the motion. 

 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

3 

THRONE SPEECH DEBATE 
 

Address-in-Reply 
 

The House then resumed the debate on the proposed motion of Mrs. Cooper, seconded by Mr. Meakes: 

 

Hon. T.C. Douglas (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, before the House adjourned yesterday afternoon, I 

congratulated the lady member for Regina, and the member for Touchwood on the very able manner in 

which they moved and seconded the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne. I also dealt with 

the complaint of the Leader of the Opposition, regarding the fact that members were going to be asked, 

commencing next Monday, to sit in the mornings throughout the duration of this special session. 

 

I would like now to turn to the address which was delivered by the Leader of the Opposition. After 

listening to it yesterday, I am convinced that the one thing the Leader of the Opposition needs is a new 

speech writer. This is the same speech that we listened to during the previous session. It is the same 

speech the people have listened to all over this province. It contained the same newspaper clippings, the 

same quotes, the same misrepresentations and the same exaggerations. Maybe it was louder, but it 

certainly wasn‟t any better. The same old inconsistencies were there — saying that taxes are too high. 

For about twenty minutes he said that taxes were too high. Then he criticized the government because 

we hadn‟t built another mental hospital and because we held the hospitals down last year to an 

additional three per cent on their budget. He described the austerity plan for hospitals as 

“belt-tightening”. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that a $35,000,000 payment to the hospitals of this province 

could hardly be described as belt-tightening. That is more than the entire provincial budget was fifteen 

years ago. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition spent a good part of his time yesterday worrying about the state of the 

CCF organization and of the New Democratic Party. This has always been a strange phenomenon to me. 

I can recall that for the past sixteen years in this legislature, members opposite have spent a great deal of 

time talking about the Regina Manifesto, telling us what was wrong with the CCF organization and 

predicting its early demise. For an organization that was going to die so quickly it has had a remarkably 

long life, and a good deal of fight in it as my hon. friends have found in successive general elections. 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

4 

I want to just offer a word of kindly advice to my friends, and I won‟t charge them anything for it. It is 

this: if the Liberal party had spent less time in the last ten or twelve years worrying about the state of 

affairs in the CCF, and about the CCF Manifesto, and had spent more time getting together a 

constructive program and securing for themselves a leader who would commend himself to the people 

of the province, they would be in better political shape than they are today. 

 

Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — Instead of that, they have tried to be all things to all men, until today they have 

come to the place where they are intellectually bankrupt, and have the least responsible leadership that 

they have ever had in their long and chequered career. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition said yesterday that the government is supported by a party which is 

passing out of existence. Mr. Speaker, he knows, of course, that this is not true. He wasn‟t here but he 

knows that at the 1960 session of this legislature, the session prior to the provincial election, I gave from 

my place, with the full support of my colleagues, the pledge that if the CCF government were elected in 

1960, it would sit for the term which it was elected as a CCF government, and that the CCF members 

would sit as CCF members for their constituencies. Now, it is true that the Saskatchewan CCF will 

affiliate with the New Democratic Party for federal purposes. This is not an unusual procedure. We 

formed the Saskatchewan Farmer-Labour Party in 1932. The CCF was formed in 1933. The 

Saskatchewan Farmer-Labour Party affiliated with the CCF for federal purposes, but remained as the 

Saskatchewan Farmer-Labour Party until the general election of 1938. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to suggest because the party to which we belong on this side has changed the name of its 

federal affiliate, that it should resign, comes most strangely from the Leader of the Opposition. Here is a 

man who didn‟t change the name of his affiliation. Here is a man who changed his political party. He 

was three times elected as a CCF member for Moose Jaw-Lake Centre. Then we walked across the floor 

of the House of Commons and sat as an independent. He made some advances, first to the Social Credit 

party and then to the Progressive Conservative party and when he found the welcome sign wasn‟t out, he 

joined the Liberal party. Many of the people in his constituency demanded that he should resign and 

come back and face his constituents, and this he refused to do. As a matter of fact when the 1957 elected 

rolled around he didn‟t even go back to that constituency which he had deserted, in order to give his 

constituents an opportunity to express their opinion about what 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

5 

he had done. Instead he went to another constituency where he was defeated in both 1957 and 1958. For 

this gentleman now to suggest that a political party that has changed the name of its federal affiliate 

ought to resign and go to the people, seems to me takes the kind of gall that would make a government 

mule look like a shrinking violet. 

 

This government has not changed its program or its policy or anything else. As a matter of fact we‟ve 

had in the Farmer-Labour party and later in the CCF, trade union affiliates since the very beginning of 

our organization. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition spent some time yesterday trying to tell this House that the New 

Democratic Party will be “labour dominated”. But if he took the trouble to look at the representation at 

the founding convention in Ottawa, he would find that the trade union representation was about 

one-third of the total delegate representation at the convention. At the Ontario founding convention last 

Saturday the CCF delegates and the trade union delegates together represented about two-thirds. The 

other one-third was made up of other groups who had never belonged to either of these groups. The 

thirty-five farmers to whom he referred didn‟t cover all the farmers. There were plenty of farmers there 

as CCF delegates and from new party clubs. The thirty-five farmer delegates were farmers from farm 

organizations who had never before been affiliated with the CCF or any of the new party clubs. 

 

Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — As far as Saskatchewan is concerned we have always welcomed trade union 

affiliates. At the convention which will commence on the first of November, trade union representatives 

will probably number less than one hundred and certainly not more than one hundred, out of a total 

delegate body of some nine hundred. I want to say that as far as the New Democratic party is concerned, 

we will welcome the support of trade union affiliates, anywhere in Canada. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition yesterday talked about the merging of the CCF and the Canadian Labour 

Congress. He ought to know that the Canadian Labour Congress is not part of the New Democratic 

Party. Under their constitution they can‟t become part of the New Democratic Party. I noticed in the 

press the other day that he referred to Stanley Knowles as being the president of the New Democratic 

Party. Mr. Stanley Knowles is an officer of the Canadian Labour Congress. He holds no office in the 

New Democratic Party, and cannot, nor can any of the other top officers of the Canadian Labour 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

6 

Congress hold office in the New Democratic Party. But I am glad, Mr. Speaker, that at long last, labour 

groups in this country are recognizing that they have a common cause with the farmers and the small 

businessmen, and the white collar workers. 

 

Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — When the Leader of the Opposition says that “he who pays the piper calls the 

tune” I‟d like to know who has been calling the tune for the Liberal party throughout the years? You‟ve 

only got to go back and remember the Beauharnois scandal and the Bren Gun scandal and the Trans 

Canada Pipe Line affair . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — It isn‟t the breweries, anyway . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — . . . and to remember that in this province a Liberal government, when we had one 

here, was little better than the cat‟s paw for the mortgage companies and the insurance underwriters‟ 

association. Any time anybody pays to the New Democratic Party or to the CCF it will be paid in the 

open where people will know who is paying. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition said that the interests of farmer and labour are not the same. Well, of 

course the interests cannot be identical, but I submit that the interests of these two groups are much 

closer together than any other two groups in our society. They depend on each other‟s purchasing power. 

The prosperity of the one will contribute to the prosperity of the other. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the Leader of the Opposition is right, and if their interests are irreconcilable, and if it is 

not possible to have a party which serves both the farmers and the industrial workers, then which of 

these groups does the Liberal party serve? Which? Well, I will tell you Mr. Speaker, what they profess 

to serve. On the prairies they talk about serving the farmer. But I know that in Ontario and Quebec for 

the last ten years, among the industrial workers, the people there have been told that you can‟t support 

the CCF because it is completely dominated by western farmers. The Liberal party doesn‟t support 

either the farmers or the industrial workers! It has supported those vested interests who have exploited 

both of them as long as Canada has been a nation! All the Liberal party has ever tried to do is to play the 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

7 

farmer and the worker off against each other, while at the same time being the chore boy of those who 

have betrayed them. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition says that the Premier deserted his desk in Regina to go about the country 

selling the New Democratic Party. Mr. Speaker, that statement is false. I have never deserted my desk at 

Regina. Since the time that I became national leader of the New Democratic Party, I have been away — 

apart from weekends and I assume I am entitled to spend my weekends addressing public meetings in 

other parts of Canada if I want to — I have been away from my desk two weeks — one week in which I 

went to Ottawa to attend the founding convention, and one week in which I took a series of nominating 

conventions and other meetings in eastern Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I assume I am entitled as are most employees of the government, to three weeks‟ holidays. 

There were a great many years for which I haven‟t had them. But I am entitled to three weeks‟ holiday 

and I‟ve already spent two weeks of that holiday, as I have already outlined, and I propose to use the 

third week to attend the provincial convention of the CCF, which will commence on the first of 

November of this year. 

 

Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — I need no instructions from the Leader of the Opposition as to how to discharge 

my duty. 

 

Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — The Leader of the Opposition is also on the taxpayer‟s payroll, Mr. Speaker. Let‟s 

not forget that. He draws an indemnity, he draws a salary as Leader of the Opposition and he also draws 

a pension as a former Member of Parliament, which is also paid by the taxpayers of this country. He too 

has some responsibility to discharge his duties and to earn his money. I was interested in the press 

release which he gave at the end of the session, this past year, in which he said he had been so exhausted 

by the work of the session that he had to go to Europe for six weeks‟ holiday. I don‟t begrudge him 

having a six weeks‟ holiday; I just couldn‟t understand what had exhausted him! As I recall it, he made 

one speech in the Throne Speech debate. He didn‟t speak in the Budget debate, and when almost every 

major piece of legislation came up, he rose and said he hadn‟t had time to read it, but some other 

member in his group was going to 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

8 

make a thumping speech on it. Sometimes the other member turned up and sometimes the other member 

didn‟t. Is this what exhausted the hon. member? 

 

Mr. Speaker, when he has put as many years in this House as I have, and is able to show the people of 

this province as good a record of rigid application to the responsibilities which have been given to him, 

then he will be in a position to offer his criticisms. 

 

Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, this session of the legislature was called together as hon. members 

know, to deal with two major matters. The first is the Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act, which 

has just been given first reading by this legislature. I think it is significant, that in his address yesterday, 

the Leader of the Opposition said nothing about the basic principles of medical care. His only reference 

to a medical care program were those which were designed to throw cold water on the idea. First he 

said, “Why don‟t we wait for a national plan.” Well, Mr. Speaker, I am sure there were a lot of people in 

Saskatchewan who heard that and who said to themselves, “How long are we supposed to wait?” The 

Liberal Party at its national convention in 1919 promised a national comprehensive health insurance 

program. They were in office from 1921 to 1930 and from 1935 to 1957. In 1945, during the election 

immediately following the war, Liberal candidates went up and down the country waving a copy of the 

Heagerty Report and waving a copy of a bill which was never put into law, and saying, „You elect us 

now that the war is over and we‟re going to have comprehensive health insurance‟. It‟s true we had a 

Hospital Insurance Act. But it was a Hospital Insurance Act which contained within it a “joker”, 

whereby we couldn‟t get a national health insurance plan until at least Ontario or Quebec along with 

four other provinces were willing to come into the plan. The Liberal party left office without having 

contributed one five-cent piece to a national hospital insurance plan. 

 

The Conservatives then came into office. Let it be said to their everlasting credit that one of the first 

things they did was to take the joker out of the Act, and to make national hospital insurance available to 

whatever provinces were prepared to proceed with such a plan. But they had promised in 1957 that if 

they were elected they would not only take the joker out of the Act, but 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

9 

they would extend hospital insurance to cover all hospital cases. This they haven‟t done. They promised 

to make hospital insurance applicable to mental hospital patients, and to tuberculosis sanatoria, and this 

they haven‟t done. The result is that hospital insurance in Canada today covers only 50 per cent of the 

hospital beds in Canada. We haven‟t got complete hospital insurance yet. Someone has said that we 

should wait for the report of the Royal Commission on Medical care which has been set up by the 

Government of Canada. Well, first of all most of us have done some experience about waiting for action 

to be taken on the reports of Royal Commissions, and if one looks at the terms of reference of that 

commission, one can see that it is not specifically beamed at dealing with the problem of setting up a 

comprehensive health insurance program. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, to say that we should wait for a 

national plan, is to ask the people of Saskatchewan to drag along and wait, as they have waited for thirty 

or forty years, for the federal government to act and knowing full well that they are not likely to act 

unless some province leads the way. 

 

The other thing the Leader of the Opposition said about the medical care program was, “What‟s the 

hurry?” He said the government is just hurrying this plan through for the publicity effect in the federal 

election. Yet, I remember at the last regular session of the legislature, that at least two or three members 

opposite asked the government when we were going to get on with the medical care plan. They pointed 

out that the government had promised it in the election of 1960. They wanted to know what we were 

waiting for — how long was the medical advisory committee going to take to gate a report down — 

what was holding us up? Mr. Speaker, this is surely a disorganized army. The rank and file are saying 

forward, and the leader is saying retreat. They had better make up their minds. Does the Liberal party 

believe we should have a medical care plan. Do they believe we should have it now? Do they want to 

postpone it? They can‟t be “forwards-backwards” all the time. They‟ve got to take a stand. I think the 

people of the province have a right to know where they stand on this question. When the House votes on 

this matter they‟ll have a chance to see, and their constituents will have a chance to see what they think 

about a medical care plan. 

 

There was one statement made by the Leader of the Opposition about medical care which astonished 

me. He said, „There‟s not a shred of evidence to show that any person in the province has been unable to 

get medical attention‟. 

 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

10 

Surely if ever a comment indicated that an individual was out of touch with people, it is that remark. It is 

like Marie Antoinette at the time of the French Revolution when the people were crying for bread, 

saying, “Why don‟t they eat cake”. To say that there is no evidence to show that any person in the 

province has been unable to get medical attention, is to fly in the face of all the facts. 

 

The Canadian Sickness Report, 1951, conducted by the Government of Canada shows clearly that the 

lower income groups in the period under study had more illness and more days of disability than did the 

higher income groups. It shows, conversely, that the volume of medical care received by the low income 

groups is much less than that received by higher income groups. The low income groups because of poor 

diet, poor housing conditions and harder working conditions have more illness and have more disability. 

Yet the records show that they are the people who get the least medical care. The Canadian Sickness 

Report shows that the low income groups spent on an average $58.10 per family, whereas the higher 

income groups spent on an average $158.70 per family. The higher income groups spent almost three 

times as much per family on medical care as did the low income groups, despite the fact that the low 

income groups had more sickness and more disability. 

 

If my hon. friend would take the trouble to turn to Page 58 of the Interim report of the Advisory 

Committee on Medical Care he would see there a table which shows that in the year 1959, 120,940 

persons or families in Saskatchewan had incomes of less than $2,500 per year. Forty-eight per cent of 

the income earners of this province had an income of less than $2,500. The same report shows that 

thirty-five per cent of the income earners in this province didn‟t earn enough to pay income tax. They 

didn‟t earn $1,000 a year if they were single, and didn‟t earn $2,000 a year if they were married with no 

dependent children. Those figures can be duplicated right across Canada as the recent survey will show. 

It is sheer nonsense therefore to say that there is no evidence that people are not able to get the medical 

attention they require. 

 

Now I readily grant that no doctor has turned patients away. No doctor could do so without violating his 

Hippocratic oath. But what happens? First of all, patients are reluctant to go to the doctor if they know 

they can‟t pay. People fail to seek medical counsel and medical advice when they should get it and they 

oftentimes 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

11 

leave it until the situation is serious and even dangerous. The second fact is that many people who do go 

to doctors incur bills and debts which cripple them for years to come and this does not just apply to poor 

people. There are thousands of people in Saskatchewan and across Canada living on reasonably 

comfortable incomes who are able to make the payments on their houses and their cars and on their 

television set and who can get by providing two things, firstly — they don‟t lose their jobs and secondly, 

that the bread-winner doesn‟t get seriously ill. For such people, doctor bills amounting to large sums of 

money can put that family in a serious financial predicament for years to come. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition yesterday spent a good deal of time talking about the terrible costs which 

this would place upon the taxpayers of the province. I thought some of his sentences were gems. He 

said, “The Liberals believe in a medical care plan if it can be done without hardship to the taxpayer.” 

Now, which taxpayer is he worried about — the ones that are going to be paying less under this plan 

than they pay now, or the ones that are going to be paying more? Which is he worried about? He goes on 

and says, “Many people wonder if we can afford $20,000,000 at a time like this for a medical care plan”. 

Many people wonder! Is he one of them? Are the members opposite among those who wonder if we can 

afford $20,000,000 for a medical care plan? Let them say so. 

 

The Leader-Post for three months has been writing editorials telling the people of Saskatchewan they 

cannot afford a medical care plan. Is the Liberal press speaking for the Liberal party. It is time the 

Liberal party got off the fence and took a stand. The Leader of the Opposition says the people cannot 

stand more taxes. He says that land taxes are too high. Mr. Speaker, of course land taxes are too high. I 

want to point out two things. The CCF government doesn‟t impose any land taxes. There is no 

provincial land tax. There was a provincial land tax when we took office, and it was put there by a 

Liberal government. The CCF government took it off. It was a tax of two mills on every bit of land in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to remind you, moreover, that by gradually increasing school grants and giving additional help to 

municipalities for roads, we have saved the municipality a great deal of money which they could 

otherwise have had to get by levying land taxes. If we had continued to pay school grants, not in the 

same amounts, but in the same percentage of the total cost of education that the Liberal party gave, and 

if we gave assistance for roads to municipalities 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

12 

on the same basis that the Liberal party gave them, the municipalities of this province — rural and urban 

— would have had to impose another 17½ mills on every bit of land in the province of Saskatchewan. 

The generous help the municipalities have had from the government has enabled them to keep the land 

taxes from going any higher than they are now. 

 

I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the cost of a medical care plan is not a new cost to the people of 

Saskatchewan. The people of this province now are spending $18 million to $20 million a year for 

medical care. This is not a new cost. It is a different distribution of the cost — that is all. This money 

had to be paid before. Doctors of this province had to be paid. Everything has had to be paid for — their 

staff, X-ray technicians, lab technicians, these things all had to be paid for. But they have been paid for 

by those who were unfortunate enough to be ill. We are now saying they should be paid for by spreading 

the cost over all the people. We propose that the family tax which we admit is a regressive tax, since 

there is a flat rate on every family, and therefore bears no relationship to ability to pay should be kept as 

small as possible. We propose that the balance of the cost — probably two-thirds of the cost — ought to 

be raised by factors which have a measure of ability to pay. 

 

Maybe this is why the Liberal press have been so vehement in their attacks on this plan. It may be that 

some of them begin to suspect that they are going to have to pay a part of the medical bill of some other 

people who are not able to pay their own. 

 

Yesterday the Leader of the Opposition sneered at the idea of „I am my brother‟s keeper‟. He said, 

“There isn‟t much cream in Saskatchewan.” I want to suggest that the Leader-Post and the Star-Phoenix, 

the Sifton interests and the Leader of the Opposition have fattened quite a bit during the term of the CCF 

government in office, and it will certainly not hurt them at all to make some contribution towards the 

medical care for those less fortunate than themselves. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — There are a lot of heavy ones over there! 

 

Premier Douglas: — The Leader of the Opposition when he began his remarks on Wednesday said, 

„The member for Regina doesn‟t know what this medical care plan will cost‟, and „I doubt if the 

government knows‟. 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

13 

This is strange. It‟s strange in the first place the government wouldn‟t know what it is going to cost, 

when the Leader of the Opposition has been going up and down the length and breadth of the province, 

saying that he knows what it‟s going to cost because he has one of the government‟s secret documents. 

 

If the government has a secret document saying what it is going to cost, and the Leader of the 

Opposition says he‟s got a copy of it, how can he say the government doesn‟t know what it‟s going to 

cost? 

 

This is what the September 27th issue of the Kindersley Clarion attributed to the Leader of the 

Opposition in a speech which he delivered at Kindersley: 

 

“ . . . claiming to have obtained possession, through “friends on the other side”, of a photostatic 

record of governments plans for a medical services scheme, Thatcher declared that this document 

will shock everyone in Saskatchewan . . . ” 

 

I don‟t know, Mr. Speaker, whether or not he has a photostatic copy of such a document. If he has, there 

are only two places he could have secured it. The first would be from some member of the Advisory 

Planning Committee on Medical Care, and I don‟t believe any member of that committee would give to 

him or to anyone else, a copy of a confidential report. The only other place that would have a copy of 

such a report would be from — 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — The Toronto Star! 

 

Premier Douglas: — We‟re talking now about costs. If he has a document outlining the costs which he 

says will shock the people of Saskatchewan, the only place he could have got it would be if some 

employee of the government had stolen it, and given it to him. It‟s the only place. As a matter of fact, I 

remember a year ago when he also professed to have had an advance copy of what we were going to 

charge for the hospital plan for the year 1961. Well, Mr. Speaker, by my standards, I have always 

thought the receiver of stolen property was exactly in the same position as the person who stole it. 

 

Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

14 

Premier Douglas: — When the Leader of the Opposition says that the government doesn‟t know the 

cost, and he doesn‟t know the cost, I wonder if he read a copy of the Interim Report of the Advisory 

Planning Committee on Medical Care. This was sent to him the very day it was released to the press. He 

will find that on page 85 estimates are given. They say it will cost between $19,970,000 and 

$20,570,000. If you add to that the administrative costs, which they estimate at $1 million, this means 

somewhere between $21 million and $21.5 million, and if a utilization fee is charge, you can subtract 

$1,800,000 from these amounts. There isn‟t much doubt as to what the cost will be. We‟re talking about 

a sum of money in the neighbourhood of $20 million — more if you don‟t impose utilization fees, and 

slightly less if you do. 

 

It seems to me to be begging the question to be talking about whether or not the people of this province, 

or the people of Canada can afford a plan to spread the cost of sickness over the entire population. This 

is not a new principle. This has existed in nearly all the countries of western Europe — many of them 

for a quarter of a century. It has been in Great Britain since 1948; it has been in New Zealand since 

1935; it has been in Australia. The little state of Israel that only came into existence in 1948 has today 

the most comprehensive health insurance plan in the world. It has more doctors, and nurses and dentists 

per thousand of its population than any other industrialized country or any country for which we can get 

statistics. 

 

It is not a new principle. To me it seems to be sheer nonsense to suggest that medical care is something 

which ought to be measured just in dollars. When we‟re talking about medical care we‟re talking about 

our sense of values. Do we think human life is important? Do we think that the best medical care which 

is available is something to which people are entitled, by virtue of belonging to a civilized community? I 

looked up the figures and I found that in 1959, the people of Canada spent $1,555 million, or eight per 

cent of their personal expenditures on alcohol and tobacco. I would be the last person to argue that 

people do not have the right, if they want to, to spend part of their income for either alcohol or tobacco 

or entertainment, or anything else. But in the same period of time, the people of Canada spent $944 

million for medical and dental care, or four and one-half per cent of their income expenses. In other 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

15 

words, in the year 1959 we spent almost twice as much on luxuries such as tobacco and alcohol as we 

spent on providing ourselves and our families with the medical and dental care which they require. 

 

If we can afford large sums of money for other things such as horse-racing, and many other things, and 

we do — I‟m not arguing against them — then I say we ought to have sufficient sense of values to say 

that health is more important than these things, and if we can find money for relatively non-essential 

things, we can find the money to give to our people good health. 

 

Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — The Liberal press in this province have been running editorials regularly for 

months now against the welfare state, particularly attacking the welfare state in the United Kingdom. 

The other day they pointed out that the British government was spending on national defence. Well, this 

to me is not a crushing criticism. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, it shows that the Parliament of Great 

Britain recognizes that giving people security, giving people good health, giving people the feeling of 

well-being, is the most important defence there is against Communism. Communities where people have 

security and where care is taken of the needy and unfortunate, have the kind of society in to which 

Communism has never been able to infiltrate. They published the figures on what this welfare state is 

costing the British taxpayer. They quoted as $2.5 billion and that is approximately correct. But there are 

55 million people in Great Britain. If you divide 55 million people into $2.5 billion, this works out at 

less than $50 per capita. 

 

Mr. Speaker, $50 per capita gives every man, woman and child in Great Britain security from the cradle 

to the grave. It takes care of their doctor bills, dental bills, hospital bills, optometric care and appliances. 

The only thing for which there is a deterrent fee is drugs, and that is very small. It gives them 

unemployment insurance, baby bonuses and pensions when they are physically disabled. It provides 

benefits in the event of death, and it provides adequate pensions for widows and their children. I say that 

if any government, or any country can give its people that kind of security for less than $50 per capita, 

then it is worth the price, and many times over. 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

16 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that a medical care plan can only be financed out of one or two sources of 

revenue. The first one is from taxes. Everyone knows you have to pay taxes if you want services. Many 

people under this plan will pay less than they are paying now if they belong to a private plan. Other 

people will pay more, because if some of the money is collected on a basis of ability to pay, and if they 

are in the higher income groups, they may be paying a little more. The important thing for the 

government to ensure is that the part which must be collected from taxes is collected as equitably as 

possible in order to distribute the burden as equitably as possible. 

 

The other source from which the government can get money, of course, is resource development. I want 

to remind you that this government has collected probably $100 for every dollar which a Liberal 

government ever collected from resource development in this province. Yesterday the Leader of the 

Opposition once again made a sweeping statement. He said that the crown corporations cost the people 

of this province millions of dollars. The fact is, of course, that the last financial statement showed 

conclusively that after providing for the losses on the woollen mill and the shoe factory and the tannery, 

the smaller crown corporations — not including gas and power and telephones — have accumulated 

over $12 million in surpluses. If you include power, gas and telephones, the surpluses are over $53 

million — $53,804,067 to be exact. The crown corporations have paid into the government treasury in 

royalties some $7,870,000; they paid to the municipality in lieu of taxes $3,609,000 and have paid out in 

wages over $181 million. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province want health security. I think hospital insurance 

proves that. In spite of all the criticism we had when hospital insurance was set up, and in spite of the 

protest of the Liberal party that we should allow it to be handled by the municipalities, the fact is that 

today no one in this province in their right mind would suggest abolishing hospital insurance. On the 

contrary, our pioneering in hospital insurance proved so successful that today our example has been 

followed in every province in this Dominion. 

 

I believe that the great bulk of the people of this province support the idea of the medical care plan. I 

believe they will indicate they are willing to pay for it, providing the cost is spread equitably on the basis 

of ability to pay. The only ones who are likely to oppose it are those who fear that they will have to help 

those less 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

17 

fortunate than themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will note from the Speech from the Throne it says this medical care plan is to be a 

province-wide plan, with universal coverage. This was an important decision for the Advisory Planning 

Committee on Medical Care to make. They had before them briefs from which advocated a partial 

medical care plan. In very brief terms the recommendation was that the great bulk of the people who 

were self-supporting would ensure themselves by joining the private plan of their choice, and that the 

remainder should have an extra premium paid on their behalf to the private plan, providing they could 

show that they were in need. Private plans ordinarily do not take people who have congenital illnesses. 

But if these people are in need and if an extra premium is paid on their behalf by the government, they 

would get medical care from private plans. Those people generally who, because of low incomes, were 

not able to pay the private plan premium would also be covered by the private plans if they could show 

they were in need and if the government would pay their premium. 

 

It was said by those submitting this plan that this could be done for some $3,600,000. This would be so 

much cheaper than a general plan. Well, the majority report of the Advisory Planning Committee on 

Medical Care showed that the rest of the committee were very dubious about this $3,600,000. It also 

showed that they were convinced the people of Saskatchewan in the aggregate would pay much more to 

private plans than they are going to pay under a government-sponsored plan. 

 

There are two basic weaknesses in the proposals which were put forward by those who wanted a limited 

coverage for medical care. The first is that private plans bear no relationship to ability to pay. I want to 

make it abundantly clear, Mr. Speaker, that the private plans such as Medical Services Incorporated and 

Group Medical Services have rendered a marvellous service to the people of Saskatchewan. In the 

absence of a government plan I have advised people throughout the years, if they can possibly afford it, 

to join these private plans. They have been well operated, and I hope that much of their experience and 

their facilities and staff may be made available to 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

18 

those who will be managing the government-sponsored medical care plan. But a private medical care 

plan can only raise money in one way, and that is by putting flat premium on every family irrespective 

of whether the family‟s income is $20,000 a year or $10,000. They have no way of graduating premiums 

on the basis of ability to pay. Only the government can levy taxes on the basis of ability to pay. Only the 

government is in a position to say that those who have less will pay less, and those who have more will 

pay more. This is why, in my opinion, and in the opinion, apparently, of the majority of the committee, 

the idea of partial coverage was dropped. 

 

The other weakness in the proposal of a partial medical care program is that a great many groups in the 

province would only get coverage if they could prove need. This means imposing a means test; this 

means probing into people‟s affairs, and this is a pretty serious thing to do. 

 

I want to say that the time is surely past when people should have to depend on proving need in order to 

get services that should be the inalienable right of every citizen of a good society. 

 

Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — It is all very well for some people to say that there is no stigma or humiliation 

connected with having to prove need. This is always said by people who know that they are in no danger 

of having to prove need. I am very glad that the committee recommended and the government decided 

that there will be no such stigma and that there will be no means test. Every person in the province who 

is self-supporting and able to pay a relatively small per capita tax, will be eligible for care and those who 

are not self-supporting will be covered by other programs. 

 

I want to say that I think there is a value in having every family and every individual make some 

individual contribution. I think it has psychological value. I think it keeps the public aware of the cost 

and gives the people a sense of personal responsibility. I would say to the members of this House that 

even if we could finance the plan without a per capita tax, I personally would strongly advise against it. I 

would like to see the per capita tax some day so low that it is merely a nominal tax, but I think there is 

psychological value in people paying something for their cards. It is something 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

19 

which they have bought; it entitles them to certain services. We should have the constant realization that 

if these services are abused and costs get out of hand, then of course the cost of the medical care is 

bound to go up. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that if this medical care insurance program is successful, and I think it will be, it 

will prove to be the forerunner of a national medical care insurance plan. It will become the nucleus 

around which Canada will ultimately build a comprehensive health insurance program which will cover 

all health services — not just hospital and medical care — but eventually dental care, optometric care, 

drugs and all the other health services which people require. I believe such a plan operated by the federal 

and provincial governments jointly will ultimately come in Canada. But I don‟t think it will come unless 

we lead the way. I want to say that when the history of our time is written, it may well be recorded that 

in October, 1961, the Saskatchewan legislature and the Saskatchewan people pioneered in this field and 

took a first step towards ultimately establishing a system of medical care insurance for all the people of 

Canada. 

 

Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — The Leader of the Opposition has said that before this plan is put in, there should 

be a plebiscite. He says this plebiscite should be held because 59 per cent of the people of Saskatchewan 

voted against it in the last provincial election. Mr. Speaker, that is not what he said during the election. 

He and the Leader of the Conservative party and the Leader of the Social Credit party went up and down 

the province, assuring people they were not against a medical care plan. How can this 59 per cent 

Liberal, Conservative and Social Credit vote now be counted as being against the medical care plan? 

Not one of the other political leaders in the last provincial election stood up and said they were opposed 

to the medical care program. They said just the opposite. The Leader of the Opposition repeatedly said 

that he was in favour of a medical care program, and that he wanted a medical care plan for the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of this province have made it abundantly clear both from the recommendations 

they have made to the government and to the Advisory Planning Committee on Medical Care, that they 

want a medical care plan. Apart from the briefs submitted by the doctors 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

20 

and Chamber of Commerce, the great bulk of representations, both to the government and to the 

committee, asked for a plan such as this. The government believes that health is too important to be left 

to the chance that the average family will have the necessary money to buy health services. I believe that 

if we put this health plan into operation it will have the same history as the Hospital Insurance Plan. I am 

convinced that inside two or three years, both the doctors who provide the service and the people who 

receive the service, will be so completely satisfied with it that no government will dare to take it away. 

This has proven true in the Hospital Services Plan. It has proven true in the medical care plan which has 

been operating in the Swift Current health Region, and which has covered over 53,000 people since 

1946. No one could discontinue that medical care plan. The doctors there like it, and the people like it. 

The doctors like it because they know they can look after a patient without constantly thinking to 

themselves, „Can this patient afford to pay? Maybe I am ordering diagnostic procedures that are going to 

add to this person‟s indebtedness. Maybe I ought to take a chance and dispense with it.‟ When the doctor 

knows there is no financial barrier, he can treat his patients and go into a thorough diagnosis. He knows 

that he can order whatever X-rays and other tests he thinks necessary. Obviously the doctor can practise 

a better type of medicine, and the patient can get a better type of health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other reason for which the legislature has been called together by His Honour, the 

Lieutenant Governor, was to deal with the Federal-Provincial tax collection agreement, and I thought it 

rather significant that the Leader of the Opposition did not mention it at all. That is one of the 

disadvantages of taking your last-year speech and going over it again. He overlooked the things that are 

of prime importance. These tax collection agreements are going to affect the income and well-being of 

the people of this province until 1967, for these are five-year agreements. It seems to me rather strange 

that the Leader of the Opposition should be so completely unconcerned with the effect on Saskatchewan 

and its people. 

 

My friend, the hon. member for Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) summarized the background of these 

agreements very adequately the other day, so there is no need for me to go into those. Suffice to remind 

members of the House 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

21 

that a good deal of credit goes to the Liberal government at Ottawa for setting up the Rowell-Sirois 

Commission in 1937 and for calling together the first conference on reconstruction in 1945. The Liberal 

government under Mr. Mackenzie King was concerned, as most public men and women were, about the 

fact that our tax structure as set up under our constitution, gave the lion‟s share of taxes to those 

provinces who had the headquarters of large corporations located within their border. Provinces such as 

the prairie provinces and the Maritimes, because they did not have the head offices of those companies, 

did not get their fair share of the revenue. The Rowell-Sirois report asked that the Federal Government 

collect all these taxes, and then redistribute a portion of them on the basis of fiscal need. I ask hon. 

members to remember that we have never had such a system. A system of fiscal need gives to the 

provinces that need it most, to raise their standards of health, welfare and education up to the level of the 

more wealthy provinces. 

 

The federal government under Mr. Mackenzie King in 1945 took the first step in this direction, by 

bringing down the Green Book proposals. They did not propose fiscal need as the basis of redistributing 

the revenue from these three tax fields. They suggested that the money be divided between the provinces 

on a per capita basis, and at least that was certainly better than anything we had ever had before. In 1956 

Mr. St. Laurent made the first break away from this, as was pointed out by the member for Touchwood, 

when he brought in the tax-sharing arrangement by which provinces who did not rent their tax fields, 

would still get equalization grants. 

 

It should be said, to the credit of the present federal government at Ottawa, that when they took office in 

1957 they raised the standard rates of income tax available to the province from ten per cent to thirteen 

per cent. This gave each province a small amount more money than they have been getting in the past. 

 

In 1960, the present government at Ottawa announced its intention to discontinue the tax-sharing 

arrangement and tax rental agreement, and forcing the provinces to go back and levy their own income 

and corporation taxes. Mr. Speaker, this has had serious repercussions for the people of Saskatchewan. 

First of all, the equalization now will not be up to the level of the two top provinces. It will be brought 

down to a national average. If you go 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

22 

above the national average you get nothing. The national average, as I said at the conference, is like 

George Orwell‟s “Animal Farm” — „Everybody was going to be treated equal but some are going to be 

more „equal‟ than others‟. All those who are above the national average, of course, will get no 

equalization grant. 

 

The most serious thing is that for the first time a new factor has been introduced. The federal 

government will take into consideration part of the revenue from resources. This means that a province 

which levies very low royalties, as does the province of Ontario, for instance, will be helped. A province 

which puts on fairly heavy royalties will find their equalization payments cut down. I don‟t know 

whether the people of Saskatchewan realize how serious this thing is. The only thing that prevents 

Saskatchewan losing $13 million a year under this agreement is the fact that there is a clause in the new 

agreement which says that in no year can we get less than we would have gotten under the previous 

agreement. But this means that for five years we will sit on the floor. Ontario will undoubtedly go up; 

other provinces will go up; Saskatchewan, Quebec and New Brunswick will stay on the floor. This 

means that the amount of money which we are getting is going to be fixed for a five-year period, and 

will take no cognizance of the tremendous expansion of services which will be required in this province 

in the next five or six years. 

 

When this was proposed in October, 1960, all the provinces except Ontario complained violently. By the 

time we had met in 1961, the Maritimes had been given an additional grant, and that of course satisfied 

them because they were not affected by the clauses I have mentioned. However, the exception which 

was taken to these proposals at the inference was taken by Mr. Lesage and myself, who represent two of 

the provinces who are going to suffer as a result of these new proposals. 

 

When I think of the very courageous stand and the forthright statements that were made by Mr. Lesage, I 

was therefore somewhat surprised when in Saskatoon I found a Liberal M.L.A. saying this, according to 

The Leader-Post, September 27th: 

 

“The Saskatchewan government‟s idea that the federal government is the „horn of plenty‟ whenever 

federal-provincial fiscal arrangements come up for discussion, 

 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

23 

made the federal government take the line of least resistance and return the levying of income and 

corporation taxes to the provinces . . .” 

 

This action will place the blame for tax increases on the province, where they belong . . .” 

 

This is a statement by the member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) who spoke, I understand, in the city of 

Moose Jaw. Even the Leader of the Opposition, speaking on Wednesday, said: 

 

“The reason the agreements are being scrapped is because of the constant criticism of the CCF 

government.” 

 

Well, this criticism also apply to Mr. Lesage and Mr. Robichaud who were equally outspoken? Do I take 

it that the Liberal opposition in this legislature doesn‟t agree with our criticism? Do they consider that 

this is a good proposal? What has been our criticism? Our criticisms, whether there has been a Liberal or 

Conservative government in office, have been two-fold. The first is that they have never yet 

implemented the principle of fiscal need which the Rowell-Sirois Commission recommended. Secondly, 

our criticism was that of the total revenue from income corporation and succession taxes, the portion 

which was divided and given back to the provinces amounted to only about twenty-three per cent. 

 

Our contention was that in a tax field in which the federal and provincial governments occupy jointly, 

the very least the provinces were entitled to was one-third of the total. Surely my hon. friends would 

agree with that. Why, therefore, for mere political advantage, should the Leader of the Opposition get up 

and say these agreements are being scrapped because of the constant criticism of the CCF government. 

Any premier standing here, and the premier of the province that is in a similar position to this one, 

would have criticized these agreements if he were loyal to the people whom he represents. 

 

Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — The Leader of the Opposition yesterday complained that the plight of agriculture 

and the problem of unemployment had not been mentioned in the Speech from the Throne. I made it 

perfectly clear 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

24 

yesterday that it is never the custom at a special fall session to deal with general economic conditions. 

That is done at a regular session. This session was called together to deal with the two things I have 

already discussed — a medical care plan, and the Dominion-Provincial tax collection agreement. I want 

to say that in spite of all the Leader of the Opposition‟s shouting yesterday about agricultural problems, 

when he had finished I had not yet heard a single, concrete proposal. He talked about unemployment and 

he quoted from a speech I had made in January, 1944. He then tried to leave the impression that this was 

a program for a provincial government. I was speaking then as a Federal Member of Parliament, and the 

very quotation which he used yesterday, showed that I was talking about the Dominion Government, 

because I talked about converting all our war industries and war plants into useful peacetime production. 

That would hardly be within the jurisdiction of a provincial government. 

 

He went on to talk about the lack of employment opportunity in the province. I am not going to chase 

him around that mill again. This has been done every session. I just want to remind him again that in the 

Saskatchewan Economic Review, it is perfectly clear. He has heard the figures before and he can easily 

see them again. Take the index of employment and use 1949 as 100. The index of employment for 

Canada in 1960 went from 100 to 118; in Manitoba it went up to 111.2; Saskatchewan is up to 126.6 and 

Alberta is up to 154.1. As a matter of fact, Saskatchewan has come up from lower than the national 

average in 1946 to a way above the national average in 1960. If you look at the non-agricultural labour 

force you will find that in 1946 we had 146,000. In 1960 it was 189,000 listed — an increase of 43,000. 

 

Then he did something which I thought was intended to place something of a strain on the credulity of 

the public. He got out the Gazette for Friday, October 6th, and he said, “Why here are 248 firms that 

have left the province.” Well, Mr. Speaker, this list includes motels, and various kinds of businesses, 

which have been struck off the registration. Why didn‟t he tell the House that at the same date last year 

234 had been dropped from the registration? Why didn‟t he tell the House that there are 434 more 

companies registered now than there were a year ago? Of course, the whole thing is farcical, because 

this ha nothing to do with whether a company is in business or not in business. I have the Saskatchewan 

Gazette 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

25 

for Friday, September 9th. It refers to a company which has been struck off the register. Here is what it 

says: 

 

“Regina, September 2, 1960. In pursuance of subsection (4) of Section 214 of The Companies Act, the 

names of the following companies are struck off the Register of Joint Stock Companies and the 

companies dissolved: Thatcher‟s Hardware (Moose Jaw) Limited.” 

 

Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — This does not mean that the Leader of the Opposition has picked up his business 

and left the country. I certainly hope he doesn‟t. We would never be as lucky getting someone like him 

again! This simply means that probably the firm has been sold to another firm, and has changed its 

name. The Leader of the Opposition must think that people are credulous and that by bringing in this list 

of 248 names, he is going to convince them that industries are departing from the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I just close by saying that this is the last Throne Speech debate in which I shall 

participate. I have had the high privilege of attending seventeen regular sessions of this legislature, and 

three fall sessions, making a total of twenty sessions in all. I would like to say that to me these have been 

most enjoyable and satisfying years. I would like to think that much good has been accomplished. I 

would be foolish if I were to say that in all these seventeen years no mistakes have ever been made, or 

that my judgment or the judgment of my colleagues has always been right. Any human being who would 

make such a statement would either be foolish or dishonest. But I do believe that in these seventeen 

years, we have done some things to make this a better province for the ordinary man and woman to live 

in; that there are more of the amenities of life; that there is a greater measure of security and a greater 

measure of equality of treatment; that there is greater freedom from discrimination; and that our people 

have, working together, moved forward. No government, of course can take all the credit for this. A 

government may give leadership, but in a democracy, unless there are people — thousands of them — 

who are prepared to work together for the mutual good of their community and their province and their 

neighbour, no government can accomplish very much. 

 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

26 

If, when the history of our period is written, it can be said that we have taken some forward steps in the 

past seventeen years, then the major credit must go to the people of Saskatchewan, than whom there 

were no finer people in all the Dominion of Canada. Here are the people, who out of their hardships and 

out of their suffering, have learned to work together for their mutual advantage. They were the first 

people to set up union hospitals on this continent; the first people to set up municipal doctor plans; and 

the first people to establish an Anti-Tuberculosis League. They are people who have learned that they 

must help each other. They learned it in the hard days when neighbors had to co-operate with one 

another, or face the possibility of starvation, or freezing to death. Fortunately, the traditions of our 

forefathers had stayed with them. Ours is a great province of self-help and mutual co-operation. 

 

I would like, Mr. Speaker, to extend my thanks to the members of the opposition for the fine personal 

relationship which we have had with one another. We have not always agreed politically, and that may 

be the understatement of the year, but we have had good personal relationships. I made up my mind 

when I went into politics twenty-six years ago that if possible, I would never allow my political 

differences to interfere with my personal friendships. The result is that during that time I have had many 

good friends who belong to other political parties. I can honestly say that when I leave this legislature, I 

shall leave it without any vindictive feelings about any member of this House, or any member of the 

opposition. 

 

I would like to thank my colleagues, whose loyalty and understanding have made my task so much 

easier. I think I can honestly say that in seventeen years I have never had an angry word with any of my 

colleagues, either in the caucus or in the cabinet. I do not mean we haven‟t argued — this is the most 

arguing party that was ever created. They can argue by the hour, but we have never had a quarrel — 

never had a word spoken in anger. 

 

I want to say to my colleagues, in leaving them, that the strength of our movement and of our 

government is that we have involved so many people in the decision-making process. We used to be 

criticized at one time because we took everything to our constituency and provincial conventions. It was 

said that no government should be dictated to by people outside the House. Of course, I 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

27 

agree it cannot be dictated to. But we must involve people in the process of making decisions. This has 

never been a one-man show. I have never made a move without consulting my colleagues in the cabinet, 

and members who sit on this side of the House, and involving the members of the CCF Provincial 

Council, and where possible, our constituency convention. The strength of our movement is that we 

have a grass-roots democracy. I am sure, if my colleagues carry one with that same principle of helping 

people work out a solution to their problems and then giving them leadership in putting those solutions 

into effect, that they will continue to enjoy the confidence of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to extend a word of thanks to the people of this province, and to say that 

their faith has been a constant inspiration to me. I have always tried to so conduct myself in the affairs of 

this province that they would always have cause to feel that their confidence had not been misplaced. 

Many years ago Mr. George Williams, who was a former leader of our movement in this province, said 

to me that if any man is going to make a success in politics, he must never want anything too much. That 

is true. If a man is eager for money or for power, or for something he wants more than he wants to do his 

duty, then of course he will easily be diverted from his task. I have never been anxious either to be rich 

or to be powerful. I have hoped that when I left office my children would be able to walk the streets of 

this city, or any town in Saskatchewan, and be able to say that during the years when their father carried 

the responsibilities of office, he never betrayed a friend and never betrayed a trust. 

 

I want to thank the people of this province who have made it possible to serve them, and I hope the 

record will show that I served them not too badly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I shall support the motion. 

 

QUESTION RE FINANCING MEDICAL CARE PLAN 
 

Mr. Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, for purposes of clarification, just before the 

Premier sits down I wonder if I could ask one question. I didn‟t understand him yet to say whether or not 

the specific tax bills to finance this medical scheme will be brought in at the current session. 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

28 

I understand they will be, from the Throne Speech, but could he tell us definitely when they will come 

in? 

 

Premier Douglas: — Yes, the legislation will be brought in. Already first reading has been given to the 

Medical Care Insurance Bill, and legislation for financing will be introduced at this session. As a matter 

of fact, I believe it is the intention of the Provincial Treasurer to outline the whole program on the 

Medical Care Bill, so that the members will know even before the finance bills come in, what the total 

picture is. We felt this was better rather than dealing with it on a piece-meal basis. 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in the Throne Speech debate, I 

would like to take this opportunity of extending a welcome to yourself on your return from your visit to 

London, representing the Parliamentary Association of this province, at the Parliamentary Association 

meeting which was held in that great city. I know that you will have represented the people of this 

province and the members of this legislature in a very fitting manner, and that you will have left with the 

people of the rest of the Commonwealth the view that the people of Saskatchewan have the welfare of 

the Commonwealth, and all the peoples of the world, in their hearts now, in the past and will have also 

in the future. 

 

I would also like to take this opportunity to extend congratulations to all the speakers who have taken 

part in this debate up to the present time. Of course I could say as the Premier that I regret I cannot agree 

with everything that has been said by every speaker, but we do enjoy hearing all the members of this 

legislature body speak to us, and present their views on affairs of interest to the people of this province. 

 

In the few minutes I wish to address the assembly this afternoon, I am not going to deal with the main 

items which are before us, because I want to leave the majority of my remarks for may address on the 

medical health plan on Monday. But there are one or two thoughts which I would like to leave with you 

today, particularly following the address of the Premier of this province, soon to leave us. I would like to 

say that I disagree to some extent with the leader of my party in this. I would like to see the present 

leader of the government stay in this province 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

29 

so the voters of Saskatchewan can give him what he actually deserves, for the type of record we have 

experienced in the last 18 years, as they would have had he stayed here for the next election by defeating 

himself and his government in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Govt. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — The Premier, in his usual style, ridiculing one after another, not only in this House 

but throughout the province, spoke of people repeating addresses that they had made in this House. 

Well, I have only sat in this House for five sessions, but I have heard the Premier make the same speech 

which he made today in everyone of those sessions, and I am quite certain that he made it at every one 

of the sessions since he came into this House in 1944. So when it comes to repeating, he should have his 

address so well memorized by now because he has had 18 or 19 sessions to present that same address to 

the legislature of this province. 

 

If there is any man (and I want to leave this thought today) in this province that has done more, 

particularly in the last three years, to see to it that it will be more difficult for the people of 

Saskatchewan, whether rich or poor, to have proper medical care in days that lie ahead and there is only 

one man that can be accused of that, and that is the Premier, for the manner in which he has carried on in 

regard to this matter for the past three years. Never before in the history of this province has the health 

of the people, whether rich or poor, been used for the political advantages that the Premier of this 

province at present has used it, during the 17 years he has been in office. 

 

The Premier said within the last few days and on other occasions that 13 years ago the medical 

profession in this province suggested to him that he should put into effect a medical care program. But I 

would say to the Premier, if at that time he had the well wishes of the medical profession, as he has 

stated on various occasions, why is it that the people of Saskatchewan have not had medical services for 

the last 13 years? 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, may I ask the hon. member a question. Did 

he say the medical profession offered to put in a medical care plan 13 years ago? 

 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

30 

Mr. Gardiner: — The medical profession suggested that a medical care plan should be put into effect. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Where and when? 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — In Saskatchewan. 

 

Premier Douglas: — What did they suggest it through, a brief, or . . . 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — They suggested it to the Premier. I said that they had suggested this to him. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Where did you get that? 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — I got it out of the press. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier has stated, and he knows very well — he has stated it on various 

occasions that the doctors at that time wanted a medical plan — he said the reason they wanted it was 

because they couldn‟t collect their bills. He has also made that statement throughout this province, the 

reason they wanted a medical care plan was because they couldn‟t collect their bills. I have heard the 

Premier myself make that particular statement. Well, Mr. Speaker, 13 years ago he could have, and I am 

quite sure he could have, made a much better arrangement with the medical profession than could be 

made in this present day and age, when he could have made an arrangement and had a medical plan for 

the people in this province for the past 13 years. I say the Premier is the man who has held us medical 

progress for the people of Saskatchewan since 1944, and no one else. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You‟re having a pipe-dream. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Mr. Speaker, in the last three years alone — we don‟t have to go back 13 years — 

we‟ve had a circus going on in this province with regard to medical care. In 1959 the Premier stated that 

in the next session of the legislature, the government would bring in a bill to provide medical services to 

the people of Saskatchewan. When the Lieutenant Governor stood before us in the session of 1960, in 

the Throne Speech of that date this government stated that before we left this House they would present 

to the members a bill to provide medical services to the people of this province. What happened? 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

31 

No bill was brought into this House. The members on the government side of the House, without 

exception, stood up and were counted, voting in favour of the fact that the government should bring in a 

bill to provide medical services to the people of Saskatchewan. Instead, when it came near the end of the 

session and the Opposition asked the Premier, where is the Bill — what was his answer? He said, “Oh, if 

we‟d brought a Bill in it would have been only a matter of form anyway, so we‟re going to appoint a 

committee.” Mr. Speaker, I have never been a friend of committees, as my friend the Premier will 

understands. I have never been a friend the Premier will understands. I have never been a friend of 

committees at any time, and I am going to say this, that if he felt it was worthwhile to waste two years of 

the time of the people, at the expense of the people of Saskatchewan, in holding committee hearings on 

medical care, why is it today that he is not prepared to take this program, once it is presented to this 

legislature, to the people and ask whether or not they favour this particular plan? If the Premier does 

that, I am quite certain that the majority of the people, if they favour this plan, will vote for it, but it 

certainly will not take as long s the committee that he put into operation two years ago. 

 

What has happened since that time? The committee was finally appointed following the election, but the 

Premier, the day the election campaign started, stated in spite of the fact that they had appointed a 

committee, that his party had a program for medical care, and when the election was over they were 

going to put into effect. As I said before, we have had at least three committee reports within the last 20 

years very similar in wording. This one, a complete waste of the taxpayers‟ money — a complete waste 

of money, because the Premier himself said his party had a program and they were going to put it into 

effect, no matter what this committee said. 

 

I have no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that that is his intention. This report, and this committee was appointed 

for one reason only — to delay the implementation of a medical care program in this province until the 

new party was formed, and he was elected leader of it, in order to give him an issue to take to Ottawa. 

The only reason why this committee was appointed was to hold up the implementation of a medical care 

program until he could make political use of it throughout the whole of Canada 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

32 

That is all I intend to say with regard to the medical care plan at the present moment, except to ask the 

Premier and the government this: If this plan that we have had placed on our desks here today goes into 

effect, can he guarantee the people of this province that he has a contract with those who are going to 

have to provide the service? If not, this is the greatest fake that was ever perpetrated on any people in 

any province in the Dominion of Canada, or on the people anywhere in the world, and I am quite certain 

that the Premier, or the Minister of Health have not a contract with anyone to provide services which are 

going to be provided according to the government, under the terms of the Act that has been presented to 

this House. 

 

So I say to the government that the actions of the Premier within the last two years have done more harm 

to the implementation of a plan to which those who are going to have to provide the services, will 

provide in the manner which will be of the greatest benefit to the people of Saskatchewan, and I think as 

he leaves, that when he has used the health of the people of Saskatchewan to promote his own political 

well-being in the days that lie ahead, he should not stand here and waiver as he did a few moments ago, 

about his past in this province, for three-quarters of his address, taking credit for practically everything 

his party had done, and finally he came down to the end and said, “Oh yes, but it was with the help of a 

lot of the rest that I die these things.” He patted himself on the back two or three times during his 

address . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — I can reach my back! 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — I hope possibly it wasn‟t because he felt that the people behind him weren‟t prepared 

to pat him on the back, or that he was giving them an indication that they should. 

 

But in the formation of the new political party I want to make reference this afternoon to a few 

comments that were made by a publication which is put out by the United Church Observer. It is the 

paper that is put out by the church to which I belong, and I must say that I don‟t always agree with 

everything they have to say in it. In fact, within the last few years I have been coming to the conclusion 

that instead of a paper representing the views of the church, it has become a political paper, and there are 

many others in the country who have taken the same view with regard to it. But I find this publication 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

33 

gives a review of some of the things that happened at the convention which chose the Premier as the 

leader of the new party. I would like to comment on one or two of them. The first is to be found on page 

5 of this particular publication. The writer of this must have been at the convention, because he speaks 

as though he had been. This is what he had to say: 

 

“The new party was the best political convention we have covered. It was well attended; well 

organized and well-heeled. A number of earnest paid-their-own-way delegates demanded that there be 

night sessions and no time off for fun and games. But sometimes we closed our eyes and listened and 

thought, how they would have cheered that speech at the Liberal or Conservative convention.” 

 

In other words, here in a church paper is an article written by someone who was at that convention 

definitely stating that this was the best-financed convention he had ever been at. Most of the delegates 

there were not there as representatives of voters of this country, but they were there, paid to be there by 

organizations in this country of ours. 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — May I ask the hon. member a question, Mr. Speaker? (Question inaudible on record.) 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Hon. members are taking objection to some of these remarks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — Certainly we are. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — There are certain people in the party across the way and other political parties that 

would like to try and leave the impression, and try to use the church as an instrument of achieving 

political power, and I make that accusation of the leader of the government in Saskatchewan. He would 

at every turn use his position as a former minister of the Christian church to try and achieve political 

benefit. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — He‟s been doing that for 18 years. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — He‟s done that for 18 years, and the people of this province, he realizes, have realized 

that fact as well. So we go on and we find the proof of this fact in the next article, which is written 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

34 

by the editor. Why do so many preachers support the new party? 

 

Govt. Member: — Read it! 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Somebody said „read it‟. Well, I‟m going to read quite a bit of it, because I think 

there is a good deal of interest in this article, particularly to religious-minded people. It will give many 

people reason to wonder about these individuals who enter politics presumably because they have the 

welfare of the people at heart, or say they have. These are some of the reasons given. Here is the remark 

they claim was made by the Premier, and I don‟t imagine it has ever been denied: 

 

“The church . . . for the C.C.F. movement”, said Mr. Douglas. Ministers of the „thirties were so 

concerned with the plight of the poor and the unemployed they sought social action through politics”, 

he added. 

 

It was a basement-full of unemployed young men in my church at Weyburn that sent me into politics 

in 1934.” 

 

I believe from anything I have heard before that the Premier of this province was in politics long before 

1934. 

 

“ . . . and I am convinced that if we don‟t have a planned economy, Canada will be condemned by 

automation to permanent unemployment of one million people.” 

 

Here is a man, a previous minister of the Christian church, who attempts to make a statement because of 

the fact that he was a member of the political party, not called, as he says, at that time the C.C.F. party, 

but called themselves the Farmer-Labour movement. They change their name every time the situation 

suits their fancy. Every time they think the people of Canada might vote for another name, they change 

the name. Principle means nothing. Here is another item by the Premier again, with regard to principles: 

 

“Two ministers told me they had joined new party clubs in order to use their influence to keep the 

party from going too far to the left.” 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

35 

“Mr. Douglas told me, „It is my belief that the old-line socialists are the real reactionaries living in the 

past!” 

 

Oh what a news statement by the Premier of this province. 

 

“I believe that the old-line socialists . . . “ 

 

(at last he admits that he believes socialism is something old instead of something new.) 

 

“ . . . socialism, like everything else, changes. The main objective of society should be the welfare, 

including the moral and spiritual welfare of the people.” 

 

This is the next thing he comes out with, which surprises me. He says: 

 

“The way to achieve this is through a planned economy.” 

 

Now, I don‟t know how you are going to achieve spiritual welfare through a planned economy, but the 

Premier seems to think that it has possibilities. He adds: 

 

“ . . . socialism is part of a debased coinage today.” 

 

Here is the Premier, who has stood up in this House and defended socialism time after time, telling a 

minister of the United Church, and editor of The United Church Observer “socialism is a part of a 

debased coinage today”. 

 

“People have no clear idea of what we mean by socialism”, the Premier said. 

 

Surely not, because of all the jumping around the socialists have done in this country, there is no wonder 

the people don‟t realize what this party or any other party actually means, when they say they are a 

socialist party at the present time. “Khrushchev”, he says, “says socialism when he means communism”. 

Hitler gave Germany national socialism. We have to be realistic about the term, “but you can have 

public control without public ownership”, he says. “Public ownership is not a means to an end.” These 

are strange expressions from a Premier who will turn over to this side of the House and accuse speakers 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

36 

and members of the party on this side of the House about changing their minds. Boy, the Premier of this 

province has sure gone a long way towards changing his mind and ideals over the past few years. 

 

Then we find some other interesting remarks: 

 

“A visitor to the convention could be very confused by listening to the speeches and studying the 

resolutions passed.” 

 

Very confused! I imagine Mr. Forest is a fairly reasonable man. I imagine he is a man with a good 

education. I imagine that he is a man who should be able to figure out something if it is at all reasonable, 

but he says that a visitor to the convention could be very confused by listening to the speeches and 

studying the resolutions passed. 

 

“The new Democratic Party flaunted its democracy, but it voted to give the party power to veto local 

nominations.” 

 

That‟s something the Liberals and Conservatives would never dare to do. Here was a Minister, booed 

when he told the contention that Liberalism in Canada was a more respectable word than socialism, but 

it says: 

 

“ . . . Mr. Sparham, who was a lay minister, had a better way of going at it, was cheered in the next 

speech when he said almost the same thing.” 

 

Then we come down to the most interesting viewpoint of the editor; who, I remind you again, is one of 

the leading churchmen of the United Church of Canada, when he said: 

 

“Mr. Douglas reminds us that it was a reaction against the pious in religion and the emphasis on the 

social gospel that sent some of his generation into politics.” 

 

That is surely a case, Mr. Speaker, because we find here today, and he has done it ever since he became 

Premier and leader of this party, he has used the Sabbath Day, day in and day out to propagate the 

political faith and ideals that he believes in. 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

37 

Then he goes on to say: 

 

“But one has an uneasy feeling that the Ministers who left the active work for the C.C.F. years ago 

haven‟t read any theology since. They seemed to have ended their theology growth with the social 

gospel.” 

 

This is what Mr. Sparham had to say about his change to the great new party of the C.C.F. 

 

“Mr. Sparham, who left the lay preacher‟s pulpit for politics says: „Politics is easier‟. I am much less 

afraid of making a mistake preaching a political philosophy than a religious dogma.‟” 

 

Did you ever hear anything more hypocritical from anyone. Intellectually it was easier to take a position 

politically than it is theologically. I don‟t blame my friend, the Premier, for having come into politics, 

Mr. Speaker, because he has shown down through the years that through his statement, there are other 

ways that he can conduct himself in a manner which, up to the present time has not held the majority of 

support of the people of this province than it would had he remained here for another election and 

brought his defeat at the hands of a great majority of the people of this province. 

 

Here is what the final paragraph says about Mr. Sparham: 

 

“He admits the party is still emotionally religious; he hasn‟t been going to church much since he got 

into the new party, and I can see that he hasn‟t any time, because they are so busy organizing on 

Sundays that he hasn‟t had the time to go to church since he joined the new party. 

 

“I should rationalize and say it is because I have been very busy, but I have to admit that there is more 

to it than that. I don‟t quite like to say that I was just sceptical, but I found in politics that I could 

divert my energy into practical things rather than work my way through my religion . . .” 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

38 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think the remarks in the United Church Observer point up very well the philosophy 

and views of a man who has been leading this province in the last 18 years — a man to whom nothing 

has been sacred in this House, or any place else since he has held that position; a man who has taken it 

upon himself to personally slaughter and chastise any leader of any political party, with any 

name-calling that he could think of. This is the man who stands before the people today and says, “Here, 

give me your support; give me your faith to do great things for the people of Canada.” Mr. Speaker, I am 

sure with the record of the type that stands on the statute books of this province for the last 18 years, that 

there will not be any great monument built to the first socialist leader in the western world, because of 

the fact that when he leaves this province he will be leaving a province which is in the worst position 

today of any province in the Dominion of Canada, and including the province of Newfoundland and 

Prince Edward Island. 

 

Why do I state that? You know, people would stay in a province if conditions were as rosy as the 

Premier of the province makes them out to be. 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — I wish you were on the air. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — In 1929 we had more people in Saskatchewan than we have living in this province at 

the present time. Thirty-two years ago — more people living in the province than we have now. The 

only province in Canada of which that can be said. That is one statistic that the Premier can find no 

answer, for it is absolutely true. No other province, including Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland, 

has a record to equal the record of the people going out of this province — perhaps not quite as fast as 

those leaving East Berlin to go to West Berlin, but almost as fast. 

 

Then in his remarks, during the debate a few moments ago, to the effect that certain of the press in this 

province, the Leader of the Opposition, and as he said, certain friends of the Leader of the Opposition, 

and certain friends of the Siftons, certain friends of the Star-Phoenix and The Leader-Post, I would like 

to remind the Premier that when he tells the story to the rest of the people of Canada, about the elephant 

dancing among the chickens, there was only one elephant over a period of 16 years that I know of, he 

has now flown the coop, and as well as flying the coop, he not only plucked the feathers, but he took 

along a leghorn with him! 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

39 

Some Hon. Members: — Is it a pink elephant, by any chance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Erb: — Your stories are quite fantastic this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Mr. Speaker, in listening to the Premier in the debate today, I find it very hard to 

realize when he completed his address that he thought he had dealt with the medical care report 

adequately. I am quite certain that he felt the Regina lady member had done that in her address in reply 

to the Speech from the Throne, in moving that motion, but I would like to remind him if he thinks the 

Liberal party is confused, what he must think after he listened to the lady member for Regina. It‟s a long 

time since I sat and listened to a speech, where I felt the government was more confused than this 

government after I listened to the lady member from Regina. I didn‟t have any idea as to what the 

government was going to do, what stand she took on various issues, or what stand this government took, 

until I found this bill before me. 

 

So it is quite strange that the Premier should attack the Leader of the Opposition and others for having 

changed stands, which of course never has been the case in this House or anywhere else, as the Premier 

knows. But of course, he made certain that he would get his word out to the public. He would say these 

things, not having with him one iota of proof to back them up. He would say them over the radio where 

no one could have an opportunity to answer back unless the people know exactly what the truth was. 

 

So I say, Mr. Speaker, in regard to inconsistency, there is no one who has spoken in this House during 

the time I have been here, that has shown as much inconsistency for the government of this province as 

the lady member for Regina did in giving her review of the committee report to us in her opening 

address on the Throne Speech debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I desire on Monday to make a full review of not only the medical committee report, but to 

bring to the members of this House and to the people of this province once and for all the information, 

and I have done this before, but it hasn‟t been put before the people of this province, or the people of 

Canada, and it is quite easy for my friends across the way to go down to Ontario and tell the people there 

all the fine things this 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

40 

government has done — taking credit not only for the one or two things they did do, but for everything 

that has been done in the province since 1905, so I am going to make it a point on Monday to give to this 

House, and I can assure the Premier or anyone else, that if they can bring a shred of evidence to disprove 

one statement I make in that address, I challenge them to do so in the speeches that follow, and I will tell 

the people of this province exactly where the health benefits have been received from, exactly where 

they have come from since 1905, and will place on record as to the medical achievement of the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Are you going to tell them about the Liberal plan for medical services? 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — I was just going to sit down, but I have neglected to mention one fact which I think 

should be of great interest to us all. You know, the Premier, if you mentioned the Toronto Star, he would 

probably jump out of his seat and tell you that you shouldn‟t be quoting from such Liberal periodicals, 

but when this report came out, who was the first one that was given an opportunity to know what was in 

it? Well, Mr. Speaker, it was a reporter from the Toronto Star. Oh, the premier said, he told him not to 

tell anybody. Of course, that‟s the old story. You tell a reporter something and you tell him not to tell 

anybody. Well, of course, I know the job of a reporter, Mr. Speaker. Of course, it‟s a reporter‟s job to 

report news. This happened to be news, so of course the reporter went down and before the people of 

Saskatchewan knew what the facts were with regard to the medical care report, the people of Toronto — 

his labour bosses down east, were already ringing the bell of praise for „Tommy‟ Douglas, hoping to win 

him votes in eastern Canada for the new political party. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the only reason why they needed that was because of the initials of the name of 

the party. 

 

The no-darn policy party — they didn‟t have any policy last August and they needed something to 

provide them with a policy when they went to the people of this country. So we find that Mr. Douglas 

says the next day in the paper, after he had been chastised by the chairman of the committee, he said, 

“Oh that isn‟t true. I said such and such, and I phoned the reporter yesterday, 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

41 

and he agrees that was right.‟ 

 

I would like to see that reporter speak for himself, Mr. Speaker. To my knowledge he has never denied 

that he was given the information that he printed in the Toronto Star by the premier of this province, and 

for him to think that he has come to the position where the people of this province are going to accept 

his word about what anyone else says or does, if he has come to that position, it is well nigh time that he 

left the position that he holds at the present time as Premier, or any other responsible position in this 

province or in this country. Until such time as that reporter speaks for himself that he was instructed, and 

that he did not receive the information that he printed in that paper, there is no reason for anyone not 

believing that the Premier intended when he gave that report to the reporter for him to do exactly what 

was done in the Toronto Star, and prepare the way for the new party in the eastern part of Canada. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with those remarks I desire to move adjournment of the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

STATEMENT RE NEWSPAPER REPORT 
 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to rise on a question of privilege. A statement has just been 

made about a report which appeared in the Toronto Star. I want to state categorically that no report of 

the Advisory Committee on Medical Care was given by me to the Toronto Star reporter. I had not seen 

the report. The report did not come to my desk or to any other Minister‟s desk for at least twenty-four 

hours after the reporter came to see me. I gave him copies of the terms of reference and background 

material. I made it quite clear because I stated to him when he came that I didn‟t have a copy of the 

report, and didn‟t know what was in it. I have made that statement repeatedly and I think most persons 

will accept my word. I don‟t expect the member for Melville to. He is not noted for being the kind of 

person with whom one could deal in terms of honour or veracity. 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

42 

Mr. Gardiner: — Mr. Speaker, just in answer to the Premier‟s statement. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — I would just like to say that if that is true, I am quite sure that the reporter would . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

MOTION FOR MORNING SITTINGS 
 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, this motion is perfectly clear. It suggests that we start sitting 

mornings commencing on Monday, and sit from 10:00 until 12:30 each day. This has already been 

discussed in other debates, and I don‟t think I need to enlarge on it, except to point out that under the 

rules of the House there are eight days in the Speech from the Throne debate, including the day in which 

the mover and seconder made their speech. This means that the speech from the Throne Debate 

automatically expires next Friday, and must be voted for on Friday. Morning sittings far from curtailing 

discussion, will add some 12½ hours that the members wanted to the Speech from the Throne debate. I 

think this will give members much more opportunity than they would have in a normal session to 

discuss any matters that they want to. 

 

I would therefore move, seconded by Mr. Lloyd: 

 

“That notwithstanding Standing Order 2, this House shall, commencing Monday, October 16, 1961, 

meet at 10:00 o‟clock a.m., each sitting day and there shall be a recess from 12:30 o‟clock p.m. until 

2:30 o‟clock p.m.” 

 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

43 

Mrs. Mary J. Batten (Humboldt): — I think I speak for a great number of members in the House when 

I say that I certainly oppose this motion. I know the hon. Premier made it clear when he spoke the other 

day that he thought that the private members were overpaid for the amount of time that they spent on the 

job, but I would like to point out to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the hon. Premier that the time we spend on 

the job is not the time we sit in our seats. There is much more important work that is done by us in 

preparing the speeches we ourselves make, in looking after the business of our constituencies, and 

answering letters and matters of that kind. 

 

I am sure there isn‟t one member who comes in here, certainly not in the opposition side, but I am sure 

that doesn‟t put in at least a fifteen-hour day. Now, I think this is about as heavy a day as I for one can 

carry, and do full justice to the people who have elected me. I feel that it isn‟t the number of words that 

are going to be said on this debate that is important; it is the quality of those words. I think, Mr. Speaker, 

that no one can prepare an adequate address on a subject of this great importance to the people of 

Saskatchewan, if they have to sit here from ten o‟clock in the morning until ten o‟clock at night, with a 

few hours in between for meals, and listen to the speeches and then try to write a speech after ten 

o‟clock at night. Certainly we are not going to do justice to the subject before us, if we don‟t listen to the 

other members. I for one would like to see every member in his seat for the speech of the humblest 

backbencher because I think we all have a great deal of knowledge about the subject, and I think we 

have all had experiences that we want to and need to contribute to this debate, and I think we should all 

listen to what the other members have to say. If we do justice to those other speeches and still try to 

prepare some sort of an adequate summary of our own contribution, we are not going to be doing a good 

job if we have to put in these hours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know when the other members received their copies of the report, but I know all I 

have been able to do is to take a very summary look at it. I have read the recommendations but certainly 

I have not had time to digest it adequately. Surely we haven‟t paid out that kind of money and had these 

people working as hard 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

44 

as this committee did work simply to put the report aside and speak without thinking. Every member I 

am sure wants to read this report carefully, wants to read perhaps some of the briefs that the hon. 

member from Regina spoke about, and we certainly can‟t do this. In addition to this there will be new 

things coming up in the speeches about which we should think, about which we should perhaps caucus, 

and I don‟t think we will be doing justice either to ourselves, to the subject before us, or to our 

constituents if we try to rush this through without giving ourselves the morning hours to prepare our 

speeches for the afternoon. 

 

Mr. James E. Snedker (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, in connection with the subject presently under 

debate, I wish to concur with everything that my colleague has just said and add a few words of my own 

in connection with the matter. I don‟t think anybody would ever accuse me of objecting to hard work, 

but I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if we‟re called upon to thoroughly study the bill which I have on 

my desk before me at the present time, that if we are to give it our full consideration, and that if we are 

also to listen to the debates that are going to take place in this House, and I hope that I will be able to 

listen to all of them, that will involve a considerable amount of time. If we are going to work in the 

morning, it would preclude practically the preparation of any alternative legislation which any of us 

might wish to consider and place before this House and the public of the province. 

 

This is one of the most far-reaching pieces of legislation that has ever been placed either before this 

legislature or any legislature of any province in Canada, or for that matter possibly in the North 

American continent. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if the hon. members on this side of the House, or 

on either side, are going to give the matter thorough discussion, and if the hon. members on this side of 

the House, or on either side, are going to give the matter thorough discussion, and if they are also going 

to be able to receive representation from the public of the province, and some of them are as much in the 

dark about the contents of this bill as we are — they haven‟t read it either. We just received it on our 

desks. I have read mine but the general public of the province haven‟t had an opportunity to read any 

part of it. There is a good possibility that members of the public would want to make representation to 

members of the government or members of the opposition, either for or against, to discuss amendments, 

certain parts of this thing that they think are good or bad, as the case may be. If we are to receive 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

45 

representation from the public, and this goes for all members of the House, we have got to have 

sometime to do it. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that a good time to do that would be in the morning. 

 

I oppose these morning sittings most wholeheartedly on the grounds that we should give the public 

every opportunity in the world of placing their views before the members of this legislature. 

 

The copy which I received of the interim report of the medical committee was postmarked on the fourth 

day of this month. I have studied mine, and other hon. members have read theirs, but the general public 

of this province, people who are interested in this matter, haven‟t had the advantages that we have had, 

and haven‟t had the advantage of making themselves thoroughly and completely acquainted with the 

proposals in the report and the proposals of this government. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that possibly 

some members of the public might wish to make representation to any member of this House, and there 

has to be some time left for doing it, and I think the time for that is in the morning. For that reason I 

don‟t think we should sit in the morning. For that reason I don‟t think we should sit in the morning. I 

think we are not giving the public the opportunity which they should be allowed. 

 

Mr. Douglas T. McFarlane (Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, my reasons for objecting to this 

bill that has been placed before us are probably different to those of my colleagues. After all, I want you 

to realize, and I want members of the government to realize that my area of Saskatchewan was probably 

one of the hardest hit areas in regard to drought, of any area in the province. In all the years I have been 

a member of this legislature, I have yet to miss one sitting day, and in fact as long as I am able to be 

here, I don‟t want to miss any sittings. My people at the present time have many and serious problems, 

and they are continually wanting some help here in Regina. 

 

When I am home, not at the session I can come in with them. When I am here attending the session 

these delegations want to come in and they want to see the Department of Agriculture; they want to see 

the Department of Social Welfare, etc., because there have never been more applications in that 

constituency for people wanting social aid than there are today. 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

46 

These are all pressing problems and the time of year is getting on. It is just about winter and these are 

serious. I want to be in a position where I can meet with these delegations and give them whatever help 

and advice I can. This morning, for instance, I think I was in touch with four different head offices in the 

city on behalf of my constituents. Because I too want to be able to prepare something to say on the floor 

of this House, I also want to peruse this bill and some of these reports, but my first obligation is to the 

people whom I serve, and as long as I am a member of this legislature I would like to have the 

opportunity to do just that, and the time that is most important to me, and to them is naturally the 

morning. I can‟t take them to these offices after 5:30, because all the government offices and all other 

offices in the city are closed. 

 

This situation does not only pertain to me, but to all members, and I think on behalf of the people whom 

we represent, that while we are here in Regina we should at least have the mornings off so that we can 

look after their interests and get them their interviews with these different government departments, and 

any other business that may effect them in this city. 

 

While this is sometimes referred to as a special session, it is not a special session; it is a regular session, 

and is at a time of year and in a year when we have many serious problems. I think we all should look 

after the interests of the people who sent us here first. That is why I do not approve of sitting in the 

mornings. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I find it very strange indeed that this suggestion 

should be made at this particular time. I was most impressed this afternoon with the remarks of the 

Premier, when he was talking about the movement that he had headed for the last 18 years and he said 

that the strength of that movement was in that they consulted their people, and I suppose there is some 

truth in that statement. Yet the very government that he heads, now bringing in one of the most 

important pieces of legislation that we have had to deal with for some time, before this House, does not 

want the average member attending to have any opportunity to consult with those people they represent, 

before he takes a stand on this particular matter. 

 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

47 

Now I feel exactly as members have expressed themselves on this side of the House. In the first place I 

see no reason to rush through this session. If we are not finished by the time of the new party convention 

in Saskatchewan, I am perfectly happy to go home and have a holiday, while these people are sorting out 

the mess they are in. That‟s all right with me. I don‟t care if the Premier wants to go down to Ontario 

and lead the new party — he can go tomorrow as far as I am concerned. There is no rush to put this 

legislation on the statute books. He has been here for eighteen years and could have put it on the statute 

books any time during those eighteen years, but failed to do so. 

 

In most every issue that comes that has little or no significance to the people of Saskatchewan, there is a 

great hulla-balloo and time is wasted and money spent in consulting the electorate about what we ought 

to do. But here, Mr. Speaker, when we‟re dealing with the health and the welfare of over 900,000 people 

in the province of Saskatchewan, we are expected to come into this chamber at 10:00 o‟clock in the 

morning and stay here until 10:00 o‟clock at night, I presume and listen to a lot of harangue that 

emanates from the other side of the House, pent up from the electorate, the people who ought to be 

making the decision as to whether we ought to have this type of medical insurance in Saskatchewan, or 

some other type. 

 

I am hesitant to say that I, like the Leader of the Opposition, when any session ends, finds that I am tired 

and I need a rest, and I think that every session is this House is rushed to the point that we are not and 

have not been doing the job as it ought to be done, if we were given the time to do so. We receive the 

same remuneration for our services whether we stay in this chamber for four weeks, eight weeks, or six 

months and as far as I am concerned I am prepared to stay in this House from now until the regular 

session opens, to deal with this question, if need be. 

 

I am prepared also to go even further than that. I think that this House would be well-advised that before 

any vote is taken on this legislation, that the members of this legislature ought to have the opportunity to 

go home to their constituents, to explain to those people who support them and those people who voted 

against them exactly what this medical plan means; who is going to pay for it; and then be sent back to 

this chamber directed by the people they represent, as to how they ought to vote. I am not 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

48 

prepared to tell my people how I ought to vote. I think that the people of Moosomin should tell me how 

they want to vote on this issue. 

 

There is another reason for that. The people that I represent, Mr. Speaker, voted five to one against 

prepaid medical services on a previous occasion. I don‟t know whether they‟ve changed their mind now 

or not, but I would very much like the opportunity, and if I am given that opportunity I will hold a 

meeting in every town in the constituency that I represent and put the facts before the people with regard 

to this matter, and let them make the decision as to whether they want me to support it or to oppose it. I 

think every member in this House ought to do just that. 

 

Here is a report! The very first pages of the report — the people who produced it are complaining they 

were not given time enough to produce it. The government had eighteen years to get this thing produced, 

and when they decided that they needed it in a hurry, they couldn‟t even give the commission time 

enough to produce a report. They couldn‟t wait on the final report. They had to have an interim report. 

Why? What is this unholy rush? I received this at my home last Friday, one week ago today. We‟ve 

been talking about health insurance in Saskatchewan for a long, long time. The report comes to my 

home on Friday, and the House opened the next Wednesday; the legislation came down the following 

Friday, and I suppose the people who sit opposite would like to go home tomorrow. I am in no hurry. 

The people I represent I am sure, would not object to taking 30 days to put this legislation on the statute 

books, and the Attorney General can babble away to his heart‟s content, but I challenge him to go home 

to the constituency he represents and put the facts before the people in that area . . . 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — . . . before he votes, and if he hasn‟t the courage and the time and the ambition to do 

so, then if I am given the time, I‟ll look after his seat as well as my own. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I would go to every town and hamlet in Hanley, and give the facts to the people of 

that constituency. If he wants to play tootsie up in his office here, while I am doing it, it is okay with me. 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

49 

Mr. Speaker, I object to morning sittings during this session or any other session. We are not sent in here 

to ram through this legislation or any other legislation. We have grave responsibilities, placed on our 

shoulders by those people who sent us here, and I hesitate to think what some people who sent me here 

would say if they knew the facts in regard to the material that has been made available to us, and the 

haste in which we are being asked to deal with it. 

 

I plead with this House to not only turn down this resolution that is now before us, but I plead with this 

House to give the members of this House the opportunity, once all the facts are known with regard to the 

plan, how it is going to be administered, and how it is to be paid for, give them the opportunity to go 

back to their own people, to place the facts before the people, and then come back to this House and to 

vote as their electorate so dictates. If we are given that opportunity, Mr. Speaker, we will have a 

democratic procedure in this House. We will have a plan that I am convinced will meet the needs and 

the wishes of the people of Saskatchewan, and this is something that I am not at all convinced about at 

the moment, and I cannot support the motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank (Minister of Mineral Resources): — I am just a little bit amazed at what I have 

listened to in the last few minutes. I have been reading a newspaper over the last couple of months, and 

according to the articles that I read in the paper, I thought the Leader of the Opposition had every one of 

his members on that side of the House just chock full of speeches ready to make, and they were going to 

need lots of time about all the things he is going to talk about. Now apparently they are not ready to talk. 

This is quite a reversal of the situation . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — The difference is that we want to know what we‟re talking about . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . or else the Leader of the Opposition was just speaking for himself. Mr. 

Speaker, one of the main questions to come before the House, the medical care question, is one 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

50 

that has been discussed pretty thoroughly for two or three years, and to a very considerable extent before 

that. I think it is rather odd if the hon. members don‟t know how the people of Saskatchewan feel about 

a medical care plan, and whether they want a medical care plan or not. I think this has been discussed 

very completely throughout the country over the past couple of years, and I know it has been discussed 

in my part of the province, and I think I know what those people want. 

 

I would point out also that a member has some responsibility as an individual too. He represents his 

constituency as a person and is supposed to, instead of having to refer everything back, make his own 

decisions. This is the type of delegated authority which we have in our country, and when the members 

say that after this issue is discussed, then they want to go back and hold meetings in every town in the 

constituency, I don‟t know whether they would do all the talking or whether they would want to listen to 

some of the other people talk. If they did all the talking they might not learn anything more about the 

situation. We pretty well know what the opinion of the people of Saskatchewan is on this thing, and now 

we have to take some responsibility for making up our minds as to how we are going to act on it. I am 

just a little suspicious that some of the hon. members opposite are more interested in delaying the 

progress of this work than they are in getting it through. 

 

I will certainly support the motion. 

 

Mr. Karl F. Klein (Notukeu-Willowbunch): — Mr. Speaker, that is about the most pathetic argument I 

have ever heard from that side of the House yet. The Minister says he knows how he should vote better 

than the people of Saskatchewan. That may be all right in Russia, but not here. Yet at the time when you 

wanted to find out what time it was in Saskatchewan, you saw fit to inform all the public, and take all 

the time in the world. When you wanted to find out whether you should sell liquor or not, and make a 

little profit, you found it advisable to hold all sorts of meetings. But now, you are trying to ram through 

legislation that is going to affect every man, woman and child, and you wish to have it all done up in a 

week. 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

51 

Here is a piece of legislation that is going to affect every man, woman and child in this province forever 

more, as the Premier pointed out, because it is quite likely once it goes in it will stay in. In my case I 

must take into consideration that in our region, the Gravelbourg-Assiniboia area, even after being fully 

informed on the operations of a health region voted it down by seven to one. Therefore, I think it is 

imperative that time be allowed to question these people in this regard at this time. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think the hon. member should get to the point that is under discussion. 

 

Mr. Klein: — I am showing, Mr. Speaker, the importance of this legislation. 

 

Premier Douglas: — . . . sitting mornings has nothing to do with explaining it to the people back home. 

Surely we are away off the subject, aren‟t we? 

 

Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I feel we should take the time to inform the people. I don‟t want to take the 

responsibility, as a Minister over there says, that he thinks he knows what is best for his people. That 

may be all right in Russia, but not in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I am being misquoted. He said that I said „I thought I knew what was best 

for my people‟. I didn‟t say that at all. 

 

Mr. Klein: — You said you would take the responsibility of making the decision for your people. What 

is the difference? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I said, I thought I knew what the people in my area of the province wanted. 

I didn‟t say . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! If the hon. Minister wishes to make a correction on his quotation he may do so 

with the consent of the member who is speaking; otherwise he may do it at the close of the debate. I 

think the hon. member should proceed immediately to the 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

52 

motion before us. We are not discussing going back to the people of the province or a plebiscite at this 

time. We are discussing morning sittings in this House. 

 

Mr. Klein: — In order to gain sufficient time, I think if we have to sit in the morning and afternoon and 

evening, there would be absolutely no possibility of consulting anybody to any degree of efficiency in 

our area, and I am certain there are many in that area who wish to be consulted. I personally unless I 

hold that consultation, do not like to vote on behalf of the people, until they tell me what they desire. 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker (Attorney General): — I had thought that having sat on the opposite side of the House 

to the Liberal party for some 12 or 13 years, that I would eventually come to understand their mentality. 

I must say, however, I find that the opinion I have had of the motives of the Liberal party wasn‟t low 

enough. I can hardly credit Mr. Speaker, the members opposite seeking to deny to the members of this 

House, the right to spend if they wish, twelve and a half extra hours in debate on the Speech from the 

Throne. If the government had refused to allow this extra time, I can visualize members opposite getting 

up and shouting — “shutting off discussions — depriving us of an opportunity to exercise our 

democratic rights.” How they can at the same time take the view that to give more opportunity for 

discussion is a deprivation of democratic rights is a mystery to me, and only the devil himself, I am sure, 

can understand the mental process of some hon. members of this House. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Is that a parliamentary statement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the difference of opinion about meeting next week 

and sitting in the mornings . . . 

 

Mrs. Batten: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. I object to the insinuation that the devil can 

understand my process, and I want that withdrawn. 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

53 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I apologize for that. I am willing to concede that the devil himself will have 

difficulty with the hon. lady. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — He‟s a good client! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — At regular sittings we have, in the second week, committee meetings, starting on 

the Monday after the House opens at 10:00 o‟clock. We did it last year. I should say that Monday fell on 

the third sitting day of the regular session of the legislature, whereas Monday now falls on the fourth 

sitting day of this legislature, so that hon. members have already had three mornings off since the 

session commenced, and at a regular session they only have two, to hear delegations and to consult with 

their constituents. 

 

The hon. member for Notukeu-Willowbunch said that he will be deprived of an opportunity to consult 

with his constituents. Well, I know how far Notekeu-Willowbunch is from Regina, and I am sure he is 

not going to go out every morning to consult with his constituents, and be back here at 2:00 o‟clock. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — But they can come in here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — With all deference to the light-footed member for Notukeu-Willowbunch, I am 

sure he can‟t get down there and consult with them and back . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I am sure too that any person from my constituency who wishes to consult with 

me will have plenty of opportunity during the day of the session, either before 10:00 o‟clock, or I could 

have lunch with them between 12:30 and 2:30, or in the dinner hour, or even after 10:00 o‟clock in the 

evening, so that I don‟t have any problem about having time to discuss these matters with my 

constituents or with people form anywhere else in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is ludicrous in the extreme for members opposite to say that they are prepared to 

stay here until February if necessary. What is the implication in that statement? The implication is that 

there is so much to discuss here that it may take us until February to dispose of the government‟s 

business, and use that as an argument for cutting down the period of time 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

54 

each day we should devote to public business. There is just no sense or reason, Mr. Speaker, in the 

suggestion that you can do more public business by cutting down the number of hours. I am perfectly 

used to working these hours, and I have no complaint about working these hours, attending to my office 

— I manage to get the work in my office done. I have no complaint about sitting in this House for the 

morning until the adjournment in the evening and still getting my regular work done and hearing 

complaints from my constituents. 

 

When these complaints come from private members it only reminds me of the wonderful time we had as 

private members. We surely must have worked short hours, and we certainly must have enjoyed a 

leisurely type of existence, in order to complain about the kind of hours that are proposed in this debate. 

 

I have no objection to the House, if it sees fit, in cutting the hours down, but I just want to say, Mr. 

Speaker, that it doesn‟t matter which side of this question the government had taken. If the government 

had suggested the hours from 2:30 until regular adjournment, we would have been criticized for not 

allowing sufficient time for the members to discuss pressing problems affecting the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — How do you know that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — You just can‟t win with the hon. members opposite. We are criticized in one 

breath because we didn‟t hurry the medical care plan on, and we‟re criticized in the other breath by other 

members of the opposition because we are trying to stampede them into action that is ill-considered. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if hon. members want to have more time to discuss the medical care bill, 

then we should get down to business on the speech from the throne, meet at 10:00 o‟clock, get our 

speeches made and get on with the medical care bill, perhaps earlier if that is desired by hon. members. I 

have no desire to hurry the matter, but if hon. members feel that more time should be given to the 

medical care bill, then they should welcome a chance to put in longer hours on the Throne Speech so 

that we can get rid of it sooner, and then get down to considering the medical care bill at an earlier date. 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

55 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that this kind of childish whining, always complaining no matter what the 

government does, is leading to a very sorry image of the Liberal party in the eyes of the people of the 

province. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Who is crying now? 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): — I hadn‟t intended to take part in this discussion but after the remarks 

of the Attorney-General, I could not help but get on my feet for a moment. I do want to give the 

Attorney General credit, because once in a while I see his car out here when I arrive in the morning at 

7:00 o‟clock, so I know that he does a fair amount of work during the session and other times. I 

understand from anything I have heard that he is one of, and probably the hardest working member on 

the government side of the House. But I am going to assure him though, that we do, as private members, 

have much to do. We haven‟t got a department with the number of secretaries that my hon. friend has, or 

any of the other Ministers of the government. There are 15 members on the government side of the 

House who have full departmental staffs to do their work for them; to operate their departments; to write 

their speeches, and any other jobs they can have them do. But the members on the opposition side of the 

House, six or seven of us have one stenographer. The government, by this action, is asking those seven 

members to get all their work and correspondence done in one hour of the day, all the work and 

correspondence, speech-typing, seeing to the work of their constituents, and answering mail — one hour 

for six members to have the use of one stenographer. That is the hour form 9:00 to 10:00 o‟clock. 

 

Some Hon. Member: — And noon hour. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Noon hour. Well, usually the stenographer goes to dinner, and I know I don‟t have to 

eat too much, Mr. Speaker, but I think usually the stenographer should be at least allowed her time off 

for dinner. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Quite frequently as the Premier is quite well aware, his party holds party caucuses 

two or three times a week, and they are usually held after the noon-hour. So that again excludes 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

56 

the fact that if this work is going to be done properly, that the members on the opposition side of the 

House are not being given sufficient time to carry out the work in the way that it should be carried on in 

this House, and for their constituents. 

 

So I say as other members of the House have suggested, that we should be permitted the mornings, and I 

am just going to make this reference to what the Attorney General said. He spoke of committees; 

everybody doesn‟t sit on the same committees. During the regular sessions of this House, while 

committees are meeting practically half the members on both sides of the House are free from 

committee work for half of the period that those committees are meeting, because half of them are on 

crown corporations; half of them are on public accounts or some other committee, and we have many 

mornings besides those first two in order to do our work. 

 

So I suggest here that possibly if it comes down to the time when the government feels that perhaps the 

business of this session can be finished in two or three days and that the time should be extended in 

order to do that, well then, I say that possibly the members on the opposition side of the House would be 

prepared to agree to make that possible, if it was a matter of finishing the business of the House in a 

short period of time. But when we have just been here three days, and they are asking members of this 

House to start this type of sitting, then I think that the members have a right, the backbenchers even on 

the other side have a right, to stand up and say that they should be given sufficient time to do the work 

of their constituency that they are sent here to carry out; the work that has been placed before them to 

do, and so I am going to ask the Premier and the government to withdraw this motion. 

 

I am quite certain that if it comes down to the period when we can see that this session is going to be 

closed and we are completing our business, and it is felt that perhaps we should spend some mornings in 

session. I am quite certain the members on this side of the House, under those conditions, would be 

prepared to be reasonable and to give this matter consideration. 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

57 

Mr. G. Herman Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think there is much left to say in this 

debate, but after listening to the Attorney General and some of his juvenile arguments, I think we should 

get down to business. 

 

The members on the government side have had this information for at least two or three weeks, and they 

have had copies of reports, which is proper and I am not criticizing that, but they have had that 

information. The members of the cabinet no doubt had it, because the Premier went down to Ontario and 

told the Toronto Star reporter what was in the bill. We don‟t read the Toronto Star. I got this report last 

Saturday morning. It was likely in my box on Friday night, but I didn‟t get the mail because I wasn‟t 

home until late that night. On Monday I had to attend a funeral. I came down here on Tuesday morning, 

and I had no opportunity whatever to look at the report and to study the different plans, and I think it is a 

very good report, from the few glances and pieces I have read form it. I think it is a report that is well 

worth reading — every word of it, and it is clear and concise so that you can understand what is meant. 

 

What is the rush. What is the emergency here? Is it for some political aspirations in certain individuals? 

Well, I am not going to be a party to it. I think that we have come here to do business, and in this session 

we are going to saddle an additional $20 or $22 million taxes on the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. I think it is worthwhile thinking over, and studying the matter — how it is going to be 

done and the best way we can do this, and not inflict any hardship that can possibly be avoided on the 

people of this province. 

 

I think we should have a plebiscite. I know and everybody else knows that the election was not a 

plebiscite, which the Premier said it was, and this thing wasn‟t carried by a majority by a long, long 

ways. 

 

Premier Douglas: — What has the plebiscite got to do with this motion? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That is just the point. What has it got to do with the motion? It has this to do with the 

motion — that you are trying to railroad through this House a bill that is going to saddle $22 million 

taxes on the people of this province — that 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

58 

is what it has to do with this motion. That is something that has never been done before. 

 

When you put in your hospitalization we had ample time to discuss that. It took the whole session, and 

we had a hearing and we had a representation from certain individuals, and so on. That is how it should 

be. I am not so sure there shouldn‟t be a provision at this session to allow municipal organizations, 

health organizations, hospital organizations, and all these . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — . . . to discuss with the members what this really means, and listen to their 

recommendations to the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I must point out that when I stand and call for order I expect the members to 

take their seats. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate your point . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Please be seated. Order! I am afraid that what you have been saying may have some 

regard to the legislation, but I cannot see that it has any bearing in regard to whether we sit mornings or 

not. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I said what I had to say, and I think that this government should be 

very careful before they railroad anything through this House. It is a form of closure. That‟s all right, 

you have been telling them all the time that this thing should be over in a week, then in two weeks, and 

so on, and there is unanimous agreement, I understand, over there that this thing is going to be pushed 

through come what may. Be careful what you do. The people will remember this session for a long, long 

time. 

 

Mr. W. Ross Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I am not going to repeat what has 

already been said this afternoon, but I wonder whether, in view of the debate we have had on this 

motion, whether the Premier wouldn‟t consider some sort of a compromise. After all, this legislation 

does involve from $20 million to $22 million. When it comes up we want to be able to discuss it 

thoroughly. This will involve the most money of any legislation . . . 

 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

59 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — As I understand it, the Premier said the tax bill is coming in this session. This will be 

the biggest money bill that has ever been introduced in the history of the province. The opposition 

therefore wants to make sure that we have an opportunity to thoroughly examine it. 

 

I had dinner with an MLA from Ontario this afternoon. He told me that Mr. Donald McDonald, the 

leader of the New Democratic Party in Ontario, made a speech a few weeks ago in the Ontario House, in 

which he said the opposition should be given a quarter of a million dollars for research help. If we had 

some research help, if we had some staff in our offices, Mr. Speaker, maybe we could get along. 

 

A point which the Attorney General made was that in ordinary sessions we have committee work, and 

that we are not going to have committee work this session. How do you know we are not going to have 

committee work? I think it might be advisable for the House to call in this Thompson Committee, and 

let us examine the members. We would like to inquire how they have reached their conclusions. There is 

too much money involved, this is too big an issue, just to rush it through. I think the Premier should 

compromise on this a bit. At least for the duration of the Throne Speech debate — it shouldn‟t be 

necessary to sit mornings. Perhaps a week from Monday, if it is necessary, we could start to sit mornings 

but for another week at least, there is a great deal of other work besides just sitting in this House, and I 

for one don‟t think we can do it with the facilities that we have. 

 

I don‟t think we can do the job that the taxpayers of this province expect us to do, if we are going to 

have to sit as long as this resolution would demand us to sit. 

 

Mr. Alex. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to put forth one thought. The 

Premier is calling this a special session. Apparently it is called for the purpose of dealing with two items, 

as outlined in the Throne Speech. The Opposition has brought to the attention, in this debate, many other 

problems which we are facing, and I know that in my area we‟re facing many. I want to say to the 

Attorney-General, and to the Premier, who mentioned it yesterday, that he didn‟t think the members 

would like to sit around 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

60 

twiddling their fingers in the mornings, doing nothing, and therefore we should sit in the mornings as 

well as the afternoons. That would be correct if the members were sitting around twiddling their fingers 

and doing nothing. 

 

I have come here, using my opportunity and my time during these mornings to go to the various 

departments, seeking information and help for my people in south-western Saskatchewan. We have 

hundreds of problems. We have people who have applied to the municipality for social aid. We have 

municipal secretaries that are not conversant with the regulations. We have line-ups of people waiting to 

have their applications processed. We have people who are not in a position to pay their hospital tax nor 

their medical tax to the Swift Current health region. They want to know what arrangements can be 

made, if any, if they go on social aid to have their medical costs paid for them. Those are problems that 

I‟m bringing to the heads of departments here to try to work out the solution. 

 

So my mornings have been fully taken up. I don‟t think that the legislature at this time should devote its 

full time to debates — nothing but debates in the mornings, afternoons, and at night — sitting in this 

chamber and listening to one speaker after another from 10:00 in the morning until 10:00 or 10:30 at 

night. I don‟t think it is advancing the cause and the work of the legislature. Such a practice is robbing 

the members of the opportunity to do what is expected of them by their constituents — to use a fair 

portion of this time to take to the various departments, the problems they are facing in order to help them 

to solve them. 

 

I think the opposition is around as early as most members in the legislature. I got the Commission report 

Friday afternoon. The weekend was a holiday weekend. We came in on Tuesday for the session on 

Wednesday. I haven‟t had the opportunity to give thorough study to it, and I have been using part of my 

mornings studying that report, looking into other suggestions that have been offered, and trying to 

balance and check one against the other, in order that I can contribute something worthwhile to the 

thinking and the assessing of the bill that is presented to us. 

 

That is the reason why I object to morning sittings, because it is not giving me the opportunity to take 

my problems to the officials of the departments, because time would not permit me to interview them at 

the 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

61 

time they happen to be in their office. It would greatly inconvenience them were they to accommodate 

me the time that I have left to deal with these problems. It is those things which the members are using 

the opportunity to assist and to work out and to find solutions to, and for that reason I object to having to 

sit in the morning and the afternoon and at night, and not leaving me any opportunity to do the research 

work that is so essential if we are to give true consideration and make a valuable contribution, both to 

the medical care bill and to the tax rental agreement. 

 

I want to have something to say on the tax rental agreement, but I want to do some research work first. I 

want to have something to say on the medical plan, but I want insofar as my limited mental capacity will 

permit, to be as informed as I can be before I attempt to assess and to offer a contribution to the House. 

For that reason I feel that I need the time and am entitled to the hours necessary to do this research work. 

That is why I object to the morning sittings. 

 

Mr. Franklin E. Foley (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to make one or two comments 

with regard to this motion. Although having only looked over the bill in question, with regard to the 

medical plan, very briefly, in my opinion there is nothing said about the financing of the scheme, 

nothing mentioned about premiums. 

 

Premier Douglas: — On a motion of morning sittings for the House we are now discussing the medical 

bill, we‟ve discussed a plebiscite and half a dozen other subjects which are not even remotely related to 

this motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I agree. I think hon. members should endeavour to keep the discussion as much as 

possible to this motion — morning sittings in the legislature. 

 

Mr. Foley: — I only wanted to point out, Mr. Speaker, there is a great deal of information which we had 

hoped to have on this matter, and the matter of whether or not we sit in the mornings certainly is related 

to the time we will have to gain information on this important legislation. For one thing we don‟t know 

anything about how the medical profession 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

62 

is to be paid, or anything of that nature, and certainly I think these are some of the things that have been 

omitted from our information to date. We should have time to get this information. 

 

Mr. Bernard D. Gallagher (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, I had no intention of taking any part in this 

debate, but when my learned friend, the member for Hanley constituency (Hon. Mr. Walker) got up and 

took as long to make his point as he did, I decided to get into it, too. 

 

I think that the member for Hanley made it quite clear that he hasn‟t got the courage to do what the 

member for Moosomin suggested that he should do. I think we should take all the time in the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! It is, I believe, now 5:30. We would ordinarily adjourn to come back at 7:30 

tonight. Is it the pleasure of the House that we do? 

 

Premier Douglas: — It is up to the House. If the House thinks it is going to be an extended debate, then 

I think we probably ought to call it 5:30. If the House wants to extend and go for another fifteen 

minutes, if fifteen minutes will finish it up, we could finish. It is entirely up to the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Let‟s finish it now. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Very good. 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — Mr. Speaker, as I started to say before, I don‟t think the member from Hanley has 

the courage to do what was suggested by the member for Moosomin. I think that this is too serious a 

thing to be kicked around the way it has been kicked around. The member from Kelsey suggested that 

he was amazed to hear that the people on this side of the House were not ready to put through the 

legislation that this House has come in to put through at this session. I might remind the member for 

Kelsey that whether or not he had access to the legislation that we are going to deal with during this 

session, three or four months ago or not, I do not know, but I know that we only got this Advisory 

Committee‟s report last Friday and Saturday. We‟ve only had the bill put on our desks this afternoon. 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

63 

I don‟t know how long he has had it in his possession, or how long he might have known what it was 

going to contain, but I do hope, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier will consider very seriously withdrawing 

or at least compromising, as the Leader of the Opposition has suggested, on this motion, that is put 

before this House. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I personally, and I think my colleagues, have no strong feelings 

about this matter. We didn‟t expect there would be all this fuss, and I find great difficulty in sorting out 

the contradictory arguments that have been advanced. One member gets up and says this is an attempt to 

cut off discussion. Cutting off discussion means adding twelve and one-half hours to the Speech from 

the Throne Debate? For people who were howling that they had dozens of things they wanted to get off 

their chest, this seems to me to be an excellent opportunity for them to get it off their chests. 

 

There have been one or two sound arguments, but I think it is silly to say that sitting mornings is going 

to interfere with getting out and holding meetings in your constituencies to see what the people think. 

You‟re certainly not going to run off every morning to have a meeting in the country. If you‟re going to 

have a meeting you‟re going to have to have it in the evening, so we‟d better agree not to sit evenings, 

and sit mornings and afternoons, if you want to hold meetings in the country. 

 

I think some of these arguments border on the ridiculous. There have been some sound arguments, and I 

think those are the ones we have to recognize. The member for Humboldt points up quite properly that 

there is a lot of study and research involved in legislation, and I think it is most unwise for members not 

to have an opportunity to study the legislation. As far as the report is concerned, most members have had 

an opportunity of reviewing it. By the way, I was never in Toronto and never talked to a reporter there. 

The reporter from the Toronto Star saw me on a Tuesday; I got the report on a Wednesday, and I didn‟t 

get a chance to read the report until a Saturday, when I sat down and went over it very carefully. Most 

members have had the same chance, and now they have a chance to spend this week-end studying the 

bill, but as the Leader of the Opposition says, there are financial bills to come down, and those, of 

course, will want some careful studying. 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

64 

It seems to me that if we are going to try to find some compromise, the proposition I would suggest in 

this, why don‟t we continue sitting mornings? After all, this is what we do during regular sessions, 

except when we are sitting in committees. It is true that the member for Melville said the committees do 

not comprise the whole House. But they do comprise as high as 38 members. The crown corporations 

committee has 38 members which takes in the bulk of the members. Why don‟t we go ahead with the 

morning sittings, until we get the Speech from the Throne debate out of the way. When we start on this 

legislation, if the members feel they want more time, let‟s either drop morning sittings, or agree to 

adjourn each night at 5:30, and have the evenings to work on. We have no desire to rush this thing 

through. I think it is very important that every member understand it thoroughly. But we felt with the 

Speech from the Throne on, it was a very good time to study the medical care report. It would at least be 

interesting, and some of the members would have a chance to read it at that time. 

 

I wonder if this would not be the most satisfactory way — to go ahead with the mornings. We haven‟t 

any legislation in front of us except the Medical Care Insurance Act. When we get into the legislation 

itself, if the members feel they would like to cut down on half days, then the Whips could confer. We 

could knock off the morning sittings, or the evening sittings, whichever would seem the more 

appropriate to the members. I wonder if this would meet the situation. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Would the hon. member permit a question? We thought — all of us, I think everybody 

voted for these Standing Orders, and we submitted to a form of closure on a vote — it was satisfactory 

to everybody. We all decided that the debate on the Speech from the Throne shouldn‟t last indefinitely; 

there should be a cut-off date and the hours at that time were firmly established. Now, we have adhered 

to this every other session. Why should this session be any different than any other session? 

 

Premier Douglas: — There‟s no change in the Standing Orders as far as the Throne Speech debate is 

concerned. The only difference is there is going to be seven and a half to twelve and one-half hours 

more debating time. The Standing Order is clear. It provides for seven days debate in addition to the 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

65 

day on which the Mover and Seconder speak. That makes eight days. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — But we thought the time sufficient there; why is it not sufficient now? 

 

Premier Douglas: — By sitting more hours per day we could finish by Wednesday if we wanted to. We 

could then revert to shorter days to deal with legislation. We don‟t have to take the full time for the 

Speech from the Throne. But certainly it is not cutting down the Speech from the Throne. This debate 

will be the same number of days, but they will be eight-hour days instead of five and one-half hour days, 

for five days of it. Three days have already gone. I would think this would be a satisfactory thing for 

everyone concerned. If the Whips get together and decide once we get through the Speech from the 

Throne, that the members on both sides feel they need more time, we could, if it is mutually agreeable, 

discontinue either morning sittings, or discontinue evening sittings. We are not pressing you to hurry up. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I wish we could adjourn here for about sixty seconds. That doesn‟t 

sound too unreasonable to me, but I would just like to confer with my colleagues here. Would that be 

permissible? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That is a rather unknown proceeding, so far as I am concerned. That is an undebatable 

motion. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Since the Premier has decided that is the course he wanted to take, it may be that he 

might leave — because of the fact that we weren‟t certain that was going to be it, except for the bill 

being on the Order Paper today, that he perhaps would leave Monday morning sitting off because there 

is no staff here over the weekend, and I know those of us who would be speaking on Monday would like 

to have some opportunity to have service, but that is just a suggestion. 

 

Premier Douglas: — That would be acceptable to me. I haven‟t had a chance to consult my colleagues. 

In television you have a conference — but I haven‟t got a long enough neck here to have a conference 

with everybody concerned. Would this be accepted, that we leave the motion on the Order Paper. If we 

do, 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

66 

this means that we don‟t sit Monday morning. We would proceed with this motion then, but somebody 

in the House would have to amend it, if we were going to start sitting Tuesday mornings. It would also 

give the Whips time to talk the thing over. Would this be agreeable? 

 

If it is agreeable, what do I do? Move the adjournment? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The book says we can‟t take a vote. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I can‟t amend my own motion? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You can‟t amend your own motion. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, can the Premier adjourn the debate, and take a vote on Monday? 

 

Premier Douglas: — The Clerk says it cannot be amended, because I have already started a motion. Mr. 

Speaker, I think I have the solution, if I could have the consent of the House. If we could get a 

gentleman‟s undertaking (and that would include the member for Humboldt) — a gentleman‟s 

agreement, that I could introduce a motion on Monday without notice, I would withdraw this motion. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We will certainly give that undertaking. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I would therefore, ask leave to withdraw the motion. 

 

(Motion withdrawn) 

 

Motion re: SUSPENSION OF CERTAIN STANDING ORDERS 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think the other motion is at all controversial, but we can 

leave it until Monday if you wish. It calls for the suspension of three Standing Orders; one respecting the 

appointment of a Committee of Supply and Ways and Means, which is a Committee which is always 

appointed at the beginning of the session to deal with the budget. There will be no budget so it doesn‟t 

apply. 



 

October 13, 1961 

 

 

67 

 

The other is Standing Order 73, which is respecting reports of the Legislative Librarian, so it seems to 

me that it is purely a matter of proceedings. 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Douglas, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: 

 

Ordered, that the following Standing Orders be suspended for the duration of this Session: 

 

(1) Standing Order 43 respecting the appointment of the Committees of Supply and Ways and Means; 

(2) Standing Order 73 respecting lists of reports required to be tabled; and 

(3) Standing Order 105 respecting the report of the Legislative Librarian. 
 

(Motion agreed to) 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:42 o‟clock p.m. 


