



















































Hansard: October 19, 1961


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

7th Day 

 

Thursday, October 19, 1961 

 

QUESTION RE MEDICAL CARE 

 

Mr. W. Ross Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are 

called I would like to direct a question to the Premier. In view of news reports yesterday that the doctors 

will refuse to participate in this medical plan, is any meeting contemplated in the near future between 

representatives of the government and the College of Physicians and Surgeons to see if any compromise 

can be worked out which would be satisfactory to them? 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I am told by the Minister of Health, at least I was two days ago, that 

the president of the Saskatchewan College of Physicians and Surgeons had, through the deputy minister, 

requested a meeting with some members of the government. That meeting was arranged for 10 o‘clock 

Saturday morning. However, statements made by the president of the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons, as appearing in this morning‘s paper, if they are accurate, raise some questions as to what the 

purpose of the meeting is. However, the government is quite prepared to carry through with its original 

agreement to meet the representatives of the college on Saturday morning, if they still desire to have 

such a meeting. As far as working out any compromise is concerned, the full details of the plan have not 

yet been made public. I do not therefore see how they can be at the stage where we can talk about a 

compromise. All that is before the House and all that has been made public is the legislation which has 

received first reading. The full details of the plan of course will be divulged when second reading is 

moved by the minister, and I feel that when that is done and all the information is before the public and 

the profession, then some of the objections which the profession may have had will disappear. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, might I ask the Premier a supplementary question. Would he feel like 

giving the House and the people of Saskatchewan 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

2 

any assurance that no new taxes will be imposed for a medical scheme until he is sure he can get the 

commission-operation of the doctors to provide the service. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, the government is not prepared to abrogate to the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons, or anybody else the responsibilities which properly belong to this legislature. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — The government will carry out whatever instructions it receives from this 

legislature and carry out any administrative responsibilities which are given to it by this legislature. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I am not suggesting that you should but let‘s not . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

QUESTION RE TELEPHONES 

 

Mr. J. W. Gardiner (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I would like to ask the 

minister in charge of telephones, if due to the protests that have been made by the city of Melville, if his 

department will reconsider their change in plans to operate the telephone service for the city of Melville, 

to the city of Yorkton until such time as both the Chamber of Commerce and the city have an 

opportunity to make further representations to his department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — Mr. Speaker, some of the telephone officials did meet with a delegation from 

the city council of Melville about a week ago. But I know of nothing from the Chamber of Commerce or 

the Board of Trade to the effect that they are making any protest. I have no word about that at all. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — This is a supplementary question to the minister‘s answer. I was just wondering if 

there was any reconsideration being given by his department to change in plans, so that service will not 

be directed through Yorkton. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

3 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — No, we have no change of plans at this time. It is just the sort of a St. Paul, 

Minneapolis deal I think. Yorkton and Melville are both rivals. 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

Hon. Mr. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I wish first of all to congratulate the 

mover and seconder of the Address in Reply, particular the lady member for the city of Regina, who 

provided the House with a very excellent analysis, and a very constructive appraisal of the proposed 

medical care plan. I wish also to congratulate the hon. member for Touchwood for the diligent work 

which he did in connection with his presentation regarding the financial arrangements between the 

federal government and the provinces, particular as it relates to our own situation in Saskatchewan. 

 

I wish also to congratulate the hon. members opposite for the contribution that they have made in this 

debate. The one thing that impressed me, Mr. Speaker, however, was as one hon. member after another 

arose to speak, the addresses by both the mover and the seconder of the speech by comparison became 

that much better, Mr. Speaker. I have been in the legislature now for a great number of years, and I don‘t 

believe, Mr. Speaker, in all my experience have I listened to such an ineffective opposition as expressed 

by the hon. members opposite in this debate so far. They have asked for a special session of the 

legislature in connection with drought problems. They regretted that there was no special provision or 

any extraordinary measure in this regard contained in the Speech from the Throne, but after listening to 

them, Mr. Speaker, I just wondered why they would want a special session. I haven‘t heard one single 

constructive proposal come from the hon. members opposite. They haven‘t made one single point as to 

what respect the government has been delinquent in its responsibility and has not adequately met the 

present emergency situation. Their remarks have been punctuated by extreme statements, unsupported 

by facts, Mr. Speaker. One of the futilities of speaking in this House is an endeavour to try to point out 

simple facts, 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

4 

obvious facts, to the hon. members opposite — it is a futile job, Mr. Speaker, because they will not 

accept facts. They believe that if they go about, particular when there is a calamity, or a natural disaster, 

they believe that somehow people are going to believe them, that they can stir up unrest and ill feeling, 

while it doesn‘t prevail throughout the province despite their best efforts in this House and so on the 

hustings, Mr. Speaker, because people know otherwise. They know the facts. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. members seem to feel that this is good political tactics. I 

would suggest to them that it is the poorest kind of political practice that can be followed by any party 

that ever hopes to become the government in this province. They are putting a very low value on the 

intelligence of the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I had expected that when the Premier had announced that this was his last session the House, that I 

would hear some expressions of gratitude for what the Premier has done, and this administration has 

done under his leadership in this province. On the contrary, they said that this period will go down in the 

records, that this administration‘s records under the leadership of Premier T.C. Douglas will go down in 

history as one which has done nothing in this province. Now people know better than that, and I thought 

they would at least have the good grace of saying something nice about the Premier, in a personal way. 

 

The hon. Leader of the Opposition said, ‗well he wasn‘t sure whether he should stay or go‘ he damned 

him both ways. He damned him if he was going to stay, and after he damned him because he was going 

away, his stated reason was ‗because I think our political chances will be better now.‘ That is the height 

of his statesmanship. I wonder if this is the reason he sought the leadership of the Liberal party, for 

strictly political purposes, or to give a contribution to better the economy of Saskatchewan. I wonder 

which is the case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Do you want me to tell you, because I figured if we got rid of you . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — . . . and people psychopaths in the rest of the country, stirring up, and I‘m not 

referring to the hon. members opposite as 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

5 

such, but the kind of person who is always prepared to take a negative viewpoint of everything, 

particularly when a calamity beyond the human powers of man occurs. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to deal first of all with the drought situation, and to review a bit some of the 

events that led up to the present situation. As I mentioned, hon. members opposite state over and over 

nothing has been done. Nothing has been done. That the department hasn‘t had a single new policy since 

1944. Well, Mr. Speaker, there is a word that could be used in reply, but I‘m afraid it would be 

unparliamentary if I used it in this House. It must be remembered that this is not the first year that this 

government or the Department of Agriculture has faced a very serious drought situation in this province. 

There have been innumerable drought problems on other occasions as well, in recent years as a matter of 

fact. For example in 1958-59 we paid out over $400 thousand in transportation assistance. We had also 

paid transportation assistance before the early snow which came in the fall of 1959. In 1959-60 very 

substantial financial aid was provided and I can still remember the early snowfall of 1959 and the 

outburst from the hon. Leader of the Opposition who wasn‘t concerned about what took place before the 

snowfall, he didn‘t seem to realize that we had already made transportation policies and other 

emergency measures available for our farmers. But without regard to this fact when the snow hit, and 

the calamity was upon us, what did he say? ‗All we can do is run to Ottawa.‘ That all we can do about 

an emergency situation is run to Ottawa. But I want to say here right now, Mr. Speaker, is there anything 

wrong with the national government assisting in situations that are of national emergency proportions? I 

think he should agree that the national government has some responsibility in these matters. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, regarding the contention that nothing has been done: For the fiscal year 1959-60 

there was paid out by this administration, that is our share of the financial responsibilities involved about 

$3 1/2 million of nothing, of so-called nothing by the opposition — in 1959-60. Despite the calamity-

howling of the hon. Leader of the Opposition, throughout this province at that time, that we‘re going to 

lose our livestock industry, that the Department of Agriculture was immobilized in the situation — we 

not only saved our livestock industry, but we had the largest numbers of cattle subsequent to 1959-60 

that we‘ve had in our history. We came through and this year 1961 recorded the highest cattle 

population in our history. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

6 

Those are the answers, Mr. Speaker. These were the objectives we hoped to and did achieve through our 

policies. 

 

By contrast, Mr. Speaker, in 1937, and I wouldn‘t go back, I only do so because the hon. agricultural 

critic from Qu‘Appelle-Wolseley referred to 1937. I know 1937 — I happened to be the reeve of our 

municipality, I can still remember the wholesale liquidation of livestock that took place. The wholesale 

liquidation of livestock in 1937 — the records show 350 thousand head of cattle less in the subsequent 

year 1938. And in 1937 they told the farmers how many head of cattle they could keep, if they didn‘t 

have enough fodder, and they also said if you don‘t sell your cattle, you‘ll not get direct relief from us. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Why did you sell yours? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I can still remember . . . 

 

Mr. Foley: — That is not true. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — That is true. I know what I‘m talking about. The hon. member for Turtleford 

doesn‘t know. He was still in short pants at that time, Mr. Speaker, and he‘s still in short pants in a lot of 

ways. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Sept out and let‘s see what you‘re wearing Toby. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — The hon. members opposite are short of good judgment and a capacity to reason in 

many instances. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Why did you sell your cattle Toby? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Now, what were cattle selling for in those days? A cent a pound! A cent a pound! I 

can still see them — thin cattle, and cattle in good shape, leaving the municipalities, as I mentioned at 

that time. It was most difficult for me at that time to agree with such a policy, and at the same time 

discharge my responsibility as reeve of a municipality, which states that the reeve shall do such things as 

will improve the general economic and social conditions of the resident ratepayers. I asked at that time 

— ―What are you going to replace those cattle with — buffalo?‖ We as a council tried to hold them and 

we did retain as many cattle as we possibly could because we felt that the farmers 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

7 

in our particular area were greatly dependent on livestock if they were to have income stability and 

ability to pay taxes in future years. I have pursued this same policy ever since, Mr. Speaker, on a 

provincial wide basis, and I believe it has brought good results. The results are illustrated in a year like 

this and other years when we‘ve had serious crop failures, when the income from our livestock industry 

saved the agricultural economy to a large measure. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the present drought situation didn‘t start just recently. It started in July 1960 as 

everyone knows. This has been one of the most prolonged drought periods in the history of this 

province. I say, and the records bear me out in this. We had good moisture in the spring of 1960 as 

everyone knows — good moisture in the spring. We previously had a heavy winter snowfall, and as a 

result of the early rains in the spring of 1960 we had one of the best forage crops in our history in 

Saskatchewan. Farmers made an excellent job of harvesting all of the forage they could in 1960, and we 

re-advised to do so consistent with our extension program. As a result our farmers had a pretty good 

carry-over of fodder reserves for the year 1961. The good summer fallow that was carried on in the 

summer of 1960 conserved the early soil moisture of that year. This is largely the reason, together with 

other reasons, better cultural practices, weed chemicals and so on, that we‘ve had such surprisingly good 

crops on our summer fallow this year. 

 

Now we were aware of the approaching problems as I say, since July 1960 — the rain practically 

ceased. We began our extension program very early using the only media that we could utilize so early 

since no one knows what is going to happen, but telling farmers that the prospects don‘t look good for a 

crop in 1961. To, therefore, sow summer fallow to oats, to sow low areas which may not be flooded to 

oats, in other words to do everything to meet, what appeared to be a growing problem. We met, Mr. 

Speaker, on March 15, 1961 with the agricultural officials from the provinces of Alberta, Manitoba and 

the federal government. We met here in Regina to discuss the pending situation and more than anything 

else, to discuss policies to meet the situation if it developed. The policies that were discussed at this 

conference in Regina were the policies that this provincial government had had in effect in previous 

years. If there is anything we can claim experience for, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, it is 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

8 

experience in dealing with drought. We are more exposed to these uncertain natural hazards than any 

other province in Canada. Everyone knows this. So we took action very early, and it was decided at this 

meeting that we would, and there was a committee set up that in the event that drought came we would 

adopt uniform policies. The policies that are presently in effect in the prairie provinces are the policies 

that this provincial administration has utilized over the years, and which policies have, in every case, 

adequately met the situation. But I must admit the 1961 challenge was the biggest one presented to the 

Department of Agriculture. 

 

I had reported the outcome of this early meeting to my colleagues and cleared a policy with them as 

early as June 9, for subsequent implementation in the event that the much-looked-for big rain didn‘t 

come. Now everyone knows that during the month of June, almost to the first of July, anything can 

happen in Saskatchewan to change the situation completely. But the policies were presented very early 

to cabinet and by June 20 it appeared that the rains weren‘t going to materialize and the policies were 

then approved for implementation, which was done immediately thereafter. I‘ll review events in a bit 

more detail in connection with general drought and the policies to meet it further on in my address. 

 

I want first to talk about one of the first things we did and that could be done. That is in connection with 

water shortage. As the hon. members know, the Department of Agriculture, a number of years ago, 

acquired many miles of pipe and pumping equipment to provide water to urban centres such as 

Balcarres, Assiniboia, Eston and several other towns. This seemed to be a growing problem and we 

acquired this equipment to do what we could in this regard. We have an investment of over $200 

thousand in this equipment. Well this spring we in the department felt, why not utilize this equipment to 

pump water to farm dugouts. We didn‘t know how it would work out. We knew it would have to be 

inexpensive and all we wanted was a rental cost for the equipment, sufficient to pay the advance account 

for the depreciation and so on. We started, Mr. Speaker, with some misgivings. We had the equipment, 

we thought ‗why not use it?‘ And, Mr. Speaker, we started, and unfortunately we started on the 3rd of 

May instead of the 1st of May. However, we started just about as quickly as we could when the ice and 

frost went away so we could pump. We started of course in areas where there were possibilities of 

pumping from larger bodies of water to dugouts. One of those areas that commended itself to this kind 

of policy was the area of the hon. member 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

9 

for Qu‘Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. McFarlane). We started pumping and I think he got his dugout filled too. 

Now, what appreciation do I get for this, Mr. Speaker. The hon. member for Qu‘Appelle-Wolseley 

because he knew the date we started to pump, put a question on the order paper asking ‗How many 

pump units did you have in the field before May 1? Why didn‘t the hon. member ask the date March 1? 

It would have been frozen then, or February 1? But he picks May 1 as the date and then he states in his 

speech — why he says! ‗They didn‘t have any pumping units in operation before May 1.‘ This is the 

type of criticism we have been getting and these are the people who want a special session of the 

legislature to deal with drought. They ought to be ashamed of themselves. I would have thought that he 

would have at least expressed some appreciation for the early action taken, and for the initiative shown 

by the department and the concern of the department in its efforts to try and help farmers as much as we 

possibly could. Since then, Mr. Speaker, this program has gone along very well. 

 

The House might be interested in knowing and I know of course this program has limited application 

because of natural factors — you‘ve got to have the water to pump from and the economic distances of 

course are a mile and a half for one pump unit. But the farmers gave full commission-operation in laying 

out the pipes and working with the one man in charge, of each unit, and we progressively put more 

outfits in the field. We had five units in the field that were engaged in pumping to farm dugouts. We also 

had to provide several units to pump water for the town of Eston. It required eight pumps in stages to 

life the water from the river valley using this kind of light pipes. Every one knows it is not possible to 

put too much pressure on these light irrigation pipes, because they break out at the joints. This is one of 

the reasons we can only pump a mile and a half to farm dugouts, and impossible to pump to any high 

elevation unless more pumps are used to relieve the pressure at the joints of these light pipes. 

 

The following figures are interesting, Mr. Speaker. We pumped water to some four hundred dugouts. By 

doing some calculating on this — it is interesting to know that this amounted to approximately 150 

million gallons of water. We also pumped to several towns — Wakaw, Balcarres, Wolseley, Abernethy 

and Eston and this will bring our total gallons pumped to these towns plus the farm dugouts to very 

nearly 200 million gallons of water. I submit, Mr. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

10 

Speaker, this is enough water to submerge some of the criticism raised by the hon. members opposite, 

particularly the hon. member for Qu‘Appelle-Wolseley. 

 

This subject of water development and water pumping was also discussed at a federal-provincial 

emergency drought conference held in Winnipeg July 2. I proposed at that time that we ought to also 

share a program for ground water development. This was left in abeyance at that time and I will deal 

with it a bit further on. 

 

Now — grasshoppers! I‘ve got a file, Mr. Speaker, and I knew pretty well what was going to happen. 

Based on the past tactics of hon. members, I have a file that says ‗drought, grasshoppers‘ and the other 

one says ‗Thatcher‘. I am always sure that if we‘re going to have a drought, we‘re also going to have an 

outburst from Mr. Thatcher. He never warns about these things before they occur. He wasn‘t concerned 

much, early in this season, when we in the department were worried, concerned and designing policies 

for this eventuality — he was thinking at that time of taking a much needed rest, by way of an extensive 

trip to Europe. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — He told us all was well then. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I want to inform the House again, no matter how futile it is, but I am going to do it 

again. As everyone knows grasshopper chemicals came on the market around 1949. In that campaign we 

were still handling sawdust and the department provided the sawdust free and the mill feed as well. The 

municipality had to buy the poison, and they had to provide the mixing stations, and, Mr. Speaker, this 

method was a very inadequate technique for meeting grasshopper infestation. We were never able to 

control grasshoppers through the old sawdust method, or to save many crops. It was cumbersome, slow 

— as everyone knows. The residual effect too, of this method, disappeared very quickly. Grasshopper 

chemicals came on the market about that time and they were costing the farmers approximately $3.00 an 

acre. We subsidized private enterprise the first year and paid half of the cost, so it cost the farmers 

around $1.50 an acre. With that experience, Mr. Speaker, I decided that we would begin to bulk 

purchase grasshopper chemicals for two reasons. One — because of the uncertainty regarding an 

outbreak, you never know even when you have the grasshopper maps as a guide whether you‘ll have a 

major outbreak or not. This depends on the weather. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

11 

Therefore one reason for bulk purchase was so that someone would assume the responsibility for 

overcoming the uncertainty of demand and supply for chemicals. The other was to try to bring the price 

of the chemicals down within reasonable reach, so the farmer could use them. Now in 1949 it was just a 

question of whether you‘d let the grasshoppers have it, or pay $3.00 an acre to the chemical companies 

for the insecticide. This was a financial gamble the farmer had to take at that time. We have removed 

that gamble because over a period of years, we were first able to bring the price down to 86¢ an acre, 

then as the result of a favourable purchase and different chemicals to 36¢ an acre. Then, Mr. Speaker, 

for the grasshopper infestations that seemed to be in prospect for 1958 and 1959, we were able to finally 

bring the price down to 14¢ an acre. This now is just a deterrent fee against over utilization, as people 

will say. Still the hon. member for Redberry (Mr. Michayluk) suggests that we should provide it free, 

(for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) pardon me.) I don‘t want to get these two men mixed up. I will apologize to 

the hon. member for Redberry. 

 

I want to say that it is practically free now, but I must admit this — where dieldrin is used for cutworms, 

you must apply five to six times as much. In the winter of 1959 we purchased $1,155,000 worth of 

supplies that were stocked in our storage facilities in Moose Jaw, in anticipation of a major outbreak in 

1959. We used from those supplies for 1959 and 1960, we also had an infestation then and a cutworm 

outbreak, as well, and only half of these chemicals were used during 1959 and 1960 as well. This points 

up my first point that someone ought to take the risk for carrying large inventories of these supplies from 

year to year because of the uncertainty of outbreaks. Commercial firms don‘t like to do this and if it 

were left to the commercial firms, you wouldn‘t have these large reserve supplies. I noticed the hon. 

Leader of the Opposition criticized us because we didn‘t leave this to the trade. I would like him to get 

up and tell this House, before this session is over, as to whether or not he wants us to turn this back to 

the commercial interests again. Do you want us to do that? Or do you want us to continue to carry this 

risk and do everything we possibly can to have the supplies on hand when they are needed. For example, 

Mr. Speaker, we carried around $400 thousand of inventory of these chemicals from 1951 to 1958 

inclusive without an outbreak occurring at all. Someone should carry this responsibility and this we are 

trying to do, and this is what we‘re being criticized for. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

12 

Mr. Thatcher: — You knew this year there was going to be an outbreak. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — . . . And we were ready for it. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You weren‘t ready for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — There he goes. This is a perfect example, Mr. Speaker, of what I am saying. No 

matter how well and carefully you place the facts before these people, they say this is not a fact at all. I 

will say this to the hon. members. Here is a picture in our annual report of the stockpiles in storage at 

Moose Jaw. Look at them and see them. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well where were they after the outbreak arrived? 

 

Mr. Snedker: — The planes had to fly it in. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — We handle these supplies and distribute them as everyone knows through the 

municipalities. The municipalities knew the extent of the outbreaks — and someone said the only ones 

that knew were the Department of Agriculture. Everyone knew the extent of the outbreaks, but as I say, 

not everyone and no one knows as to what the extent of hatchability is going to be. You can have 

prolonged wet weather and you may not have any infestation worth speaking about. If the weather 

continues dry and cold you‘ll not have the same hatchability, but if you have a combination of dry and 

very warm weather, then you have an explosion of grasshoppers. Everyone knows this and this is what 

happened. We had 125 thousand gallons on hand, as I say, to begin the campaign, which looked like a 

very good supply in view of the forecast. Municipalities started ordering around the middle of May 200 

gallons a day, 300 gallons a day to three and then six thousand gallons a day — some days it dropped 

back to four thousand gallons, and then those hot days came as everyone knows and we had an 

explosion from a demand of five thousand orders a day when on a Monday and a Tuesday the demand 

suddenly arose to 30 thousand gallons on Monday, 25 thousand gallons on a Tuesday — a total of 55 

thousand gallons for two days and we had still at that time over 60 thousand gallons on hand and had 

ordered, a week previous, additional supplies from the suppliers in Toronto. They began working around 

the clock, even then we had no way of knowing that the level of demand would take such a huge jump. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

13 

A person I suppose could say, well why didn‘t the municipalities appraise their needs a little more 

accurately. This of course can‘t be done with any degree of accuracy. In order to catch up with this 

unprecedented demand for those two days, knowing that the supplies wouldn‘t arrive in time by rail — 

and that there would be some lag in supplies and some discouragement in the campaign if we didn‘t 

keep supplies on hand — we turned to every resort we could to get supplies here quickly. We contacted 

the commercial airways and this was out of the question. Costs were too great. I called Mr. Harkness the 

Minister of National Defense and asked him if he would place at our disposal the Royal Canadian Air 

Force, and he said he would do what he could. The R.C.A.F. contacted us and we told them about our 

likely demands, and they talked about having two or three flying boxcars immediately available which 

would only carry a relatively small load. We informed them of our demands and that the supplies would 

have to come within two or three days to do any good. They responded, Mr. Speaker, in an excellent 

manner, and I want to take this opportunity of extending my thanks and appreciations first to the 

Minister of National Defense Mr. Harkness, for making the service of the R.C.A.F. available to us, and 

secondly to the officers and the air crews who worked practically around the clock to bring the supplies 

to us. This was excellent commission-operation, Mr. Speaker, and I couldn‘t see anything wrong with 

using the Royal Canadian Air Force to help us in an emergency situation within our country. 

 

The hon. Leader of the Opposition says, ‗this is going to cost a lot of money.‘ It isn‘t going to cost a lot 

of money, and we did subsidize the price. This cost more, but we absorbed the extra cost, so insofar as 

the farmer was concerned it was still 14¢ an acre. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . a lot more though. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — This is the usual, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Socialist arithmetic again — doesn‘t cost any more. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I‘ll say this to the credit of this administration, Mr. Speaker. When I present these 

situations to my colleagues they go along without asking questions like that, so it is done, and I like 

speed and maybe they know that I like speed. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

14 

Mr. Thatcher: — If you did a little planning you wouldn‘t have to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — The thing that seemed to worry the Leader of the Opposition more than anything 

else was the fact that I had my picture taken at the airport when the first plane arrived — that really hurt. 

He stated all I was doing was getting publicity and getting my picture taken. I would like to him to know 

it wasn‘t our public relations men that took those pictures. The Royal Canadian Air Force did that. They 

were so enthused over the fact of having done something unusual and worthwhile to help us. And they 

sent me some of these pictures, Mr. Speaker, and I am going to treasure them for a long time too. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we air lifted around 30 thousand gallons in our effort to have an uninterrupted and 

continuous campaign. Thank heaven it was successful. In a few days we moved by rail and by plane 

over 48 thousand gallons of chemicals. The personnel at the factory were good enough to work around 

the clock on several shits to supply our needs. And they continued to supply our needs throughout the 

campaign. The total amount used in the campaign in terms of money was $1,120,000 of nothing. This is 

enough chemicals to cover five million acres of land for the control of grasshoppers and four hundred 

thousand for cutworms. The hon. members opposite never mention benefits. They always mention the 

little things. The little problems that do occur in any good program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I would like to turn again to the major problem that we faced this summer and that is drought. As 

everyone knows the pasture situation particularly, looked very bad. How we got by with the small 

movement of livestock to alternative pastures I don‘t know. I think it was principally because farmers 

turned their cattle into cereal grain crops that obviously wouldn‘t make a good commercial cereal crop. 

 

I have mentioned already that our first emergency drought meeting was March 15. Our policies were 

cleared on June 20. On the 23rd I contacted the federal Minister of Agriculture and they were worried 

too. Everyone was worried about the pending situation. Copies of our policies were sent to him in the 

hope that they would share costs with us. He later suggested that we have a meeting in Winnipeg, which 

was held July 2 with the three prairie ministers to discuss and adopt policies on a uniform basis. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

15 

We agreed on certain policies and here they are, Mr. Speaker. These are the policies that were available 

to farmers. Here are the policies that amounted to nothing according to the opposition and that — 

nothing was done! 

 

1) One hundred per cent of the cost for moving farm machinery and fodder by rail. 
 

2) Seventy five per cent of the cost of moving fodder and machinery by licensed commercial trucks, 
and incidentally in this connection we extended this assistance to truckers who were hauling 

cattle, either truckers from here going to the States or truckers from the States coming up here for 

cattle. We said we‘ll pay you 75 per cent of your trucking costs up to $12.00 a ton for any hay 

you bring up. You must assume the responsibility of course for purchasing the hay in the States 

or wherever it comes from and disposing of it here, which they had no difficulty in doing. This 

was to give some added encouragement towards acquiring fodder from outside sources of 

supply. 

 

3) Five cents per ton-mile for the movement of fodder by farm truck. 
 

4) Fifty cents a mile, one way, for a fully loaded truck moving fodder, harvesting equipment to put 
up fodder elsewhere. 

 

5) Two cents per head per mile for the truck movement of cattle to pastures or to a supply of water 
where this was necessary. 

 

Now, the next, Mr. Speaker, that I mention is assistance that is provided only by the provincial 

government. At the Winnipeg conference I asked that we share transportation assistance in the 

movement of feed grain and seed, oats and barley, particularly. This was refused. I asked some help in 

carrying the feed and seed storage charges between the provincial government and the federal 

government for retaining supplies of grain in elevators at shipping points in the drought area. This was 

refused. So we went ahead on our own. 

 

6) (And this is provincially paid entirely and this will be a substantial item.) Seventy-five per cent 
of commercial trucking costs for transporting oats and barley up to $12.00 a ton. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

16 

7) Seventy-five per cent of transportation costs by rail for transporting oats and barley. One of the 
hon. members was worried about seed oats and I share his concern, and I will say a bit more 

about it a little later. But this assistance is available for the movement of feed or seed, oats and 

barley, by truck or by rail anywhere in the province. 

 

8) Four cents per ton-mile for moving oats and barley by farm truck beyond the distance of 25 
miles in all cases. 

 

9) Share with the municipalities 50 per cent of the storage costs on wheat, oats and barley held in 
elevators for farmer‘s needs in drought areas. 

 

10) On July 14 we advised our agriculture. reps. that we would also pay the expenses of agricultural 
committee men, municipal officials or anyone who assisted them in meeting the drought 

problem, either in making local surveys or going out to scout up and find fodder outside the 

municipality. 

 

11) We were concerned, Mr. Speaker, and I began to be concerned in the middle of July as to 
whether we had enough fodder within the province, and in order to encourage more farmers to 

harvest cereal grain crops, that is doubtful cereal grain crops for fodder, we proposed to the 

federal government that we introduce some kind of an incentive plan that would encourage the 

building up of these extra fodder reserves. As a result this $45.00 per ton bonus plan was 

adopted. I should mention too that P.F.A.A. relaxed their regulations previously, and advised 

farmers that where a farmer cut his cereal grain crop for fodder that the yield would be 

considered nil as far as P.F.A.A. eligibility was concerned. So these were concessions. This last 

one, the $5.00 per ton bonus plan is a pretty good policy, and contrary to what some hon. 

members said, I think it was the hon. member for Rosthern, (Mr. Boldt) who said that we told 

farmers to cut cereal grain crops for fodder. We didn‘t. We told farmers to use their best 

judgement. We said it will be badly needed. We said further if in your judgment you think that 

under this plan, you could do better than you could by leaving it for cereal grain, well harvest it 

for fodder or for cereal grain, whichever you think is best. 

 

I think we will probably get another 50 thousand tons of fodder from this policy. I want to say 

something 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

17 

about it. The purpose of this policy, as agreed to with the federal government, from their point of view 

and I can‘t disagree with them, was to get some extra fodder reserves. In other provinces and here it was 

a prime condition that the farmer must harvest it himself, he must bale it, and put It into stacks and in 

Manitoba he was not to sell it to anyone until a later date. I don‘t know what the cut-off date is in 

Manitoba but they are holding it for quite a while for extra reserves. But, we didn‘t think this particular 

provision was practical here. We though that if in a municipality there was someone who needed the 

fodder and someone else had cut a cereal grain crop for fodder, we shouldn‘t require this farmer to put it 

all in a stack and then undergo the uncertainty of sale for it at a much later date, so we said: First of all 

the farmer must harvest it himself, it must be his crop and an agreement must not be entered into prior to 

the date of this policy, which was the 19th of July, and that he must make his application to the 

municipality for the assistance and accept the condition that he will only sell it to someone approved by 

the municipality, and for not more than $20.00 a ton, but that after October 1, I believe that is the date, 

such farmer could then sell it to anyone he wished providing he didn‘t sell it for more than $20.00 a ton. 

This is the way we did it, and it got us into a few little administrative problems in trying to implement 

this policy in the most practical way possible. I though I should mention this because some of you may 

have run into some of the problems involved in the administration of the program. 

 

12) On July 17 the provincial government guarantees under the seed grain and supply act were made 
available to rural municipalities. I might say that we asked the federal government to provide 

emergency credit, without success. This is, therefore, the only other source of credit that we have 

available and this method has been used, as everyone knows, over the years. Under this policy, 

the province guarantees bank loans, negotiated by municipalities and also guarantees 75 per cent 

of the losses. I think with cattle prices where they are this is not a bad risk or any great risk for 

any municipal council to take to help ratepayers, particularly smaller farmers who haven‘t any 

money immediately on hand to purchase their own feed requirements. 

 

13) On October 11, as everyone knows I received a reply from Ottawa approving the community 
well development program. Someone said to me, ‗I supply you‘ll claim credit for that too Toby.‘ 

Well I do! I do! 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

18 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — There is nothing like being a shrinking violet at times but not all the time, and as 

everyone knows I didn‘t step out hurriedly — when we received confirmation from Ottawa, for a lot of 

publicity and prematurely say, ‗Here is the policy.‘ I let the other boys do it! 

 

During the latter part of August I was very anxious to discuss this program on an actual basis, and other 

matters with Mr. Hamilton. I was finally able to run him down when he was out here in Saskatchewan. 

As you know, he‘s all over the province speaking like other politicians are. I informed him, ‗I want to 

see you, there are some urgent problems here that we better talk about.‘ So he came to see me. I said: 

‗Alvin, there is one thing we ought to do, we ought now to start a well development program. Because it 

isn‘t long before winter will be here, and soon we will be unable to pump any more water to dugouts, 

sloughs are drying up. This would be a sound program.‘ And he agreed with me. He suggested we work 

out a policy with P.F.R.A. officials and advise him. I wired the policy to him September 5, and I 

expected we‘d get a very quick reply. I don‘t know what happened; I can‘t say what happens at the other 

end or elsewhere, but I kept sending wires to Mr. Hamilton saying this matter was urgent. I can table this 

correspondence if the hon. members want it for the record, but I don‘t think it‘s necessary. I kept 

sending wires and letters and he kept assuring me he was pushing it all he could. Manitoba objected 

somewhat to our initial proposal. Our first proposal was that we share these costs with a rural 

municipality on the basis of 20 per cent for the municipality and the balance 80 per cent shared equally 

between the two senior governments. Someone took exception to it somewhere along the line, and the 

next proposal I got back, was 35 per cent for the municipality, and we finally compromised on the basis 

of 30 per cent for the municipality and the balance of 35 per cent each for the federal and provincial 

governments. This is the policy in existence now. This includes sharing all of the costs of boring and 

drilling up to $1,000. That is the limit in this aspect. The balance of all of the costs of the cribbing or the 

casing, the pipes the pumps, the motor and everything else is shared as already mentioned. This policy is 

intended for rural municipalities and must be sponsored by a rural municipal council. This is an 

emergency policy for well development for community use. This policy is now in effect, and 

unfortunately we have lost a month and 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

19 

a half, which I regret, but at the same time I appreciate the fact that the federal government has come in 

with us. I only wish they had told us sooner that they were coming in or otherwise since we could have 

gone ahead on our own at an earlier date. 

 

It is very clear, Mr. Speaker, that the policies which I have enumerated are very much more than 

nothing, and that they have been adequate, because we‘ve met the situation, Mr. Speaker. We‘ve met the 

situation very well. In support of my contention that we‘ve met the situation I submit facts, Mr. Speaker. 

I know, again, that they will probably not be accepted by the hon. members opposite, but when you look 

at cattle marketing for example, Mr. Speaker, we were worried about wholesale liquidation and panic 

marketing of livestock. This was avoided because farmers had policies under which they could do 

something and under which they could acquire fodder cheaply. The transportation was paid, the major 

part of it. Transportation and moving of machinery was paid — this is the only and proper way to do it. 

We‘re talking about many millions of acres of land, and we‘re talking about several million tons of 

fodder, and it takes thousands of working hands to accomplish the task of getting this much fodder in a 

limited period of time. You must, therefore, have policies which will stimulate thousands of hands to the 

task. This is what prevented panic marketing. As the campaign gathered momentum, we could see less 

and less cattle rushing on the market. I want to at this time, Mr. Speaker, express my very sincere 

appreciation to all agencies who helped out. I want to especially commend the staff of the Department of 

Agriculture, the agriculture. reps. and other field staff who didn‘t take their vacations as planned, who 

stayed at home and worked. I want also to particularly mention the plan industry branch, and Mr. 

Holmes, who stayed at his post during the grasshopper campaign. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — . . . Sundays, in the evenings till 12 o‘clock taking orders for municipalities, and I 

want to commend the plant industry branch and the director for having handled this task with a very 

minimum of staff, and again the agriculture. reps. for a most thorough job well done. The greatest credit 

of all goes to the agriculture committeemen and municipal councils who did an excellent job, and more 

specially to the farmers themselves, who really became aroused and responded wholeheartedly to the 

demands of the situation. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

20 

The department‘s function is to provide the policies, to coordinate activity, to develop the organization, 

and to advise people as to what is going on, getting listings of fodder, locating fodder — this we did, and 

it has been a wonderful combined commission-operative effort. I want to also extend our thanks to the 

publicity agencies, the T.V. stations, the radio and the press, all of whom operated in an excellent 

manner. All of whom, like us, were concerned about a very serious economic situation facing the 

economy of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we‘ve come through, I must say in good shape. In fact we are 

going to have a little reserve of fodder. I think when the supplies of fodder are redistributed under our 

policies that we‘ll be able to show a little reserve to be carried over to next spring. 

 

Cattle marketing is a good indicator for success or otherwise, Mr. Speaker, to date. Our marketings are 

415 thousand adult cattle and 88 thousand claves. Now for the four years previously — we will take 

1957-58 when in the neighbourhood of 550 thousand were marked in the 12-month period. We 

estimated that we might have a 30 per cent increase in marketing which would be normal, considering 

the fact that people need more money when cereal grain crops fail, and considering the fact that fodder 

and water are big problems. Now to date there have been 415 thousand adult cattle marketed. We 

expected under our figures 612 thousand in the full 12-month period for the calendar year. Whether this 

will occur or not I don‘t know. If it doesn‘t occur we‘ll be marketing in a normal manner. So this is one 

indicator. The other indicator of success is that at the Moose Jaw feeder show, I don‘t know if Mr. 

Thatcher was there this year, I don‘t know if he had any cattle there or not, but we‘ve had the highest 

prices paid for a lot of cattle in any year for the past ten years, and the feeder prices paid at this show 

were generally good — better than last year. These facts provide concrete proof of the success of our 

policies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Still the hon. members opposite want to run around the country and try to stir up ill 

feeling when they know the people are concerned and worried, this is when they go to work with their 

unsupported statements. 

 

\I see the hon. member for Melville is not in his seat. I have had other letters like this. Here is a letter 

that I received from the Melville and district 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

21 

Chamber of Commerce and they say to me: 

 

‖Dear Sir: 

 

The Melville and District Chamber of Commerce would like to offer you our thanks and grateful 

appreciation for the role you have playing in helping the Melville and district farmers in obtaining the 

necessary feed they needed for their cattle.‖ 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Maybe I should have said amen with that, Mr. Speaker. But I have a few more 

things to say. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Thank God for small mercies. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Yes, and may the Lord also bless you. 

 

It is very clear, Mr. Speaker, that we‘ve had a wide range of policies available. This has not been 

nothing, but it has been something. It is not the shortcomings of these policies that have been worrying 

the hon. members opposite, it is the success of the policies. We‘re not out of the woods, Mr. Speaker, by 

any means. We are all worried yet. We don‘t know what next year will bring. We know we‘re still very 

deficient in moisture supplies, and we will need twice the usual moisture to bring conditions back to 

normal. This we know. 

 

There is no new legislation required to meet any future possible emergency situation that may develop. 

We have the necessary legislation on the statute books now, and I can assure the House that we will 

certainly, as usual, keep very close to future problems and if we need to expand assistance now provided 

we will certainly use our best endeavours to do so immediately. I think the best guide as to what we 

might do has been what we‘ve already done. 

 

Someone mentioned seed oats, and we‘re worried. We have been paying transportation assistance for 

bulk carload movement of good seed to the Saskatchewan Seed Grain Co-operatives over the past years. 

We think that we‘re going to need seed oats from outside the province. One of the best sources of supply 

is northern Alberta. We discussed with the Saskatchewan Seed Grain Co-operative very early, the 

possibility as to whether they might not handle this for us, providing we gave them a guarantee against 

loss and they would of course do so for a nominal fee for service, because they are not only 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

22 

experienced in this field but they have the wheat pool organizations in both provinces to work with. It is 

our hope under this arrangement that they may find some good commercial seed that would be cleaned 

and stored in Edmonton, then subsequently shipped into areas of need in the province by carload lots. 

I‘ve asked the federal government — again I ran to Ottawa — ran because I couldn‘t think of anything 

myself, according to the hon. Leader of the Opposition and some more members opposite. I asked them 

if they would share in this program on the basis of sharing 50 per cent of the rail cost. I haven‘t had a 

reply as yet, to this request made a month ago. I wrote several letters on other matters as well to which I 

await replies from the hon. Minister of Agriculture in Ottawa. He shows a great inclination for wanting 

to do things and as everyone knows he has a great imagination, but I wish he‘d stop flitting about like a 

butterfly and light long enough once in a while to come to some decisions. This worries me a little, 

because when time is important, delays like this can be worrisome. I should mention one thing further. I 

don‘t know when I may hear from Mr. Hamilton, but I hope soon. There are problems in connection 

with this, as everyone knows. This seed from outside the province has got to go through the wheat board 

because it is interprovincial trade, and this brings the price of this seed pretty high, and we must 

therefore give some freight assistance in the movement of it. There is a good deal of seed movement 

taking place within the province, but our figures indicate that we‘ll probably have to go outside 

Saskatchewan to get more seed oats, but as mentioned there is a good movement going on under our 

existing policy within the province which will be in effect to December 1. 

 

Now a good deal has been said about fodder reserves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Again. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Again, yes. I would suggest the hon. member from Arm River takes his pencil 

before I sit down. I have said to this House over and over that we have been developing and encouraging 

the development of projects for the production of fodder as well as for community pasture development, 

we have taken the big projects on ourselves. Not only because they were big and beyond the financial 

means of a local group, but to demonstrate what might be done in reclaiming sub-marginal land for 

fodder production. The hon. Leader of the Opposition is right next to one of those areas. He knows what 

goes on, and he knows it has been of great benefit. If he doesn‘t know, he ought to know, because there 

has been 35 hundred tons of fodder harvested on that particular project this year. So what the hon. 

members opposite are actually saying is, that the government ought to 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

23 

raise these reserves. Well, I‘ll tell him a little further on how many acres we‘d have to socialize in order 

to do that. It would take quite a bit. But in the course of the development of these projects, during the 

early stages of development, we harvested some of this fodder, and put it up in stacks and later sold it. 

As a matter of fact I was criticized in this House because we did this. They said there was too much 

spoilage and we were losing money on it. Well there was considerable spoilage despite the fact we built 

mighty good stacks. But this is how we came to have fodder banks on hand as a government, but it 

would be foolish, Mr. Speaker, for me or anyone else to suggest to the farmers of Saskatchewan that the 

government itself was going to do this and try to thus meet emergencies such as we‘ve had by having 

fodder available that we grow on such projects. Preposterous! Mr. Speaker, and this kind of suggestion 

would be misleading the farmers. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well did you not start out doing that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Our programs have been mainly directed at the development of fodder reserves on 

individual farms and on a co-operative and community basis. Now we‘ve had great success in this 

regard. Over the years we‘ve developed over 72 thousand acres for both dry land and irrigation forage 

production, 50 thousand acres of which are in dry land fodder projects and the balance under irrigation 

production, on which all acres are producing fodder. The hon. member for Notukeu-Willowbunch 

mentioned irrigation. He should look around a little. There were over 11 thousand tons of fodder 

produced on these irrigation projects this summer. He should go over some of the projects and see the 

results and may I suggest to him that instead of beefing in this House, that he should take some initiative 

locally and get water users to organize. The policies are available for them. We‘ve done our best to 

convince farmers in potential irrigation areas that they ought to do some irrigation, but this is the 

farmer‘s decision. He is the landowner and it is a decision he must make. The policies are there waiting 

for him. He didn‘t go to Ponteix for example where there were 35 hundred tons of fodder produced this 

year, just a little ways from him to the north at Pambrun he would find another successful producing 

irrigation project. These are things he ought to do, instead of beefing in here and saying ‗nothing has 

been done‘. Well here is 72 thousand acres of so-called nothing. Is eleven thousand tons of fodder from 

irrigation — nothing? Plus five thousand tons from dry land projects including 35 hundred from the 

Mortlach project alone an indication that nothing has been done. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

24 

The hon. member for Qu‘Appelle-Wolseley says there‘s been nothing new done in the department. Has 

he heard of the conservation development branch? He never would have heard of that before 19454, or 

even before 1948. This is a new branch called the conservation and development branch which 

undertakes this type of projects, and over the years, since this branch was organized, over $20 million 

was expended in this and other kinds of development projects. Twenty million dollars worth of nothing, 

Mr. Speaker. Nothing, according to them. How can people be so ridiculous? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You didn‘t have one bale of hay ready when the drought hit. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Here, Mr. Speaker, is an excellent example of the point I am trying to make and 

why it is so futile to try and tell these people, who think only in terms of politics, to tell them anything of 

a factual nature. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You‘re not very convincing Toby. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — There are several new branches if the hon. members want to hear of them, that 

have been set up in the Department of Agriculture — not only the conservation and development 

branch. We‘ve more than doubled the agriculture. rep. service. We added livestock specialists to the 

animal industry branch and new policies. Veterinary services, districts, lab services and grants for 

veterinary scholarships. Nothing new they say. An extensive forage crop program in the plant industry 

branch. We‘re developing new seed varieties of rambler alfalfa in the states of California and Oregon, 

because we‘re very anxious to supply quantities of this seed. It is the only place we can multiply and 

grow this seed successfully and we do it, and we bring it up here for our farmers. Six thousand orders for 

forage crop seed are filled most every year, which is enough seed for 150 thousand acres of land for 

forage crop production. This is how we‘re building forage project reserves. All right, now the hon. 

members had a lot to say about fodder reserves. I am going to give them a few figures, Mr. Speaker, in 

connection with this year. They never mention new things — A.M.A. — Agricultural Machinery 

Administration testing service — they knocked every one of these things when they were initiated, Mr. 

Speaker, and then too there is the new family farm improvement branch — nothing new. No new 

policies. Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that if anybody, anyone at all would just take the Annual Report 

of the Department of Agriculture now and compare it with 1944‘s annual report and then let the general 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

25 

public decide in this way as to whether — nothing new has been added or done. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Give them a chance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — What are the extents of our fodder requirements in this province, Mr. Speaker? . . . 

Thanks for the assistance Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You need it Toby. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Now, Mr. Speaker, speaking of requirements — our requirements for fodder will 

be from 2 ½ to 3 million tons of fodder a year. This is what is required to feed our stock annually. Our 

crop correspondence surveys indicate that from 3 to 3 1/2 million acres of cereal crops were cut for 

fodder this year. Three to 3 1/2 million acres, and if this turned out at one-third of a ton per acre, this 

would give us 1,160,000 tons of emergency fodder. Would the hon. Leader of the Opposition suggest 

that we ought to socialize 3 1/2 million acres of land? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — No, I certainly don‘t But I suggest that after all the money you spent you should have 

some fodder reserves. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — . . . or two million tons of fodder. If we didn‘t do it on this scale, Mr. Speaker, we 

would be misleading the farmers of this province. I have made it clear over and over again that we have 

done everything possible to build up our reserves on this scale. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — All through the south. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am taking a bit of time but I will guarantee you I‘m saying 

more of a concrete nature than they have said in this debate anyway. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You‘ve convinced yourself. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — When one is speaking in these fodder reserve dimensions, Mr. Speaker, it is 

ridiculous to suggest that the department itself should produce such huge supplies and the farmers will 

laugh you out of court if you try to tell them that the government ought to do this . . .  



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

26 

Mr. Thatcher: — They may laugh but they . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — This great free enterpriser! The hon. Leader of the Opposition. The one who 

opposed government activity in every field would now have us socialize a great part of the industry to 

give the farmers fodder. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Like heck I would and don‘t put words in my mouth. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, he ought to know something of it. He criticizes these policies. I 

noticed in the public accounts for last year the Thatcher ranch got some benefit from the 1959-60 policy. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Very little. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I don‘t know how badly he needed it, but he is such a free enterpriser I didn‘t think 

he would ask the government for anything. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I will be a lot worse this year Toby. You perhaps knew it is the same with a lot of 

people, Mr. Speaker. As long as they‘re doing well, they‘re great individualists and private enterprisers 

by saying — I‘ll look after myself, but just let a little trouble occur and then they run to governments. 

Talk about private enterprise contradictions and furthermore so-called free enterprisers run to 

governments before they ever get into trouble, Mr. Speaker. Not because they need some relief but 

rather they run to go for help to make more profit, so to talk about the sanctity of private enterprise is 

just silly and ridiculous because such complete disassociation from governments simply does not exist in 

modern society. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — The way you‘re talking about it, it is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Another thing, Mr. Speaker, everyone knows that in August 1958, Mr. Diefenbaker 

announced a five point farm program. Some of them have reduced farm incomes we all know, but there 

was one point he said was for the purpose of ‗building fodder reserves‘. Well Mr. Hamilton, the federal 

minister was in the province recently making political speeches and he said the province hadn‘t taken 

advantage of that offer. Well I thought ‗gosh they must have a program‘. As a matter of fact, Mr. 

Speaker, we did submit proposals on a shared program basis but we never 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

27 

could find out what their program was. However, I took Mr. Hamilton at his word, and I wrote to him 

and submitted a definite proposal to share a program for individual fodder reserve development. I 

received a reply indicating no program existed. I, therefore, in turn sent a very kindly reminder to Mr. 

Hamilton that he had made this statement, and that I expected he had a program. Well at any rate we‘re 

going to discuss this at the coming federal-provincial agricultural conference, and since Alvin‘s a bit on 

the griddle we may still get a good point program. 

 

Here is what we have in mind. Not only some additional encouragement to help farmers with hay 

shelters. This is the big need. This is the great discouragement against building reserves. As I said, 

we‘ve had the experience that despite the fact we‘ve put up very good stacks, we still experienced very 

considerable spoilage, and we feel that if we shared a program under which financial assistance would 

be given to farmers for putting up hay shelters, spoilage would be avoided and encouragement given to 

individual farm reserves. They don‘t need to be expensive — financial assistance might be provided on 

a tonnage basis and we‘ve submitted such a proposal. I think this would help a great deal. It would not 

solve all the problems but certainly it would prevent a lot of wastage. In good fodder in which the 

farmers put a lot of work and money weather spoilage often depreciates such fodder to half its value, 

from this point of view alone such assistance would be justified. What the final answer to our proposal 

will be I don‘t know. 

 

The other prospect we have in mind for expanding our existing programs is through A.R.D.A. We have 

made very definite proposals and we hope that we can incorporate some of the policies and programs we 

have now in connection with fodder, pasture and general reclamation development into a comprehensive 

A.R.D.A. program. If this were done we could greatly expand our present activity, particularly in 

northern Saskatchewan on the fringe of settlement, where farm units are small and where the need for 

pasture and additional land resources are great. We could do a great deal of good. I don‘t know if hon. 

members opposite know of or have seen our fodder and pasture program projects, but we have done an 

enormous lot of good. This is one of the best programs we have. There are areas like Torch River 

municipality, also the west of Meadow Lake area, Beacon Hill, Pierceland, Goodsoil, where we must do 

something of this nature for these people. I must admit that if we don‘t in many cases there will be 

continuing social aid problems. It is a case of providing more land resources for these people and this is 

one way of 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

28 

doing it. The development of pasture projects, forage projects, and giving them more land resources to 

improve their economic position. This is what I am fundamentally interested in — that is improving the 

position of people. In all fields we have got to think of human beings, Mr. Speaker. And I regret the one 

particular item in the Throne Speech, the medical care plan, has received so much adverse criticism and 

the issue has been so greatly confused. There has been a great deal of talk about the heavy burden of 

taxes that this is going to involve. Well, Mr. Speaker, I don‘t know of a single project that we have 

initiated that wasn‘t criticized, or could be criticized on that basis. But if you don‘t do these things you 

stagnate. 

 

The hon. Leader of the Opposition for example said, ‗now we should go very carefully‘. Some 

opposition members say we‘re not going fast enough, others say we‘re going too fast. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Toby, they used that yesterday. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Then others say we should go backwards completely, and revert to a local 

government basis. They all agreed of course, and this is popular with oppositions to always talk about 

high taxes, this is nothing new. Oppositions talk in this vein no matter where you go. You can go to the 

United States or Europe, you can in fact go anywhere and they‘ll tell you ‗these darn education costs are 

too high‘. ‗Municipal costs etc. are too high.‘ But the fact is, if a person succumbs to that kind of 

philosophy you don‘t go ahead at all. The hon. Leader of the Opposition mentioned, ‗Well you‘ve got 

the South Saskatchewan project, you‘ve got the Squaw Rapids project, you‘ve got, (I believe he said,) 

your gas program, and this is all costing a lot of money. We don‘t think this is the opportune time to 

proceed with medical care. You have to consider it in this light.‘ It is true, you do have to consider these 

things, and then weigh them against the demand, and the desire of people to have security and to live in 

terms of modern circumstances. But when he mentioned the South Saskatchewan dam and the Squaw 

Rapids project, and as you know, Mr. Speaker, over and over this man says that these projects are debt 

disabilities. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: —I didn‘t say that. I said you have to pay for them. That‘s all I said. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — He thinks they are a burden of debt. Mr. Speaker, had we not done these things 

where would this province be today in terms of economic stability, in terms of encouraging industry to 

come, and this sort of thing. These are the kind of programs that 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

29 

bring industry, provide new employment opportunities and provide a base for improved social services. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You didn‘t have much to do with the South Saskatchewan dam anyway. That was the 

federal government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. Leader of the Opposition keeps talking about high 

taxes but never at the same time mentions the great benefits in improved services which taxes provide. 

Again, Mr. Speaker, that people don‘t like high taxes is well known and therefore the opposition uses 

this method to direct the anger and the opposition of people against this administration, by saying we‘re 

responsible for a situation that prevails all over Canada — that we‘re the nigger in the wood pile, that 

this is the outfit that has caused the high taxes. This is what they‘re trying to put over, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, if that assumption is correct, it would be equally valid for me to say of the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition, since he‘s been in the hardware business, that the increased costs of hardware can be 

attributed to him. That it‘s his fault that hardware as an item in the total costs index has gone up more 

than anything else; more than food; more than children‘s underwear. In fact the price of hardware items 

has gone up more than anything else. But do I stand up in this House and say it‘s his fault? Certainly not 

and he too ought to recognize this simple fact. The same people who pay for high-priced hardware also 

pay taxes. The only difference, Mr. Speaker, is they get 100 per cent service for the tax dollar. There 

isn‘t anyone putting profits in their pocket. That is the big difference, Mr. Speaker. Furthermore the 

people ask for the services for which tax dollars are paid. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — What did Clarence put in his pocket? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Although I don‘t attribute any blame for the increase in hardware prices to the hon. 

Leader of the Opposition, but it is common knowledge and I think he will agree, he has done pretty well 

in this business. I wonder sometimes, Mr. Speaker, if this had anything to do with his change of 

philosophy. I have known him a long time, Mr. Speaker, and if there is anything that I hope to pride 

myself on, it is that I will remain true to my convictions once I come to a well reasoned conclusion. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . stay stupid all your life. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

30 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. Leader of the Opposition was either hypocritical when he 

was in the CCF movement or he is hypocritical now, Mr. Speaker. The evidence points clearly to the 

fact that he is hypocritical now. He has gathered around him by his political tactics resentful and 

negative minded people. The kind of people who know nothing else but negative criticism, who cut 

everything to pieces, and who refuse to see anything good in anything that is done by this 

administration. They have again clearly demonstrated this attitude during this session of the legislature. 

 

Why did this man want a special session of the legislature to deal with the emergency drought situation. 

To sit in this House and yap for weeks on end, while farmers wait, without attention to their feed and 

fodder needs and associated problems. I like to get a job done, Mr. Speaker, and this objective has been 

accomplished as far as my department is concerned. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Watch your blood pressure Toby. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I dropped my notes and raced along ahead of myself . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You haven‘t told us anything yet though. What are you going to do? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Yes I have told the House what has been done, but will they accept facts? No, I‘m 

afraid not. I‘m being very careful not to leave anything out because I want to be as correct as I can. I 

hope some day to be rewarded by at least one of the hon. members opposite getting up to say, ‗Well 

thanks for what the department has done in this or that particular case.‘ But, they‘ve not only criticized 

me, but they‘ve criticized the staff of the Department of Agriculture too. I am sure that the members of 

my staff will appreciate this kind of criticism after the tremendous effort they have put forth this 

summer. And everyone knows it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think I have said enough on this occasion . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — On a point of order — on a point of privilege, Mr. Speaker. The minister has made 

the statement . . . 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

31 

Mr. Speaker: — . . . Will the hon. member please sit down while the point of privilege is being stated? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — The hon. minister has made a statement in this House that is utterly untrue. He has 

said that the members opposite criticized his staff. I want to ask the minister, what members on this side 

of the House criticized his staff and when? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — In this House, Mr. Speaker, I believe it was the hon. member for Rosthern (Mr. 

Boldt) that said that the Department of. . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — He is out so you can‘t accuse him . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — . . . Agriculture hasn‘t done anything. He made the statement and I made a note of 

it when he made it. If the hon. members wish to check his address, it may have been . . . but I think it 

was the hon. member for Rosthern who made this statement — criticized the department officials for not 

having done anything. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, this statement is not true. On a point of privilege, Mr. Speaker, this 

statement is not true. 

 

Premier Douglas: — . . . Sit down. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I won‘t sit down for you or anybody else. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You will sit down, the Speaker is on his feet. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I will not sit down. I am rising on a point of privilege. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You can‘t rise on a point of privilege while the member is speaking. The Speaker 

has already ruled that in this date. On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I was up before you were. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! What is your point of order. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, you have already ruled that no person can rise on a point of order 

while the member is speaking. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

32 

Mr. Speaker: — You are right on that — on a point of order. 

 

Premier Douglas: — He didn‘t say a point of order, he said a point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — He rose on a point of order. 

 

Premier Douglas: — He says now it is a point of privilege. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I rose on a point of order, Mr. Speaker, and I have the right in this House the same 

as you or any other member. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Which is it? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I said on a point of order. He says I believe the member for Rosthern . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — State your point of order. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — . . . from the Minister of Agriculture . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member has stated that the statement made by the hon. minister 

concerning the hon. member from Rosthern was not made by the hon. member from Rosthern. I think 

that statement should come from the hon. member from Rosthern himself. He is now in his seat. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, is this a point of order? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I don‘t really think it is. 

 

Premier Douglas: — It has nothing to do with a point of order. It is a question of privilege. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Sit down. 

 

Premier Douglas: — You‘re not running the House, thank goodness. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think this is a matter of misquotation, and if he hon. member feels that he is 

being misquoted in regard to this he has an opportunity to bring it up at the close of the speech. I think 

the hon. member from Rosthern, with the permission of 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

33 

the hon. minister could make the explanation now but if the hon. minister is not prepared to allow that, 

the hon. member may make it at the close of the hon. minister‘s speech. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I very carefully noted the remark which I believe was made by the hon. member 

for Rosthern, which gave the impression that the staff and the Department of Agriculture were negligent 

in their responsibility or duties in connection with meeting the drought situation. He mentioned officials 

of the department. I didn‘t attribute — I didn‘t . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Toby you‘re . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — No . . . I‘ll check. I‘m going to make a point of checking. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Premier Douglas: — It is not a point of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member may ask to make an explanation and with the permission of the 

member speaking, it may be given at this time. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — On a point of privilege, Mr. Speaker, I have not criticized any member . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member wasn‘t in the House and he doesn‘t know what was 

said . . . 

 

Mr. Boldt: — . . . I am quite convinced, Mr. Speaker, that I have not criticized any member of the 

agriculture department in the address that I gave here on Tuesday last. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I must accept this, but I am going to check his speech regarding 

this. I am not prone to being misled or taking notes of something that isn‘t actually said. I have been 

very careful in documenting anything that I say . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You wouldn‘t know it from your speech this morning. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — If I am wrong, I would certainly be glad to withdraw any imputation that the hon. 

member said that members of the department haven‘t done their jobs thoroughly and well. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

34 

Now, Mr. Speaker, from what I have said it becomes quite clear that I am going to vote against the 

amendment and support the motion. I am going to support the motion for very obvious reasons, because 

it is a very necessary progressive step forward in providing medical services to everyone in 

Saskatchewan. This is bound to meet with opportunity, but I think it is going to meet with great public 

acclaim too. I think a lot of people who are opposing this medical service plan at this time, are going to 

regret having done so five or ten years hence . . . They‘ll be taking credit for it. The same opportunity 

occurred way back some 42 years ago, I believe, when the first municipal doctor scheme was introduced 

in this province. The same opposition took place, and the funny thing about it, Mr. Speaker, was that the 

local practitioners at that time opposed the plan, and later on when the plan was established — the hon. 

member for Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) is shaking his head because he doesn‘t know — he hasn‘t 

anything in it so he can shake it — he doesn‘t know . . . 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — I was there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — The local doctor opposed the plan at that time. It was put to a vote of the ratepayers 

and carried by a very small majority. Later on this same doctor was engaged by the municipality, and 

became the strongest supporter of the first municipal doctor scheme in Saskatchewan. This has 

expanded, and I recall too and I don‘t mind saying, this is a matter of record, the college at that time 

took a very dim view of this approach ― for the people to have a medical care plan if they wanted one, 

or a municipal doctor scheme. The demand rose for this first scheme because of the dire need of the 

ratepayers in that municipality and their inability to pay their own individual medical bills. At that time 

the college took a dim view, and suggested that any doctors who would enter into a contract with the 

municipality, might be debarred from practice. You know, this attitude is undemocratic. This is very 

undemocratic in my opinion. I mention this first of all to merely illustrate the initial opportunity that you 

will get to forward steps, on the part of some people, and I am sorry, Mr. Speaker, I‘m awfully sorry as a 

human being, and as a person who believes that he has some sense of Christian philosophy, and wants to 

see some application of it, that there are other fellow human beings who take a rather dim view of social 

progress and bringing security to people. And there has been so little said of people in this debate. I pray 

that Divine Providence will guide these 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

35 

people. What is wrong with a municipal doctor scheme? What is wrong with the Swift Current medical 

care plan? It only has one great shortcoming ― it doesn‘t include everyone. Isn‘t it about time, after 

having had all this experience and the great pride we have for the health progress that has been made in 

Saskatchewan, that we shouldn‘t take a further step. I would think that everyone would be in agreement 

with this, because as suggested that because it‘s a municipal plan, that this would take something away 

from somebody has not materialized. None of this has happened, and to now suggest that somehow if 

government does these things, it is dictatorship is sheer nonsense, Mr. Speaker. If I couldn‘t think of a 

better opportunity excuse than that, I wouldn‘t put up any excuse whatever. What the opportunity are 

doing in fact is, lessening people‘s faith in the democratic process and confidence in government. That is 

what they are doing. 

 

I think that this assembly, and the assembly of any parliament, or a municipal council, elected as they 

are, are the bodies that we must look to as carrying the authority for the welfare of people. This is the 

function of governments. Governments have no other function than to further the social and economic 

interests of people. This is a challenge to democracy in the western world, Mr. Speaker. I‘m 

misinterpreted constantly, Mr. Speaker, when I keep saying, that we‘ve got to demonstrate at home that 

we can make democracy work in the interests of all the people, and if we do that this is the most 

effective weapon that I know of that we can use against the spread of materialistic communism, and 

fight profit-seeking materialism at home as well, Mr. Speaker. We have to do this in a modern world if 

we are going to survive. Can‘t you see it? This competitive struggle, of trying to compete against one 

another on the basis of survival of the fittest, has reached the proportions now, that if we don‘t reconcile 

our views and commission-operate on the basis of constructive counter proposals, we will destroy 

ourselves in the process. This is inevitable. And because a person says this nowadays, in some quarters, 

you‘re supposed to be some kind of a ‗Red‘, Mr. Speaker. Well if this is being a ‗Red‘ I‘m going to be a 

‗Red‘ if that is the way some want to put it, but above all else I want to be a practising Christian. 

 

Government Members: ― Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Let‘s not forget, Mr. Speaker, going to church and practising Christianity is not 

merely a means of saving one‘s own individual 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

36 

soul. It means much more. Those of us who have so little confidence in the general application of our 

Christian philosophy that we ought to use it only to save ourselves from hell, or accept it because of 

fear, need to rethink this position because this is not basic Christian philosophy. Christianity is 

essentially a co-operative philosophy for proper human relationships that was laid down and is necessary 

for man‘s survival. And in the present world situation, its application in a practical sense, on the basis of 

reason, supported by all the scientific and technical know-how we have available to us, and putting it 

into practice on that basis, means the survival of humanity for a world of great hope and a world without 

fear. People aren‘t going to go on forever living in dread and fear. We‘ve got to hold up greater hope for 

them than that. This goes without saying. We can begin this at home. We can begin this process in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and I do hope that the medical fraternity, that all people including the 

members opposite will take this viewpoint in connection with the next progressive step forward in our 

own province. Remember, whether we like it or not the eyes of Canada are on this province and on this 

particular session of the legislature. There is little doubt in my mind, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Diefenbaker 

knows of the upsurge of demand on the part of people ― rank and file people ― for health security. He 

knows this. He set up a commission to study this situation. There is no doubt that he will have this in his 

next election program. There is no doubt either, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberals will follow suit . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Isn‘t that good? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — . . . but, Mr. Speaker, a lot of this will be governed by what happens in this 

particular province. We can set a good pattern here once again, and we don‘t take any pride in saying 

‗we have led the way.‘ I don‘t. When things are done I give due credit for things being done. I give 

credit where credit is due, and I must give credit for example to the federal government for helping us in 

the drought this year. I am thankful for this, despite things they didn‘t do, I am, however, thankful for it. 

I am thankful that too they were able to sell more wheat to China. This supports my argument, and 

proves what could have been done long ago if we had given some real long-term credit to these people. I 

must give credit, also if Mr. Diefenbaker comes out with a health program for Canada, I will only of 

course give him credit for it, if he implements it. I can‘t give the Liberals any 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

37 

credit because they have talked about it and had it in their program since 1919, but they didn‘t have the 

courage to do it, Mr. Speaker. I am wondering if these members here today, so many years later, will 

have the courage now to assert their rights as elected members and help bring in a medical plan for the 

people of this program that will give all our people the benefit of it, regardless of ability to pay. I will 

support the motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I wonder if I might ask a question of the minister? I didn‘t want to interrupt him 

when he was speaking but there are two questions that I would like to ask him. I wonder if he could give 

the House any idea what the price of oats would be ― feed oats in Saskatchewan from the Peace and 

what varieties of oats are grown in the Peace and if they are accepted varieties for the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — We‘ll get extensive varieties naturally, for the province, I think it would cost $1.33 

a bushel delivered after cleaning etc. I think it is imperative, therefore, that we provide transportation 

assistance. These oats will come quite high because they have to be purchased through the Wheat Board, 

plus loading, cleaning, storage, transportation etc. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I missed the first part of the answer. Pardon me, Mr. Speaker. Did you say that 

different varieties were available in the Peace that would be . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I said you could be assured we would get variety suitable for conditions here, and 

this is one of the reasons that we asked the seed grain commission-operatives to do this job for us. They 

have had a lot of experience in this field and they have contacts with good growers in Alberta and 

Manitoba. I‘ll check if that is the correct price, but I think it is. 

 

Mr. Eiling Kramer (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, in joining this debate, I want to say that I feel it 

has been called for two specific purposes. One, of course, is to take care of the tax legislation, and the 

other is to bring in a health bill. Had I had my choice, I think there probably should have been something 

done in order to confine the discussion to these particular things, and let us get home and back to work. 

A lot has 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

38 

been said about debating many other things, and a lot of other questions have been raised thus far in the 

Throne Speech debate, and I feel that especially many of the members opposite have contributed to 

nothing but the length of this session. 

 

Apparently the opposition seems to think that we should be calling a special session in order to change 

the weather. This of course is impossible as any sensible person knows. I personally farmed through the 

thirties, the drought years, and I am quite aware of what the policies of the party represented opposite 

were in those days. I want to congratulate the hon. Minister of Agriculture for the terrific job he has 

done in every field. 

 

Government Members: ― Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: ― I not only want to congratulate the hon. Minister of Agriculture for the province of 

Saskatchewan, but of Alberta and Manitoba as well, and also our federal Minister of Agriculture at 

Ottawa the Hon. Alvin Hamilton. These people took immediate and decisive action when the crisis 

arose, and assured the farmers of western Canada that there would be no mass panic. And there wasn‘t a 

mass panic. Cattle marketing has been orderly and we are enjoying a fair price for cattle today. These 

are things still wrong, and I will say this at a regular session. There are still things wrong in the cattle 

marketing business, but as far as we are concerned they could have been a great deal worse if it hadn‘t 

been for the decisive action that was taken, and the assurance that was given the farmers that a floor 

price would be placed under these cattle, and there wasn‘t any panic marketing, and I think that this 

more than anything else prevented what we had in the thirties. And members opposite despite the 

eulogising that has been going on from that side of the House, of the wonderful things that were done in 

the thirties ― I sat here and listened to the hon. member for Qu‘Appelle-Wolseley, (Mr. McFarlane) and 

I couldn‘t believe my ears. It is like the old story about the local village drunk who was run over by a 

truck and he died, and his seven children and widow were at the funeral, and the parson was eulogizing 

the departed brother, saying what a wonderful citizen he had been; what a wonderful provider; finally 

Mrs Brown couldn‘t stand it any longer and she said to her eldest son Johnny — ‗slip over and see if 

that is really father in the coffin.‘ When I hear the hon. members eulogizing the Liberal party and what it 

did in the thirties for the farmers, I cannot help be reminded of this particular story. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

39 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen some rather unhappy weather conditions this year. We have heard the people 

opposite blame everything that happened on this government, especially heaping ridicule on the 

Department of Agriculture, despite the fact that it has been doing a tremendous job in meeting the 

situation; in commission-operation with the federal government. As I said before I give them both credit. 

There is no doubt in the world that there will still be a great deal of problems for agriculture, but 

certainly it has to be recognized that these situations have to be faced by us as individual farmers. 

Certainly we have to provide a little for ourselves, and we can‘t expect the government to be setting up 

bulwarks against every particular thing. One thing I think we can expect of governments, and the one 

thing that was said by the hon. member for Wilkie (Mr. Horsman), and I have a great deal of respect for 

the hon. member for Wilkie, Mr. Speaker, I think that if there is a spirit of liberalism, and if there is any 

liberalism left on that side of the House, he and two or three others are the people who are holding the 

old respectable flag of liberalism up for that particular party. As I say I respect my neighbour, the hon. 

member for Wilkie a great deal, and he said this in this speech. ―The farmers are going to have a terrific 

time meeting the situation. Never had the situation been worse.‖ 

 

Well if it‘s bad in the Wilkie-Unity area, Mr. Speaker, I think it must be terrible in the rest of the 

province, and I know it is, because the Wilkie-Unity area was one of the fortunate areas that had a very 

good crop. There were bad portions, but certainly not anything like the rest of the province had. 

Providence has been good to us weather-wise for the last ten or twelve years. We have had abundant 

moisture on the average. Farmers have quite often produced two crops, a crop and a half — well above 

the average. Then isn‘t it startling that after ten of the best years weather-wise that this province has ever 

known, twelve of the best years, average crops, that the farmers of this province are not in a position to 

withstand one crop failure, or one near crop failure. 

 

It is rather astounding, and I place the finger of responsibility for this, Mr. Speaker, directly on the 

Liberal party, and its record at Ottawa, and the lack of agricultural policies over the past many years, 

when they were in power. Now today they are praying, as the Liberal party usually does, that the people 

of Saskatchewan and of Canada will have short memories. They must pray every day that they have 

short memories. They must pray that the province of Saskatchewan 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

40 

and the farmers of Saskatchewan and the people of Canada will forget all the times they said ‗no‘ 

‗impossible‘ to things that should have been done. And they hope that they will forget too, that many of 

the things that the Liberal party, which is supposed to be a progressive party and they try to pass 

themselves off as a progressive party, but the Liberal party said, ‗no they couldn‘t do it‘ but when the 

Conservative party got in, they were able to do some of these things, and bring some relief in some 

small measure to the farmers and to the people of Canada. I must be to the everlasting shame of the 

Liberal party to be put in that particular position. So no wonder, Mr. Speaker, that they pray that the 

electorate of Canada have short memories. 

 

They sit here in the House with no responsibility, either federally or provincially, yakking on the 

sidelines, criticizing everybody, and saying ‗we would do better‘ hoping that the people have forgotten 

their record. Well I for one, Mr. Speaker, will never let the people of Saskatchewan forget their record, 

and I think it will be a long time before the record of the Liberal party is forgotten, either provincially or 

federally in this province. 

 

Now a great deal has been said about this farmer-labour union, and the hon. member for Wilkie (Mr. 

Horsman) again said that he wondered how this would be possible — that farmers would be able to unite 

and work with these people. Let us not forget, Mr. Speaker, that I think it was 40 or 50 per cent of the 

people of Canada not so long ago, were engaged in agriculture. Since that time they have had to leave, in 

many cases due to Liberal agricultural policies or the lack of them. They had to leave the farm, give up 

the farm and go into the labour force. Let us not forget that many of the people who are working in 

labour unions today, in fact some of the labour leaders, are the sons of farmers. Certainly many of the 

labour members are sons of farmers, and are very close to the farm. Do they suggest to us that these 

people would do anything, even if they had the power, that would harm the interests of agriculture? It 

would be cutting off their nose to spite their face. It would be defeating and working against their own 

brothers and their fathers. 

 

I said this last winter in moving the Throne Speech debate that in northwestern Saskatchewan we have 

many, many small farms and large families. Two or three of the sons and daughters of each farm family 

certainly must find employment off the farm. Is the farmer, in that particular area, is he going to vote 

and work against the best interests of his sons and daughters in labour and the professional field? I don‘t 

think so. Neither are these people who are 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

41 

in unions going to work against them. This is a group of people who are all Canadians and who will 

work together as Canadians, and this is exactly what the people opposite, who are trying to pass 

themselves off as Liberals – liberalism was forgotten by this party many years ago, and it has developed 

into nothing but a reactionary opportunist group, that is willing to do the bidding of big business as it has 

always done — as it did with the Trans-Canada pipelines; as it did back in the days of Beauharnois. It 

has always been the tool, ever since the days of Sir Wilfred Laurier. It has always been the tool of big 

business and it still unfortunately commends itself to a lot of respectable people who haven‘t looked 

beyond the end of their nose. This is the job that the New Democratic Party must do, is to convince 

people that there is a better way and that they can have a party of their own which will do things for the 

people, rather than for the interests of a few vested interests. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are told also by the hon. member for Wilkie that it is wrong, and told by other members 

too, that it is wrong for union members to contribute to politics. Well, who contributes the money to the 

Liberal, Tory and Socred parties? Big Business. These are earnings from the people, taken in their mark-

up and when big business can have such a good mark-up that they can give $100 thousand, $500 

thousand to the Liberal or to the Conservative party, or $50 thousand to buy a leader in the province of 

Saskatchewan, so they can give him orders afterwards, then I suggest . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: ― I wish they could. 

 

Mr. Kramer: ― Read MacLean‘s magazine. Mr. Speaker, I suggest that this is money that has been 

taken involuntarily from the people as well. It is estimated by the commentators that the 1958 election 

cost the national Liberal and Conservative parties somewhere in the vicinity of $8, — $10 — $12 

million or thereabouts for their national campaigns. When you see full-page ads in some of the leading 

magazines throughout the nation, and you have a full time T.V. network program, and you know what 

this costs, you know that there is a tremendous amount of money being spent. I know what the CCF 

party had to spend in 1958. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: ― So do I. 

 

Mr. Kramer: ― . . . They had $250 thousand in the 1958 election, and our books are open, and I 

challenge you — I challenge the Leader of 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

42 

the Opposition to open his books; then we will be prepared to open ours any day in the week. We‘ll find 

out where the contributions come from. We‘ll find out. We won‘t find the breweries and one thing and 

another . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: ― Not much you won‘t. They‘re your biggest contributors. 

 

Mr. Kramer: ― They had an investigation in Manitoba, and I‘m speaking facts, I‘m not speaking 

suppositions. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: ― Neither am I. I‘m speaking facts. 

 

Mr. Kramer: ― They had an investigation in Manitoba, not too long ago, and this investigation showed 

that the donations from breweries in Manitoba to the Liberal party were substantial. To the Tory party 

quite substantial. To the social Credit party — not quite so substantial. To the CCF party — nil. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: ― Mr. Speaker, the breweries are the biggest contributors in this province that the CCF 

have. It is the truth. 

 

Mr. Speaker: ― Order! The hon. Leader of the Opposition . . . 

 

Mr. Kramer: ― I suggest, Mr. Speaker, when he speaks he should speak the truth. We heard his 

speech, Mr. Speaker, in the opening session. I would have thought he had made enough of a fool of 

himself then without continually trying to interrupt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wasn‘t going to say anything about what the hon. member said in his opening address but 

he was talking again, the old story about stagnation in the province of Saskatchewan, I though this old 

record had been worn out but apparently he still thinks it is going to get him a little credit somewhere 

even when he has been reprimanded by the Financial Post for trying to sabotage the steel company in 

Saskatchewan. He still persists in trying to sabotage business and convince the rest of the people in 

Canada and the United States that they shouldn‘t invest money in Saskatchewan. You know, if I were a 

competitor of the steel company here, I couldn‘t think of a better way to sabotage them than to hire an 

influential citizen in the province to try and drag it down to bring public interest to a low 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

43 

level, so that it could probably be bought for 50¢ on the dollar. I am rather surprised that the hon. Leader 

of the Opposition would do this for nothing. He is probably getting paid for it. It says in the Star 

Phoenix, June 23, 1961: Editorial note: 

 

―If Ross Thatcher, provincial Liberal leader, would temper the vigour he has shown and is showing 

with a little more common sense, he would do even better than he is doing. His statement at a recent 

rally near North Battleford that the potash areas east of Saskatoon would never be developed under the 

socialist government strikes us as nonsense. The company working this mine has sunk millions upon 

millions to get a potash mine and has been facing great difficulties, as every company attempting to 

mine potash in this province. Does Mr. Thatcher believe that these difficulties would not have been 

met if his own party had been in control in the province. Nonsense.‖ 

 

The Saskatoon Star Phoenix, June 23, 1961. Even the Liberal press has to come to the rescue of 

common sense. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: ― I didn‘t say that, and if I said it, it would have been nonsense and I‘ll admit it, but I 

didn‘t say it. 

 

Mr. Kramer: ― I am sorry, but again he is welching, but I do appreciate that he feels badly about it. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: ― I just didn‘t say it. 

 

Mr. Kramer: ― Another ridiculous statement that was made by the hon. Leader of the Opposition was 

the quotation, and it has already been brought to the attention of this House, the various things that were 

said in the Gazette, that these were companies that had changed hands and that they don‘t simply mean 

that they are going out of business. It even listed the Thatcher Hardware as going out of business, but 

I‘m sure it only changed hands, and I think that the name Thatcher Hardware was changed in order that 

they might be able to do a little more business in Moose Jaw. That is good practical business and I 

certainly wouldn‘t want to continue business under that particular heading. When he talked about the 

horse processing plant in Swift Current closing up, this I thought was the pay-off. Apparently the hon. 

Leader of the Opposition doesn‘t seem to know that you 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

44 

need horses, whole horses, to run a horse processing plant. The portion of the horse that is epitomized so 

ably by some doesn‘t go into a can. 

 

Mr. McDonald: ― It would take a big can to fit that one. 

 

Mr. Kramer: ― It sure would. Well now we‘ve said enough about that. I guess that possibly if some 

politicians had their way, for instance Senator Horner was quoted as saying ‗the thing to do in 

Saskatchewan was to go back to the horse and ox cart‘. I suppose we could some day reopen the horse 

processing plant and we could be back in business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, I appreciated most of what the hon. member for Wilkie (Mr. Horsman) 

said and I think he made a very good contribution to the debate in this House. I think his sincerity is 

unquestionable. Unfortunately I cannot say that for some of the rest of the speakers that have spoken in 

this debate. The hon. member for Turtleford, yesterday, rose with a considerable amount of 

apprehension and for him, I think he delivered what would be a very temperate speech. He chided me 

for interrupting the hon. Minister of Education. I believe this is my privilege to ask a question and, Mr. 

Speaker, I did so in the proper manner, and I bow to your ruling if I did not. The hon. member for 

Turtleford (Mr. Foley) suggested that I rudely interrupted the hon. minister yesterday when I posed a 

question through you, Sir. If you rule that this is true then I will accept the criticism. 

 

Mr. Speaker: ― I made the ruling at that time that you were in order. 

 

Mr. Kramer: ― I was in order. Thank you very much. This of course proves, as well as many other 

things that what the hon. member for Turtleford says, has to be taken with a grain of salt. He suggested 

this was my only contribution thus far. Well I suggest that the only contribution that he has made thus 

far has been to the length of the session. Number one, there were some things that were so ridiculous, 

especially for a school principal, that I must make some protest. He raised the question again, and 

alluded to it as if there was something wrong with it, about the transfer of crown lands, lands belonging 

to the crown, and the government trading these crown lands for Indian lands to provide for a park at 

Jackfish Lake. But this school principal, the hon. member for Turtleford, said that we expropriated this 

land. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

45 

Well I would ask you, Mr. Speaker, how could the crown expropriate crown land? 

 

Mr. Foley: ― Mr. Speaker, if I may rise on a point of privilege . . . 

 

Mr. Kramer: ― Mr. Speaker, I refuse to be interrupted. He made his speech yesterday. 

 

Mr. Speaker: ― What is the point of privilege? 

 

Mr. Foley: ― May I speak to a point of privilege? 

 

Mr. Speaker: ― State the point of privilege please. 

 

Mr. Foley: ― He said that I stated that they had expropriated crown land. 

 

Mr. Speaker: ― I don‘t think that‘s a point of privilege. I think that is an explanation that could be 

made with the consent of the member speaking, or at the close of the speech. 

 

Mr. Foley: ― I simply wanted to point out . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: ― I cannot accept it as a point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Kramer: ― Whether he said expropriation of leases, or expropriation of crown land — it is equally 

ridiculous. The only privilege that these people had, and I‘m sorry they lost it, was to permit this land 

from year to year. The crown expropriated nothing. They discontinued a policy. That is all. There was 

no expropriation. 

 

Mr. Foley: ― There were no leases. 

 

Mr. Kramer: ― There were no leases. You used the word leases and I suggest that he used this in 

issues to the press, and he was corrected before. He refuses to be corrected and he insists on pursuing a 

point that has absolutely no truth. 

 

Mr. Foley: ― There were leases. 

 

Mr. Kramer: ― Mr. Speaker, there was a question also about a road. I would say again, that if the hon. 

member had given the advice that 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

46 

was necessary and available, and had known what the proper procedure was, these people may now have 

a road, because they proceeded to ask for a road through the Department of Indian Affairs, through the 

Department of Natural Resources when the assistance should have been asked for through the 

Department of Municipal Affairs, and the hon. member should have known this. The procedure 

probably could have been started much earlier than it was. 

 

Mr. Foley: ― That is nonsense. Is the Department of natural Resources not part of the government of 

the province? 

 

Mr. Kramer: ― The hon. member also gave us a learned discussion on carp. Now nobody should be 

more of an authority on carp than any member of the opposition. Then he went on to chide the hon. 

member for Bengough (Mr. Dahlman) for the information he gave this House regarding Sweden. Of 

course the hon. member for Bengough was quoting an authority, an unquestionable authority, and 

certainly not a paper that is particularly an ally of democratic socialism or the CCF or the New 

Democratic Party, but a paper that is dedicated to giving the facts as they see them the ‗Financial Post‘, 

a respectable Conservative paper, I believe. Now this is what the hon. member from Bengough was 

quoting from, and I at this time want to congratulate the hon. member from Bengough, on the 

tremendous contribution that he made to this House in this debate, as well as some of the others. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: ― I‘ve got a little more to say, if the hon. Leader of the Opposition is leaving. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: ― You‘re a long time getting to it. 

 

Mr. Kramer: ― After having pointed out, as the hon. member for Bengough did, what a tremendous 

job Sweden has done in bringing about full employment, in bringing itself into a position where it is 

ahead of Canada in production, and they certainly are ahead of Canada in social services in every way. I 

am not proud of this. I am unhappy about it. Here is a country with probably just a fraction of our 

natural resources, only a little better than one-third of our population, and they are able, with a planned 

economy through a democratic socialist government, (labour dominated if you wish because certainly 

there are more labour people in Sweden than anything else) 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

47 

these are the people that re-elected the government this year with an even greater majority. These people 

have been able to show the world what can be done with sound economic planning and retaining the 

freedom of the individual at the same time. This is done. And then the hon. member for Turtleford chose 

to quote an unknown authority, but he says it must have been so, some chappie that decided to write a 

letter from Blaine Lake, by the name of Makaroff and this was supposed to prove that the arguments of 

the hon. member for Bengough were incorrect, and that the social security and the type of government 

they have was bad in Sweden. He said that they had a very high suicide rate, and the crime rate was 

going up and so on. This may be true, but when the last president of the United States made this 

statement, he was corrected very quickly by Adlai Stevenson, a well-known Democrat, who said that the 

United States, not Sweden has the highest suicide and crime rate of anywhere in the world. It might be 

interesting to note in this House today that one church periodical that I read just recently stated from 

statistics that the time costs in the United States today were between $400 and $500 per capita. The hon. 

member chooses to talk about Sweden in a derisive manner, as this democratic socialist . . . 

 

Mrs. Batten: ― Mr. Speaker, would the hon. member give us the name of the church publication that 

made that statement and the date. 

 

Mr. Kramer: ― It was the Liberty. I am quoting from memory, but I will produce this paper, Mr. 

Speaker, and I will table it. 

 

Mr. Foley: ― Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might ask for another point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Speaker: ― The hon. member has risen on a point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Foley: ― I neglected to mention yesterday that the authority for the statements on Sweden that 

were quoted in this letter were made by Dr . . .  of Great Britain. 

 

Mr. Speaker: ― Order! I must remind hon. members that they may make these explanations at the 

close of the debate, or with the permission of the hon. member speaking. 

 

Mr. Foley: ― I‘m sorry, I thought I had his consent. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

48 

Mr. Kramer: ― The hon. member made his speech yesterday and unless he has a point of privilege or a 

point of order, I choose to proceed as I would like to get through by closing time. 

 

We have these particular things that have been said, and a great deal more that could be said about the 

statements that have been made, but I think they have been more than ably answered in the debate thus 

far. 

 

There is one thing I will mention. There has been a great cry about water and derisive statements were 

made by the opposition about the hon. Minister of Agriculture not doing enough about the water 

question. There again, we have had P.F.R.A. operating in most of this province for many years, and in 

those areas where the P.F.R.A. does not operate, the provincial government under the able leadership of 

the Minister of Agriculture, have taken over and given very good service. I congratulate both these 

offices. Again the Liberal party and any member of it are the last ones that should be talking about a 

water shortage. If they had done something more besides talk about the South Saskatchewan river dam 

for the last thirty or thirty-five years, and used it as an election football, we could have had this dam 

today. If they had proceeded with this type of thing the way they did in the United States, under the new 

deal — under Roosevelt, when people were needing jobs back in the thirties, and when we had mass 

unemployment, we could have had that dam and there would have been a green spot this year in the 

heart of Saskatchewan, and we would have had ample water supplied in a great portion of this province 

that is now dry and crying for water and crying for fodder. Again I lay the blame for this situation — the 

shortage of water, squarely on the shoulders of the Liberal party and its inactivity and absolute laissez-

faire throughout the years. They are the people who are responsible for this and no one else. 

 

Now there is another thing I can‘t let go by and that was the statement made regarding this plea for help 

for a certain section of the population — the Mennonites in Rosthern. Now I have a lot of friends among 

the Mennonites, a lot of personal friends and I respect them very much, but I have never known any of 

these people to ever beg for help. They‘ll pay their way the same as everyone else and take the same 

chances along with everyone else, and I am rather surprised that the member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) 

should be putting the Mennonites in a position where it might be suggested that they are begging. I am 

certain these people do not beg and never want to beg, and they are some of the 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

49 

best farmers and the best settlers that we have in this province. 

 

The Assembly recessed at 12:30 o‘clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly resumed at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

 

Mr. Kramer: ― Mr. Speaker, as I was saying before we called it 12:30, a great deal has been said that 

probably was just as well not said by the opposition, since this session was called. I want to make a few 

more remarks about some of the wild statements that were made by the opposition, in a great clamour 

for instance, about the grasshopper situation. I want to say a little bit more about that. Apparently these 

wise people across the way seem to think that the Minister of Agriculture is even more farseeing and 

wiser than they think they are. I wonder if anyone could have foreseen the extreme hot weather — the 

un-seasonal hot weather we had in June which created this perfect hatch — a 100 per cent of 

grasshoppers, according to entomologists. They sprung from places in numbers that no one would have 

foreseen, and no one could have foreseen the weather. They criticized us for not having enough poison 

on hand. Well, when all is said and done the minister outlined very thoroughly the tremendous saving 

that had been made to farmers in the purchase of this, and I think they did a very good job, according to 

the long-term use. If we had had the same amount or even a little worse, we would have had plenty of 

grasshopper poison this year — we would have been overstocked. 

 

I think there were complaints across the floor that we were overstocked a couple of years ago; spending 

too much money on this. But there is another factor in this, as far as being prepared is concerned. If 

some of the R.M.‘s including R.M.‘s in my constituency had put their orders in a bit earlier, so that we 

would have had some idea as to what the situation was, if they hadn‘t waited until the last minute as they 

did in the affected municipalities in my area — the farmers are well aware of this; so are the 

municipalities. They accept the full responsibility for it. We, the Minister of Agriculture and the 

department officials would certainly have known in advance and could have put in probably some more 

advance orders. They had no carry-over; actually no carry-over in many municipalities with which I am 

acquainted. I think they have to accept some of the responsibility if there was any lack of preparation, 

which I don‘t think there was. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

50 

If we had had normal Saskatchewan weather, damp and cool in June, we would never have had the 

grasshopper outbreak to the extent that we did. I think it is very unfair and simply unethical to try and 

heap abuse on a department that has done a tremendous amount to meet the situation head on. Along 

with the commission-operation of national defence, we got the supplies in here and I think they did a 

tremendous job and deserve tremendous credit. I certainly think there are a lot of municipalities that will 

agree with me — in fact all of them that had grasshopper infestation. 

 

This whole drought question, as I said before lunch, and I reiterate, is certainly a far cry from the way 

the Liberal government of the late ‗thirties met the situation at that time. I wonder what we would say 

today, and what they would be saying across the floor if we ordered the liquidation of livestock down to 

so many head before you could get a bit of assistance. Or if we were to order the liquidation of entire 

herds right down to eight or nine head. This happened all over the province, and the records show it. 

They are right here in the books, where one of the ministers at that time was complaining because the 

Premier, who at that time was a federal member — he claimed he told the people in his constituency not 

to liquidate their livestock; that the government should provide feed for them. 

 

Registered herds were liquidated at one cent a pound and less. In fact, there were people who sold their 

cattle (including myself) and some of my neighbours who actually got bills for freight from Winnipeg 

after the cattle went down there. This was the agricultural policy of the Liberals in the ‗thirties, Mr. 

Speaker, and this is the thing they are trying to whitewash and hope people will forget today. I want to 

put this on the record once again, so that it will not be forgotten. 

 

Then there is this continual digging and jibing away at people who have been active politically, getting 

political jobs. I suggest that simply because a man has been active in politics, if he has been defeated or 

has stepped out of politics, he is just as eligible — if he has the qualifications, he is entitled to take a job 

with the government as well as any other Saskatchewan citizen, Mr. Speaker. I hate this digging of good 

public servants, good citizens that have happened to be fortunate enough, or happened to have chosen 

government services as their vocation after they have stepped out of politics. I think it is entirely unfair, 

and certainly a Liberal party has done this many, many times. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

51 

The former Minister of Agriculture worked as a deputy minister down at Ottawa as a public servant for a 

number of years, and I think he was a pretty good deputy minister of agriculture, too. Scads of people 

that have been named, that I could name, that were former Liberal and former Conservative members 

that are working now and still working, both for provincial and federal governments. In fact, I think we 

have had better luck with some of the former CCF members and politicians that we have hired than we 

have had with some of the former Liberal candidates which I could name, and which we ran into 

considerable difficulty with, in one case. It caused one department a considerable amount of 

embarrassment. 

 

Then there is all this talk about giving jobs to political friends. We, Mr. Speaker, when there is a job to 

be done, contracting, road-building, in practically all cases the policy is to call for contracts. What was 

the situation in a couple of instances in the Saskatchewan legislature, session 1937 — I will refer to a 

couple of questions that were asked. As the hon. Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Brockelbank) 

suggested, old books are wonderful things. They are. The question was asked in the legislature 

concerning J.W. Miller of Edmonton regarding a certain contract for work at the Saskatchewan Hospital. 

―Has J.W. Miller (and everybody at North Battleford at least knows that Mr. Miller — formerly know as 

‗Big Jim‘ Miller was a very good Liberal and a very active Liberal supporter — he‘s a big wheel) — of 

Edmonton, Alberta, or any company with which he is connected, done any work for the government 

since July 18, 1934?‖ The second part of the question: ―If so, what nature?‖ Third part, ―How much was 

paid to J.W. Miller or his company by the government?‖ The fourth part of the question, ―Were tenders 

called for by the government for such work?‖ Let‘s see what the answers are. 

 

The first part of the question, did he get work? — ―Yes. Western Construction and Lumber Company of 

Edmonton, Alta.‖ The second, — ―If so, what nature? Construction of a water gallery under the river to 

service the Mental Hospital at North Battleford.‖ ―How much was paid? $21,342,000.‖ ―Were tenders 

called for such work? The work was of such nature it was not possible to call for tenders.‖ 

 

Then we have another firm of well-known plumbers — Mr. Titerle, campaign manager at one time for 

the Liberal candidate, as I remember. ―How much was paid to Jack Titerle of North Battleford by the 

government? $14,152.78. How much owing? $2,000.00. What did he do? Plant alterations and repairs, 

trenching, laying water pipelines at Battleford 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

52 

Mental Hospital. Were contracts let by tender? No.‖ And right in between these two things — ―Is Allan 

D. Pickel (Allan D. Pickel was a former Liberal provincial member representing the same seat that I 

have the honour to represent before he retired) of North Battleford in the employ of the government? 

Yes. If so, what capacity — what are his duties? Grounds constable and guide, Battleford Mental 

Hospital.‖ You know, folks, there is one thing that startles me a bit. He was employed at $105 per 

month, and I think my only criticism of this is that they probably could have done better for such an able 

gentleman — they could have found a better job for him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this sanctimonious preaching and digging and slighting is not becoming of this 

House at all. I think we have a Public Service Commission in this province that is beyond reproach. In 

order to get a job with the government you first of all have to prove that you have the qualifications. 

You‘re hired because of what you know, not who you know, and that was certainly not the case prior to 

1944. 

 

If a man has the qualifications, especially in jobs that call for the interpretation of policy — if I have to 

make my choice, if I should be the one who has the choice of a man who can interpret the policy of this 

government if he has the qualifications, opposed to one who is not in sympathy, he would certainly get 

the nod — after he had proven he has the qualifications, Mr. Speaker, and I make no apologies for that. 

 

So let‘s give the charges and the statements of the opposition the amount of attention they deserve. I 

think I have placed on the records a number of things that are in the public interest, straightened out a 

considerable amount of misinformation that was laid before this House, and I am prepared to back up 

everything I have said. 

 

I want to thank the Provincial Treasurer before I sit down, too, for prompt action —it was only a little 

thing, but one of my constituents when this tremendous rush for feed was on, came in. This was in early 

July, and suggested he was going to have to employ trucks that he did not normally use until harvest 

time and he thought this would be the case with a lot of others as well. I got in touch with the Provincial 

Treasurer, and asked him if the harvest license could be released earlier — the special harvest license 

which permits a farmer to get an extra license for older trucks and extra trucks for $5.00, including 

insurance. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

53 

I want to thank him for seeing to it that this was done in this year when certainly harvest came on much 

earlier, and with all the transportation of hay, these extra trucks and cheaper licenses were a great saving 

to the farmer. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Foley: — What about the gasoline in the northern part of the province? 

 

Mr. Kramer: — I suggest gasoline in the northern part of the province is the same as it is anywhere 

else. They have price wars, and the law of supply and demand seems to be taking its usual course. Mr. 

Speaker, I was a bit sad but proud, and a bit humble when I listened to the Premier‘s contribution which 

will be the last one in this House on the throne Speech debate. I am sure that many other members on 

both sides of the House felt much the same. I want to, for my part, wish him well and God-speed in the 

new field that he is now fleeing to — if this was fleeing, I think the Premier would probably say with the 

job that he has at hand, ―It‘s a hell of a way to flee‖. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that when the history of this province is written, that the hon. Premier T.C. 

Douglas will be recognized as the architect of the best 20 years that Saskatchewan has ever know to 

date, and I am sure that future generations will remember and honour things that were done under his 

leadership. I am old enough to know the difference. It is unfortunate that an entire generation has grown 

up that has not had first-hand experience with the method of government that we had prior to the 1940‘s. 

This is why we have to be ever more watchful, to keep people from taking all these good things that we 

have had for granted. We certainly will have to work very hard in order to keep them convinced, 

because apparently there are some people who think — they must have read Hitler‘s Mein Kamff — in 

which he said quite blatantly and quite boldly that if you tell a lie often enough, big enough and hard 

enough, the majority of the people will believe it. This is apparently the attitude of some members of the 

opposition, certainly the Leader of the Opposition — I‘m not saying all the members of the opposition 

— I‘m just referring to some. This apparently is the method they choose, and think is the best method of 

gaining power in Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think, having said that, you will realize I am against the amendment and will certainly 

support the motion. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

54 

Mr. G. Herman Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I was thinking this morning when I sat here 

and listened to the strenuous effort that was put forth by the Minister of Agriculture to justify his 

decisions and the actions of his government, what a politician told me many years ago — he said if your 

case is weak yell loud and hard, and that will help you out. That was what he attempted to do this 

morning. 

 

First of all I would like to say a few words about the member from North Battleford (Mr. Kramer). 

Speaking about the price of cattle; when they were one cent a pound compared to what they are now. 

Does he know that the drought started in 1929, and that was in 1935-36-37, and there was no feed in this 

province for six or seven years? Dr. Anderson had two and one-half years of drought before he left 

office. There is no credit given to him. He battled with this thing. It is no government‘s fault that you 

have a drought, but time passes by and it is hard to forget some of the things. After seven or eight years, 

after you came into office all you did until this time — for two or three or four years was to damn the 

Liberal government, and your fodder bank was one of the things you advocated. You plugged it home, 

and knocked and knocked the old government, and that you were going to do those things they had 

neglected to do. Why haven‘t you done it? You haven‘t had more than one year‘s drought. Where are 

your promises; what is your policy that you tried to advise the other fellows to follow? You haven‘t 

done anything. In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, all we have to do is go back to 1947 — 300 cattle froze to 

death in the southern part of the province on account of this government not being able to assist them 

with the feed situation. 

 

The member for that constituency . . . 

 

Hon. Nr. Nollet: — Would the hon. member inform the House whose cattle these were, and under what 

circumstances? I know all about it . . . 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Why ask, then? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — If you know all about it, that makes it worse. That makes it more serious than ever. 

The member for that constituency, Mr. Speaker, was Dr. Hause — I always called him my Conservative 

friend, because he was a Conservative; he wasn‘t a C.C.F.‘er. He came into my place one Sunday night 

in my room at the hotel, and he gave me all the information, and he said this, ―When you get up on your 

feet you let him have 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

55 

it — I can‘t do it because I sit on that side of the House.‖ He told me the whole story, and then in 1945 

Mr. Bentley made a statement — March, 1948 and he said: ―Feed and fodder assistance during the last 

four years at total expense to the government was $76,000.‖ Just imagine for four years, $76,000. Then 

300 cattle were frozen to death. 

 

I think that a government that has that kind of a record should just sit quietly and not say anything that 

would at least bring on a discussion about these things, because after all, talk about relief. There was a 

question asked in the House from this government and the answer was given by the Minister of Social 

Welfare, who said this: In 1937-38 the welfare and direct relief expenditure by the government was 

$23,121,126. That was all human relief, Mr. Speaker. There was nothing for livestock; there was 

nothing for fodder; there was nothing for seed and nothing for gas and oil for the farmers at that point. 

When we got through in the spring and fall of 1938, the total relief stood at $56 million. 

 

I saw an answer to a question here this session — I don‘t know how much more you‘ve been dishing 

out, but it says here that feed and fodder up to October 1 was $12,588.34, and then you paid for 

transportation of farmers‘ cattle to pasture, $3,760 — a total of $16,347.78. Right after that, Mr. 

Speaker, the question was asked, ―How much money has been collected from farmers for pumping 

water?‖ and he said, $29,620.00. Here the total was $16,000 for helping the farmers, and then you 

collected $29,620 — that was the cost of the water that you have been pumping. So you must be a pretty 

good businessman. I don‘t see how in the world you could operate your department that way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have been here for 17 years since this government took office, and I hear from the 

member for Battleford (Mr. Kramer) that it is too bad for us Liberals to talk about the deplorable things 

the CCF have done. That it is really a bad thing for us to do. These fellows have been sitting here for 17 

years, and all they have ever talked about was the dirty ‗thirties.‘ That‘s all we ever heard from any man 

on that side of the House. Then they have been comparing the financial condition of the province with 

the dirty ‗thirties, with what it has been during the last few years. The total revenue, Mr. Speaker, the 

first year of office of the Liberal government in 1934 was $11,700,000 . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Which you tried to make the farmer pay. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

56 

Mr. Danielson: — Now how far did you get? This government has six times the revenue over the last 

17 years that we had previous to that time — every year we got $2 million from the federal government; 

later we got as much as $4 million, and during the last two we got $8 million, and this government is 

now getting $69 million from the federal government this fiscal year. The federal member from Moose 

Jaw said they get $72 million; Mr. Diefenbaker set a figure at $69 million, and I take his figure in 

preference to the other gentleman‘s. Nevertheless, they are not very far apart. 

 

There was also something said this morning by the Minister of Agriculture when he was telling them all 

about how wonderful he had been conducting the affairs of agriculture, when he started talking about 

this medical plan. He made some reference to the fact that so far as the doctors‘ attitude to this plan was 

concerned, there wasn‘t very much difference, as I understood him, from what happened in the earlier 

days when the municipalities engaged doctors to take care of their ratepayers and the people in their 

municipalities. There was a certain amount of hostility then. Well, I have been here since 1904, Mr. 

Speaker, — that‘s a long time, and I was in municipal work at the time. I was here when they started the 

sanatorium in this province. I was on the council at the time. I have been following this thing up pretty 

closely, but there is just one difference between that plan and the plan that is proposed by this 

government. The doctors in those days did not have to hire out to a municipality, or accept a contract 

with the municipality — they could do what they wanted. They didn‘t have to — they were all willing to 

do it. They rendered wonderful service. By the way, there are many of them working right today, Mr. 

Speaker. There are still a great many of these doctors inside these municipalities, carrying on the great 

work that they have done all these years. 

 

So there is no comparison, and as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, if it hadn‘t been for the fact that the 

municipal plan of health services had commission-operation from the medical men all over the province 

to carry it out, this province wouldn‘t be in the forefront, for all provinces in the world in the year 1934-

35. That is what Dr. Sigerist says, and he was hired by this government to come here to condemn the 

government, but he stayed here to praise the plan that we had here in Saskatchewan. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

57 

Let me just tell you something here. Before the CCF government took office a large proportion of the 

rural municipalities, and a goodly number of towns and villages had in operation plans of prepaid 

medical and hospital services. They were similar to the present hospitalisation plan, but were 

administered by local authorities. Let me say this to my friend, the Minister of Public Health. I think he 

is probably as good a man as you have in the government — I have had a lot to do with him, and I have 

had good service from him. I want to point out to him that I think the day is coming pretty soon when 

you will do a good stroke of work if you return to the municipal hospital, or to the local hospital board, 

the authority to take care of and operate the institution without too much interference like it is at the 

present time, from the Department of Public Health. 

 

Now then, at that time, Mr. Speaker, out of 300 rural municipalities, 106 had a prepaid hospital service, 

and this was under a Liberal government — which you say had never done anything. And 159 

municipalities had a prepaid medical service as well. Twenty-nine towns and villages had a prepaid 

hospitalisation, and 71 had a prepaid medical service. That was quite an advance, wasn‘t it, Mr. Speaker, 

— in spite of the drought, in spite of the primary conditions under which we operated in those days. 

Many of us were thirty or forty miles from a railroad, but still we commission-operated as people should 

do, in those days and we built this province of Saskatchewan to what it is today. So don‘t let it be told 

any place, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province, ―I‘m going to give the credit to the people of 

the province ― not the politicians. They are the ones that wanted this thing, and they went to the 

government and said, ―This is what we want, certain legislation and certain rights to do certain things‖ 

and we gave it to them. There was no man who had more sympathy for this system than the late Dr. 

Uhrich. 

 

I understood (I wasn‘t in the House) that the Minister of Agriculture mentioned certain figures with 

regard to the amount that had been spent for hopper poison. The whole amount is $3,900,000. Don‘t let 

it be understood by any person in this House that this government has given the ‗farmers that 

$3,900,000. The farmers and the municipalities have paid that — it was not given by the government, it 

is not an outlay or any gift from the CCF government to the farmers of Saskatchewan. As a matter of 

fact, they are not used to it, because they never got any . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — No one said it was. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

58 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I‘m not going to take up any more time with this agricultural 

problem. I think it has been pretty well discussed. I just wanted to check over this thing and correct 

some of these impressions that have been spread about. Once again let me tell the Minister of 

Agriculture that the only thing that he did this summer to help the farmers (and he didn‘t stretch that 

point very much) was that they held lots of conferences and lots of meetings, to talk the thing over. That 

is practically all they have done, Mr. Speaker, — talk the thing over. If it hadn‘t been for the federal 

government coming in here — I imagine they will probably take credit for this $16,000 on freight and 

shipping cattle from one pasture to the other, from pasture to feed, but the federal government is also 

paying part of that. So if it hadn‘t been for that I think we would have been much worse off than we are 

today. 

 

There is one thing — and he mentioned something about that — you haven‘t seen anything yet of the 

drought since you came into power; not a thing. This is the beginning; not the end as the indications 

point today. It is the 30-year cycle which history tells us is visiting this triangle of western Canada and 

part of the United States every 30 years, and don‘t forget this — there is more coming. I don‘t care what 

you do. If you don‘t have a rain next June to keep the hoppers down and kill them off, you‘re not going 

to get a crop even if you get some rain during the season, because according to your own department — 

and I think that is where they have probably done more work to benefit the farmer than anywhere else 

— and that is they had a survey last year. You said a little while ago you wouldn‘t know where this 

grasshopper outbreak was going to be; you couldn‘t tell. Well, what have you got this survey for? You 

made a good job out of that last year. I have a map, two or three of them, as a matter of fact, every place 

in my district where we spotted these infested small spots here and there, and larger areas in some 

places, they certainly were right, because they were just alive with hoppers last summer. There were two 

hatches. One was early in some places in April during those few hot days; then we had two weeks or 15 

days of cool, damp weather without any moisture, and the last hatch was delayed until about the second 

week in June. That is when the big hatch appeared. Today the whole part of Saskatchewan, in this part 

of the country that I know of is seeded with grasshopper eggs, and think what is going to happen next 

year. 

 

If you haven‘t done anything this year, you don‘t know anything about it and you will get to find out 

what 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

59 

drought periods really mean to the farmer and to the people who have to put up with it. 

 

Another thing, you‘re also going to find out what is going to happen to your cities. This CCF 

government has been preaching — the last few years ―Oh, we don‘t need the farmers so much now. The 

economy has shifted from the farm to the industrial sphere and we are no longer dependent upon the 

farmer.‖ But let me tell you this, that the economy that depends upon the industrial part of Saskatchewan 

does not amount to a darn when the drought comes on; when the farmer fails. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I agree with you. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Most of them sell their businesses and they take their money out of here, and God 

knows they need it because they put in three or four times as much as they ever had taken out, and they 

probably will never get it out. But I‘m not complaining of that. But don‘t forget this, that immediately 

the farmers fail, the businesses are failing. Last week when I was home some servicemen said to me, 

―What in the world is happening? We‘re not selling any gas.‖ We are not selling enough to pay our 

board. In my place, the commission-opposition up there, which I am connected with — we find that the 

gas sales are going down by 67 per cent during the last two or three weeks. That is the situation. Why? 

The farmers have no money. Another thing — if a man has money it is a sort of psychological effect on 

that fellow too, and he doesn‘t spend it if he has it, and that makes it all the worse. So you‘re up against 

that condition and you‘re not going to have recovery; you are going to have more acute conditions in the 

days to come than it is at the present time. You and the rest of us will find out this, that when the farm 

economy of Saskatchewan fails, the cities and the towns fail with it. 

 

I was listening just this morning to the Minister of Education and I had hoped he would be in the House 

to listen to what I am going to say. He had to do his little bit of a stunt — he‘s a new man here — he had 

to do a little bit of a stunt to throw dirt — to insinuate that everything that was done in this province has 

all been done by the CCF government. He was just simple-minded enough to repeat talk that had been 

taught him and every new member that comes in here, what happened in the early days. He said that the 

cancer commission and all cancer clinics, etc., were that of the CCF. There has never been a bigger false 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

60 

story told in the world. What did he say then? He just repeated what someone else told him. He hasn‘t 

read up or checked up on the statutes, or anything on the records of this House to know where they come 

from. As a matter of fact, wouldn‘t it be a nice thing if for once this was said: ―Dr. Anderson‘s 

government started the cancer clinic.‖ No — you‘re not that generous. We — We are the whole thing. 

Dr. Anderson started this, and Dr. Munroe should have the credit for that, also. He‘s dead now, but he is 

the man who started the cancer clinic in this province. We came in in 1934 and they were operating. 

There was a feeling in the province that cancer clinics and cancer treatment should be free in this 

province. I just told you, Mr. Speaker, that our total revenue in 1934-35 was $11,700,000. The next year 

it was $14 million and it crept up to $22 million. Our education tax has been so much abused — that 

stinking tax that this CCF government was going to do away with; it is between $2 ½ million and $3 

million. The gasoline tax in those days brought us in far, far less than $2 million. That‘s what we 

operated on. So that after we had inquired into the health conditions of this province through a 

committee of this House, Mr. Patterson, or Dr. Uhrich brought in the free cancer clinic bill. That was in 

the session of 1934, and of course many members of this House, Mr. Speaker, never knew that the 

legislation that is the basis of the hospitalization bill, and all the things which have been done over the 

last few years — is based on the legislation that was passed by the Liberal governments — every bit of 

it. When this hospital bill was before the House, I said to the Premier one day. ―What does this mean?‖ 

(We were in committee). ―Oh, the member for Arm River should know‖, he said. ―You passed the bill.‖ 

Of course it was a slip of the tongue, but after all it did come out. 

 

So when he comes into this House and says that the cancer, hospitalization, and free treatment of cancer 

was put into effect by the CCF government, well, there‘s never been anything like that at all. That is 

absolutely false; the whole thing is false. I‘m going to say something here before I go into what I am 

really going to say — that in 1960, June 23, the present Minister of Public Health, (and I am surprised at 

this) he spoke to the CCF Ladies‘ Club in the city of Regina at the King‘s Hotel, and I could read a lot of 

his speech, but here is what he said: 

 

―Another aspect of the provincial health program, the cancer service program was also outlined by Mr. 

Erb, just prior to the election of the CCF government in 1943. The Liberal government passed a cancer 

service act which was never implemented. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

61 

―In 1944 the Cancer Control Act was passed by the CCF government, and the Cancer Commission set 

up. He said there is now two cancer clinics.‖ 

 

―Dr. Munroe established two cancer clinics before the Liberals ever came in here.‖ 

 

Now then, you see in order to make these people believe, they must be gullible, after all, that they had 

established a cancer clinic — he said, ―We, the Liberals passed a bill in 1943‖. We didn‘t do any such 

thing. Then they come in and pass a Cancer Control Act in 1944. It is certainly something that I am 

extremely surprised at, that the Minister of Public Health would say a thing like that. But that shows 

how desperate they were to claim the credit for what the Liberal government did May 1, 1944, before 

the election the free cancer act was put into operation, Mr. Speaker. It was from that day on that all 

hospitals were notified to send all hospital bills to the Cancer Commission, Department of Public 

Health. They did not pay, or could not pay the operating bills, the medical bills, for this simple reason, 

that Dr. Uhrich, in his work, he told me himself — he said, ―We have done our best to get a working 

agreement with the medical profession, but they tell us that they won‘t do this now because some of our 

best men are in the armed forces, and for that reason they don‘t like to sign any agreement until the men 

come back.‖ That is what he said to me. But that doesn‘t mean the government was not prepared to pay 

the medical expenses, not by any means. 

 

Sometime in June, around the 16th, an election came up. We went to the people and this CCF 

government came in. They called a special session in the fall of 1944, and they also hired a man from 

the John Hopkins University in the United States to come up here and check up on the health conditions 

of the province of Saskatchewan; to recommend any services in addition to those already in existence, 

which he thought might be necessary. This gentleman came up here, and he worked here for about —I 

don‘t know how many days — but he was here for a much shorter time than any other investigator or 

expert, but the CCF got rid of him as quickly as they could because they didn‘t get the report from him 

that they expected or wanted. 

 

Then one day at a luncheon meeting at the Kiwanis Club, he said this: 

 

―A fine ground-work in health services has been laid in Saskatchewan. Dr. Henry E. Sigerist, 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

62 

Chairman of the Provincial Health Survey committee told the Kiwanis Club Monday at a luncheon 

meeting. 

 

―The province has a fine health record, Dr. Sigerist said, who is Dean of Medicine, John Hopkins 

University. Dr. Sigerist said that Saskatchewan‘s survey was one of the most pleasant he had ever 

undertaken during his career. He had many similar assignments, but this one in Saskatchewan differed 

from those in South Africa and the Balkans, as it was one in which services did not start from scratch. 

 

―In Saskatchewan, Dr. Sigerist said, it was a case of bringing this existing facilities into more service 

for more people.‖ 

 

Then on page two — I cannot resist raising this — the Premier has come in and sat down — March 3, 

1945 — almost a year later the Premier said: 

 

―All hospitals which were bona fide hospitals received a grant of 50 cents per day per patient. This 

grant is one of the highest paid in Canada. It speaks well for the previous administration of this 

province and for the people in taking such an interest in health matters.‖ 

 

Well, now, fifty cents health grant does not sound very much for these days, but the hospital rate, Mr. 

Speaker, that we could charge was $2.50 per day. The, due to the drought for several years there was an 

emergency grant that brought our total grant up to $1.46 to $1.85. So that wasn‘t too bad on a $2.50 fee 

for patient per day. But that was the Liberal government. 

 

They called a special session in the fall of 1944, and certain legislation was passed. In 1945 the regular 

session came along on February 20, and when the Premier spoke on that Speech from the Throne he said 

this: ―We are now giving free cancer treatment, not only diagnostic and X-ray treatment, but also . . . ‖ I 

remember that the hon. member for Moosomin (Mr. Proctor) insisted at the last session — (that was the 

special session in the fall of 1944,) that money had been voted in last year‘s estimates for surgery in 

cancer cases. He said: ―True, my department — that $5,000 was provided, but that was to set up the 

clinical roster; $5,000 would never begin to pay for surgical treatment, which my hon. friend must 

admit.‖ That was the Premier‘s 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

63 

statement then. Well, Mr. Speaker, according to these statements and he has made these statements on 

numerous occasions, he couldn‘t find any money that had been voted by the Liberal government to carry 

on the free cancer services; he couldn‘t find it, and there was nothing there. Well, coming into the House 

later on, in 1943, Mr. McCormack, the member for Estevan asked the government the following 

question, which was answered by the hon. Mr. Bentley, the Minister of Public Health. ―How much was 

provided for cancer services in estimates (a) 1943-44; (b) 1944-45?‖ This is clear enough. Here is the 

answer by the minister: (a) for 1943-44, $76,760.00; (b) $215,000 for 1944-45. The Premier said there 

was only ―$5,000 or $10,000. 

 

Here we have the Premier and his Minister of Public Health — one of these two is lying, and I repeat it 

again — one of the two is lying because the former Minister of Finance in this province, the man that 

‗flew the coop‘ came up to Davidson and told his audience there before the election in 1936 and 1952 

both, that I was lying when I said that the cancer clinic was financed and money was voted to carry on 

the cancer treatment, during the years 1944-45. Who is lying? 

 

The minister said that $215,000 had been voted, and you said there was none. I will go a little farther. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Will the hon. friend allow me to make a statement? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You give me an answer to my question. Did you tell the truth when you said that? 

That‘s what I want to know, because you‘re trying to make a liar out of me. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, no one is trying to make a liar out of the hon. member. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Your minister, Mr. Fines, came up there and tried to do that on two occasions. I have 

had some experience with this thing. I have lived in the community since 1904; I‘m not going to stand 

for that. 

 

Premier Douglas: — The hon. gentleman asked me to answer a question. I was going to answer that. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

64 

Mr. Danielson: — All right, but he‘s not going to make a speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Would the hon. member kindly refrain from using a word which I do not think 

is parliamentary language and should be used in this House. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That‘s the only language they understand, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think it is time that we started trying to draw a halt to this sort of . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well, we can call it an absolute untruth. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member asked me if I would answer the question. I would 

like to do this if I may. It will only take a moment. I have never, at any time, called in question the 

veracity of the hon. member. The statement I made was true; the hon. member and I are talking about 

two entirely different things. There was a vote for the diagnostic clinic of the sum which he mentioned. 

What I was talking about was the money to provide for surgery. These are the facts, if the hon. member 

will check them. No one ever denied that diagnostic clinics had been in existence for years, and their 

work had been greatly extended. We were talking about providing money for surgical services. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That doesn‘t change the position at all then. In your Speech from the Throne in 

1945, and here it is: 

 

―We are now giving free treatment to the mentally incompetent. We are now giving free treatment to 

not only diagnostic and X-ray treatment, but also surgery. 

 

―I remember that the hon. member for Moosomin (Mr. Proctor) insisting at the last session that money 

was voted in last year‘s estimates for surgery in cancer cases, ‗while no one in my department can find 

it, it is true that $5,000 was provided but that was to set up a clinical roster. Five thousand would never 

begin to pay for special treatment.‘ 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

65 

Even my hon. friend must admit this. Now, if anyone comes in they got free treatment. Mr. Speaker, 

he has insisted on that; and not only him but all of them — the lady member from Regina (she quit the 

last two years, but previous to that) — in every speech she made, she told them that we voted against 

the hospitalization, and at the same time we didn‘t provide any money for cancer clinics. 

 

Just to finish this thing — and someone wonders why I am suspicious of the Premier. Well, I have told 

this House before, and I am going to repeat it; you can cell me crude; you can call me anything he 

likes, but I wouldn‘t believe him under oath and if he tells the truth it‘s an accident. Here it is: I‘m 

going to take the report of the Saskatchewan Cancer Commission for the calendar year 1957, Page No. 

9, and here it is, from 1934-54 — the amount of money voted and the amount of money spent. We 

come to the year 1944-45. This fiscal year May 1, 1944 to April 30, 1945 — voted $215,000, and 

spent $158,614 — they spent $158,614. That‘s all they spent, and they were in control for nine and a 

half months. We didn‘t spend hardly anything before we went out, because we couldn‘t pay medical 

bills; and we could only pay the hospital bills and we only had some 30 odd days between the time 

when we had to get out and the CCF came in. 

 

Not only was more money voted, but this CCF government, according to its own report had $57,000 

balance, April 30, 1945. But for the next year the only increase for 1945-46 was by $78,000 — the 

prices were going up and there was reason for it. I am not questioning that at all. But what I want to 

tell this House is that it is too bad that my friend the Minister of Education is not here so that he could 

learn something about the history of this province from these estimates. These are the things that have 

been repeated, no matter what the Premier has to say. This thing has been repeated several times 

during the last few years, but every time a new member comes into the House who doesn‘t know and 

you listen to the old familiar tale of this government — then they believe it and they go out and say 

that these are the facts — these are the statistics. The Premier spoke about means tests. Well, that‘s not 

a very nice word, Mr. Speaker. It means that somebody is getting checked up; somebody is 

questioning about what he does with the money, or whether he really needs it or not. There is no 

government in the dominion of Canada that has applied the means test more ruthlessly and more often 

than this government has done. This government took $614,000 off the old-age pensioners‘ payments 

paid in 1947 into 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

66 

this government in that fall, and stuck it in their own pockets. They stole that money from the old-age 

pensioners. There was some $676,000, the Minister of Public Welfare in this province himself sat 

down, and he said, ―You‘re wrong in your figures‖ and he figured out that the amount was only 

$640,000. I can read you from McLean‘s magazine and their comments on this thing. I could stay here 

all afternoon and prove to you that that is a fact. The fact of the matter is this, that the dominion 

government increased the old age pension and their share of the old age pension — I‘m going to read 

you this; the whole thing is right here: It won‘t take very long. Some of those fellows over there stood 

up and read for three hours, and some of them one hour, and that‘s all they did: ‗Supplementary 

Pension Paid by the CCF Since May, 1945‘: 

 

―Douglas promised that if the government decided to pay it, it would be $5.00 per month.‖ 

 

That is what he promised in 1944 at the special fall session. 

 

―We have decided to increase the old-age pension, and if we do it would be to $5.00.‖ 

 

Well, they squeezed it down to $3.00, but even that was appreciated. 

 

―In April 1st, 1947 the supplementary pension of $3.00 per month was increased to $5.00 per month. 

During the 1947 session of the federal parliament the Liberal government increased the basic 

pension from $25 to $30 per month. During the period April 1st, 1947 to August 31, 1947, the CCF 

government paid one-quarter share of the basic $25 pension. That is $25 per month. A total of 

$11.25 subject to the means test; that is including the increase of $5.00. 

 

―On September 1st, 1947 the federal government proclaimed an increase of $25 to $30, but in doing 

so they made the payment retroactive to May 1st, 1947.‖ 

 

Or they gave the provincial government money enough to pay for the old-age pension in Saskatchewan 

that could qualify for $3.75 per month, back to May 1, 1947 — for four months for $15 per month. That 

is the increase of the old-age pension — $3.75 increase; the $15 difference was the dominion‘s share 

because the increase in pension of $30 a month was raised so their contribution was $15 a month. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

67 

What did the CCF government do? Did they pay it to the old-age pensioners? Not by any means. The 

CCF humanitarian — the first, Christianity-applied government — they took the money to recoup 

themselves, to pay themselves for supplementary pensions paid; pensions they had paid since 1947. That 

was not all, Mr. Speaker, in this legislature that increase in pensions from April 1947 was nothing but 

just a straight increase in the old-age supplementary pension. 

 

The amount of money kept from the pensioner, according to Mr. Valleau‘s own statement, was 

$614,700. What does this all mean? It means this, that from April 1, 1947 to March 1, 1948, the CCF 

government paid a supplementary pension of $5 per month, for one month only. That comes in there, 

Mr. Speaker, because they had to pay the $5 per month for one month only, and the dominion made that 

payment retroactive. That increase was made in April, 1947 by this government and was a straight 

increase on the part of this government, and the increase that the dominion government paid which they 

paid back before that, belonged to the people that were drawing the pensions — the pensioners of the 

province of Saskatchewan, and this government stuck it in their pocket and thought they were smart. 

 

I happened to see the Saskatchewan Gazette, and I have it here. I started digging into this think and there 

was an Order-in-Council issued, and I took it into this House. I moved an amendment in the Speech 

from the Throne at that time, and I had the whole House up on their toes here. Mr. Valleau came over to 

me on this side of the House, and he was ripping made. He said, ―You did an awful thing. I was ready to 

go to Ottawa over that‖ I said, ―You can go; I‘ll wait for you to come back‖. No, he wasn‘t going. Well, 

I have the McLean‘s magazine here. I could read you that, what they say about it, and I am sure my 

leader, Mr. Thatcher here — he was in Ottawa at the time, and the McLean‘s magazine says that the 

CCF members of the House were wrought up over the publicity. They were trying to criticize and 

belittle the federal government for what they did, and in the meantime this government was copping off 

the money that they should be paying to the old-age pensioners. Let‘s confess — they will never come 

back. 

 

There was another man — Jake Benson in this House here, and he may never come back. The CCF have 

a number of victims of their disciplinary methods all over this province; there are four or five of them — 

they‘ll never come back. But, that‘s what they did. They are the last group on the face of the earth that 

should never criticize any other government — I don‘t give a darn whether it‘s in 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

68 

Canada or any place else. There‘s no government on the face of the earth that I know of that pulls off a 

stunt like that. It‘s despicable and no one can describe it otherwise than inhuman and despicable as the 

action was. 

 

The poor old-age pensioners of the province of Saskatchewan lost that $416,614.00 that rightly belonged 

to them. 

 

I have a few odds and ends that I might say a few things about. I was very much interested — (but all 

the members I am interested in go out of the House) — I wanted to talk to the lady member for 

Saskatoon (Mrs. Strum). She was telling us the other day, and I must say I sympathize with her, Mr. 

Speaker, — I know how hard she is working; how they have been trying to impress on the ruling nation; 

particularly Canada and the United States, that they should desist and try to quit manufacturing and 

exploding bombs — atomic bombs. I think they are right. She was kind of downhearted, I understood, 

because they hadn‘t met with success that I think, and that she thought they should meet with. I suppose 

they just said, ―Well, it‘s not all in our hands. We can‘t tell you what the other fellow is going to do.‖ So 

I was just going to suggest to her, Mr. Speaker, that she talk to some of her friends, Mr. Khrushchev — 

turn her attention to Mr. Khrushchev. She has been to Ottawa and talked with Mr. Diefenbaker, and I‘m 

sure Mr. Diefenbaker is a peaceful man, and so is Canada — and they would do anything in the world to 

be able to do what she wants him to do — she has been to the United States — but she should go and see 

Mr. Khrushchev; seeing that they are such good friends with him, why don‘t they go direct to him. That 

is just a suggestion I want to make, and you might pass it on to your Premier. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — They‘re too timid to do that! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That‘s true, too, but they‘ve got a leader here and I was going to suggest to him that 

after all, if they are frightened of Khrushchev, they might take some of the courage from the Premier. He 

says that Canada is a nation who should be able to tell Mr. Kennedy to take the troops out of Cuba and 

he should tell Mr. Khrushchev to keep his tanks off the streets of Budapest. You know, that‘s courage 

itself, and carry that out with a good effect, probably. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have heard during this session and in every session — I don‘t think there has been a 

session 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

69 

here for the last 17 years without the Premier telling the House how in 1919 the health proposal was 

brought in by the federal government under MacKenzie King. That‘s a long time ago. It has been 

delayed. It‘s partly in operation now. It was up when the Liberal government passed an Act assuming 

half the hospitalization costs. It might not be half according to some people‘s figures, but it is at least a 

long ways towards that. But when these people got that from the dominion government, what did you 

do? You threw the Cancer Commission into that; you threw the geriatric centre in there and you threw in 

everything else except the sanatorium, so you had a bigger figure. But it is really 50 per cent so far as 

the actual hospitalization is concerned. 

 

Premier Douglas: — We never got a nickel from the Liberal government. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Not including the tremendous overhead — that‘s where you can save a lot of money. 

 

Premier Douglas: — It wasn‘t until the Tories came in that we got anything. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I don‘t attempt to be very well informed, but I think so far as hospitalization, I am 

better informed than the Premier is. I have been in hospital work for the last 40 years, and am still in it. 

But this has been held up. It is a slight, and a degrading item so far as the Liberal party is concerned. Mr. 

Fines didn‘t look at it just that way. He confessed just about two years ago now that he said he 

understood, (I have the clipping here) that the action of the government in assuming part of the 

hospitalization cost — but he said this: He understood that it could not probably have been done any 

quicker because they must carry it — the provincial government, the nation as a whole, before they 

could branch out and distribute that money. That is the reason for this. So you see, all the ballyhoo and 

all the propaganda about the Liberal government was just so much hot air, so far as Mr. Fines was 

concerned — just so much hot air. So much slander on somebody else. But the Premier went up to 

Hanley in 1952, and he told the audience there that if the federal government would not come through 

with medical services in the next year or two, he was prepared to march in and assume the responsibility 

for putting it into operation. He went across Saskatchewan and made just exactly that same statement in 

1952, Mr. Speaker, and this is 1961 — that‘s ten years ago, now. It‘s ten years ago and it is only now 

that he is trying it, so he‘s not very quick on the draw, either. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

70 

Mr. MacKenzie King didn‘t say it would be in the next year or two — he knows that he would have to 

carry the provinces. He said it was going to be between that election and the next and that was in 1952, 

and that is all he promised. So that is all his promises are worth. It wouldn‘t be today, Mr. Speaker, if it 

wasn‘t to give him a send-off with a crown on his small head, to go out and preach all over Canada 

―Look at what I did in the province of Saskatchewan‖. And you‘re not through yet. 

 

A federal exemption-member for Dauphin, Manitoba in the federal government helped with an election 

last year. He went out and started spreading all over the newspapers in western Canada, saying that the 

medical men of this province are opposed to this thing because for the first time they will be compelled 

to make an honest income tax return, and then you wonder what is wrong with the medical profession; 

that they don‘t smile . . . 

 

Any man or any party who would be responsible for that sort of thing, they are pretty darn low, Mr. 

Speaker. They are lower than I want to associate with, that‘s a cinch, but that‘s what he said. You‘ll go a 

long time before you‘ll live that down. 

 

We hear over and over again, and the member for Bengough was talking about socialism, and he talked 

about Sweden. Well, I‘m not going to talk about Sweden — they‘re getting along over there; they‘re 

blundering along like any other nation. They make mistakes, but all you hear from these politicians isn‘t 

so. Some of those fellows go over there and tell you what they are doing here, and they magnify it. 

Sweden is a country with about 8 million people; she has natural resources. They have an immense 

amount of iron ore, and all that sort of thing. Here‘s where the CCF defrauds the people‘; they fool the 

people. They say that socialism is social services. Well, anyone that knows anything in the world knows 

that there isn‘t a country in the world that doesn‘t have social services — at least nowhere on the 

western hemisphere, and practically every place now. In the last few years they have been expanding by 

leaps and bounds. Some of the countries that are the highest capitalistic ones have more social services 

than you have ever had. Go back and read the Regina Manifesto. Nationalization of industries; 

nationalization of finances, banks, etc., and manufacturers controlled by the government and 

manufacture all they want — this is socialism. 

 

What are you going to do about nationalizing land? It was Mr. Coldwell, I think — or maybe it was the 

wise man — 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

71 

maybe it was this little boy over here, or was it Mr. Coldwell — running down there as a Social Credit? 

I think he was. He said this, that the present owner will retain title to the land, but anyone who sells out 

or moves out, the government will take it over. That was socialism. Then you talk about the power 

commission. Well, good Lord, the power commission was there before you came. That wasn‘t a socialist 

act that was a public utility and so was the telephones. But you go and peddle that because you have a 

hospitalisation scheme. Why, there was hospitalisation in this province before you ever saw it. So what 

is pure bunk, that is pure dishonesty for anyone to try and go out and convince the people because they 

have provided themselves with social services, that that is socialism. That‘s what they do when they talk 

about Sweden over here. 

 

They had that a number of years ago, but we had a hospital and doctor care plan. In the rural districts, 

they paid to operate the hospitals. We had two doctors in the place where I came from and they assessed 

the people before the service was rendered. Every post-office had what we called a savings branch; that 

was a savings institution operated by the government and the postmaster operated it. He has a very 

important position in the present administration in any country. But the services for the people have 

been extended and enlarged, but no socialist — they have as much free enterprise in Sweden as they 

have in the United States. If the government had gone into anything so have they done in the United 

States. So don‘t swallow all this stuff you hear — no matter whether it comes from the member from 

Bengough (Mr. Dahlman), or anybody else, because they are just trying to fool you, that‘s all. 

 

I was very much interested in the ‗swan-song‘ of the Premier when he was speaking here the other day 

and he said this would be the last time. All very sad, indeed. I was a little muddled on this thing myself, 

because there are hundreds of people around the country who thought he left a long time ago. That‘s the 

truth. I can say I have met people in my own hometown who would stop and say hello, and talk a little, 

and then they would ask, ―Did you listen to the radio last night?‖ Or, ―Did you see the newspaper?‖ 

There were different headlines, and one thing and another. Well, he‘s gone now, isn‘t he? That is 

invariably what they ask. I say no. Then I came home one day and picked up the newspaper, and here 

was the heading which said ―Douglas Visits Regina‖. You can‘t blame me for believing that I have been 

fooled — there was the newspaper. One day he is at Port Arthur and the next day he‘s gone to the labour 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

72 

unions down there; then he‘s out in B.C., and back on the west side of the province. Sometimes he goes 

some other place — Fort William and so on. Then sometimes he comes into Regina and that is what the 

press said, ―Douglas Visits Regina‖, and I think that is quite fair — that is what I thought. I found he is 

here, and I think he will be here for sometime. I don‘t think you can bank on whether you‘re going to get 

away at all or not, in the next election — and it could be that you will be left at home. You see, nothing 

is impossible in this world. Nobody could have told that the Tory party had slipped out in 1934. Nobody 

could tell that the Liberal party and the CCF and all the Social Credit would be cleaned out in 1958. You 

tried for years now to expand your empire in this country — for 18 years and you haven‘t been able to 

do it and you‘ve been going downhill and you lost out in every other place. So don‘t be too sure . . . 

 

You see, when you look back, you know history repeats itself. Mr. Speaker, a few years ago we had a 

gentleman by the name of Henry Wallace in the United States. He was an outlaw, but he was preaching 

the New Jerusalem just like you are. A good living — an abundant living; it was the New Jerusalem on 

the face of the earth. He ran first in the United States, and he was going to combine labour and farmers. 

He did, too, but they snowed him under and you never hear of him any more, Mr. Speaker. There wasn‘t 

a chance in the world of him every coming back. I think such fate can befall you. I am sure it will. So 

you see, human minds work in a peculiar way. The fact that you have strived and strived for years to try 

and expand some of your activities, and to win the conquer more and more, and eventually do like 

Khrushchev over there — control all . . . It doesn‘t mean anything, except that it proves one thing, that 

you have not been able to do so. 

 

For that reason there is the possibility that your rosy outlook at the present time may not turn out to be as 

rosy as you think it is. I can‘t help but say a few words about the chastisement that was given the Leader 

of the Opposition, when he drew attention to this House that he had once been a CCF‘er. When a man 

has brains enough, ability enough and courage enough to see he is in wrong, to right his way and do 

what he thinks is right, that should be something to his credit. I wonder how many thousands of Tories 

have voted for you in 1944 that have never voted anything else before? They were the fellows that 

elected you. They were the ones that elected you. They did that because they wanted to get even with the 

Liberals. If they 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

73 

had gone back and nominated their own candidates and built up their party, they would have been a 

party to be reckoned with the first in Canada today, but after all, if this is a disgrace at all (which it isn‘t) 

— and we are proud of our leader for that reason, for that courage. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Danielson: — What about the holy man that sits down there? He ran as a Tory with the consent of 

the Tories, and the Communists were pushing on the back of that. So then he had the CCF on one side 

and the Social Credit on the other — he had the four parties. He ran for four parties at one time. He is 

the greatest political acrobat on the face of the earth! So we don‘t need to apologize for our leader. But I 

know you don‘t like him, but that is proof that he‘s a good man. It‘s not that he isn‘t good. You‘d never 

chastise anybody that you thought was no good. You could try to eliminate anyone that stands up and 

talks back. 

 

Now then, this new party — they are just as old as the hills. There‘s no new party — nothing new about 

it. I, Mr. Speaker, am a farmer. These fellows are going to unite the farmer and the labourer. Well, it has 

been tried and tried over and over again, and it has never worked. You know, the labourer is so much 

brainier — they‘re too intelligent. Look at the House of Commons today. Who sits and represents the 

most industrialized part in eastern Canada? Who are the representatives of parliament today? The 

Liberals, not the CCF. Every one of them. 

 

There was another thing — I look at these things in many ways from the standpoint of the farmer. The 

New Democratic set-up has been dealt with, but I have a clipping here which says: (October 10/61) 

 

―Niagara Falls, Ont. — The New Democratic Party of Ontario, dominated numerically by labour 

unionists, and the CCF members Monday overwhelmingly endorsed a farm policy that calls for 

removal of restrictive measures in provincial marketing legislation and provides for long-term credit 

on favourable terms . . . ‖ 

 

What is this restriction of labour-farm legislation that they are calling for removal of? That is legislation 

that the farmers of Ontario have fought for years and years to get on the statute books, and some of it 

couldn‘t replace it 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

74 

without the consent and agreement of the federal government — this is the legislation. It says too: 

 

―Len Laventure of Glasgow Station said collective bargaining for labour and farm marketing for 

farmers are the same thing.‖ 

 

Well, I think it is darn hard to convince a farmer of that. 

 

―You labour people have collective bargaining, but how would you like it if you had to go to a 

government appointed board before you could do anything, he said.‖ 

 

Is that a clear indication that the CCF or the Labour Union — you can call them what you like — I don‘t 

think labour is — that‘s the CCF — their idea is to eliminate the commission-operative legislation and 

the marketing legislation on the statute books in the province of Ontario, and they wouldn‘t be any 

different in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The farmers of this province have carried no part in this government. The farmers have been a 

convenience to this government; nothing else. This government is dominated by, and controlled by the 

labour unions and the small left wing of the commission-operative movement in this province. Listen to 

the speech by the member from Bengough (Mr. Dahlman) last year, when he told the truth, and he was 

put on the carpet for it, too. For telling the truth. I‘m going to repeat that he told the truth. The farmers of 

this province have never had anything, and they don‘t own you a darn thing except forgiveness for your 

sins. And they are many — they are many. They have been the hewers of wood and the drawers of water 

for this government for 17 years. You haven‘t done a thing for the farmer, except heap more and more 

taxes on them, and you‘re not through yet — you‘re just commencing. 

 

But it is a long, long road that has no turning, and you‘re coming towards that pretty soon. I am 

interested in the fact that this government or this party was elected as a CCF government, and now they 

are going to at the next convention, switch over just like a change of their colours, and they are going to 

be what they call a new democracy. Well, it is a peculiar name for an old socialist party. They don‘t fool 

the people, and you won‘t fool them any more. 

 

I predict, from what little connection I have had with labour in the province of Saskatchewan, and this 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

75 

is not too much — but there has been three or four real good sane men — that you are going to get a 

shock when you think you will get all of labour. They‘re not going to vote for you because they are 

responsible men. They are well informed. They have watched this government and have seen what has 

taken place in this province. All they want is work and peace and contentment, so they can raise their 

families and earn a living and be good citizens. That‘s all they want. Strife of any kind is foreign to their 

make-up. 

 

I‘m just going to say a few words, Mr. Speaker, in regard to a matter that affects our hospitals. I‘m not 

going to quarrel with the minister — not a bit. He knows my feeling on that — I had a chat with him one 

time in his office, and that is, that you saw fit, about a year ago to interfere with the debentures issued in 

the province of Saskatchewan that had been issued before the building of hospitals and the carrying on 

of hospital services. When the hospital districts were organized, the first thing you do is get an architect. 

He draws up the plans, under the direction of the department, because the site of the hospital is 

determined, and the district it is supposed to serve — if it is going to have 15 beds or 20 beds, or what. 

He draws this up and gives you an estimate of the cost. Grants have been given by both federal and 

provincial governments towards these buildings, and at the present time I think they stand at about 

$2,000. They we are called on first of all to go to our council and discuss this. Under your regulations 

we got to prepare a by-law, but first of all before that we have to go to the local government board. I see 

the Provincial Treasurer is smiling. He should know all about this thing, but I‘m going to get to the point 

I am talking about. It is not only me — the Hospital Association of Saskatchewan — every hospital 

board chairman that I have met (and I have met at least a dozen of them) is bitterly opposed to this thing. 

I say we have to go to the local government board and submit the plan to him; he will then reject it or 

cut it down, or increase it. The thing that guided him so far is that the debenture issue should not exceed 

two mills on the dollar for each year to pay your interest and the capital payments on the debentures, 

which will be liquidated in 20 years. That is the basis on which this has been figured. There‘s nothing 

wrong with that at all. 

 

Then we go up and prepare a by-law and we get a vote on that by-law and then we are ready to go, if 

that is carried. Then we sell this debenture, and when we do that it 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

76 

results in the municipality, whether rural, town or village, bringing in a hospital bill. Generally there are 

three or four rural municipalities and a number of villages and towns. We enter into a legal contract for 

the sale of our debentures. Our tax ability is the guarantee for payment of this bond. That‘s correct and 

nobody in this House can deny that statement; it‘s a fact. It is the duty of local governments to collect 

and pay into the trust fund of the hospital board to collect and pay into the trust fund of the hospital 

board at the bank every year, and the bank pays the debentures. 

 

Now the government comes along and you say — that is, the government members and the Premier say, 

―We will take over the principal payments on your debenture indebtedness; if that applies to one it will 

apply to the whole province.‖ I will say this (and I have talked this over with two or three lawyers); they 

maintain and I maintain that this action on the part of the government is illegal. You are ruining the 

contract and obligations that exist between the debenture holders and the local government board. That‘s 

what you‘re doing. You have butted your nose in there. I‘m going to give you figures — I don‘t know 

whether they are exactly correct or not but I got them from these people who are engaged in 

hospitalisation, and I think they should know. This was done for one purpose, and that was to settle 

more liability on the local ratepayers. It is estimated you gained $1 million a year and some say it is $1.5 

million. Look here — the first ten years of any hospital debenture, the principal payment is the small 

part and the interest is the big part. Then they equalize it, and it‘s the other way. You take all the hospital 

debentures that this is by far the largest part of hospital debentures in the province of Saskatchewan. But 

in our case, because I was finance chairman of our hospital and nurses‘ home, and I know that you have 

gained from us by a substantial sum every year. Now, then, what was the reason for it? We have never 

been able to get this government to state to the people why this contract was upset by the government 

effecting the hospitals of the municipalities, towns and villages and their relation with the bond 

debenture — the debenture holders were going to be thrown out. Which is as today. 

 

I would like the minister, Mr. Speaker, to tell us what the reason was. We should be entitled to know 

that. We are the men that are responsible. On the 11th day April last spring when we had an obligation 

to pay, we were in a position where we had the money to pay it; we were fortunate, but we didn‘t get 

your payment until just a 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

77 

few days ago. What was the reason for doing this? It upsets the whole thing. Here‘s another thing — 

financing is a peculiar thing; one thing affects the other. By doing this you have on the whole shoved at 

least $1 million expense on to the rural municipalities, towns, villages and cities. You have done that. 

But you have advertised (and it is advertising) — the ratepayers in the municipalities now confess that 

the government is now paying the debentures. Well, that is only half true. Here is the exact position. 

When you did this thing you reduced our income from the hospital services plan by many thousands of 

dollars. You said: ―We‘re not going to allow you any depreciation on your buildings.‖ So you took 

about $6,000 away from us and then you go around saying, ―Look what the government is paying‖. You 

haven‘t paid anything — not a cent. You left it all to the municipalities and they don‘t know why you 

did this thing. Let us hear from you now, because they say now that you have probably $6,000 more a 

year than you need to. All you need to do is pay the interest, and that‘s a little more than half the debt. 

 

But here‘s what happened. Just about a year ago, last January or February, first of all in some mysterious 

way there came to the hospital board a salary list — all we know it had been approved by the 

department. Then he goes to the association, then comes down to us with a very nice salary increase. I‘m 

not opposed to good wages, but immediately that had been settled; immediately we have committed 

ourselves for the 12 months of 1960-61, then the minister comes down and says, ―Step on it boys, we‘re 

going to cut you down and we‘re going to hole you down — no increases any more.‖ And here we are. 

The fact is this, that we are now sitting here with no depreciation payments on buildings and equipment; 

we pay more money now than we did before when we paid our own debentures, and we got 

depreciation. 

 

What is this hospital board going to use to pay all the expenses that you don‘t pay, and you‘re 

contracting them every year. For instance, you have a bunch of mathematicians up there in that building 

— no doubt you need them sometimes, but they sit there and they come out and say — ―You‘re 

overstaffed for $4,000; you had so many patients, etc.; you are three-quarters overstaffed with nurses.‖ 

That‘s right. You know that‘s right, don‘t you? But that is absolutely ridiculous. How in the world 

would you expect a small hospital board or a matron of the hospital to overcome this — that might work 

possibly to some extent in a city hospital — where you have a number of nurses, and probably 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

78 

some extras that you can turn them out any time you like, and then call them back anytime you like. but 

it won‘t work in a rural hospital. Consequently there is $4,000 that is taken added to our deficit. 

 

There is something else. I could run up a list here, but I am not going to do it. But there have been 

accusations — we‘re not in any worse shape than anybody else; as a matter of fact we‘re not in bad 

shape because we had the foresight and prepared for the future, but I can see this thing. I attended a 

meeting in your museum last June, I think it was, of the hospital association and that thing was up for 

discussion, and it was a very clear statement that was made by some of the members that were present, 

who know more about hospitalization than I do. But I want to point out that at least we should have been 

told why this action was taken. I don‘t think that it is an unreasonable thing to expect. 

 

I want to say a few words on this tax agreement. This tax agreement is not very good — I was very 

much interested in the Minister of Education who devoted some time yesterday morning to this matter. 

He is supposed to be a brilliant man; highly educated, but I didn‘t get the impression that he knows very 

much of what he is talking about. Nevertheless, the Premier‘s definition, if I happened to get it right, is 

that the controlling factor — the deciding thing for any adjustment or division of taxes is centred on the 

general revenue of the dominion of Canada and should be based on fiscal need. I think that the Rowell-

Sirois report stated that while the government at that time didn‘t see fit to carry that out, and I think they 

did the right thing. I don‘t see how in the world that with ten provinces in the dominion, that you can 

have indefinitely something hanging in the air — something that can go up or down, and it lends itself to 

bargaining, to bull-dozing and bargaining and haranguing, and even hard feelings. They, rightly, 

therefore said that the base for the division of this national revenue over Canada as a whole shall be that, 

based on the population of the two richest provinces of the dominion of Canada, and that is Ontario and 

British Columbia. That has worked out very well. 

 

When this thing was discussed in the House of Commons, Mr. Fleming advocated — that the division 

be based on fiscal need — the same as the Premier of this province — ―The principle of equalization is 

that out of federal revenues, provision should be made with a view to helping those provinces that have 

fiscal need.‖ That‘s what Mr. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

79 

Fleming said. I was surprised to hear Premier Douglas — the champion of provincial rights, agree with 

Mr. Fleming — the fiscal shysters in the province and in the dominion of Canada. 

 

Mr. Diefenbaker took another look. Here is what he said: (Not in this debate, but in a previous debate he 

said this): 

 

―The definition of equalization has been as the Prime Minister put it, to bring the revenues from the 

three taxes in all the provinces up to the level of those of the highest two.‖ 

 

There you have a definite base to go by and to stand by. There‘s no squabbling, no arguments or 

anything else. You have the base right there and it has worked very, very satisfactorily. I hope that Mr. 

Diefenbaker will go back to what he said previously and put that base into operation once again. I think 

that‘s just about all there is to it, except the quibbling, the haranguing and the back-biting, and I should 

say fiscal blackmailing, by this government of the government of the dominion of Canada, regardless of 

who that government was — whether it was Conservative or Liberal. It doesn‘t make any difference, 

Mr. Speaker, what they get; how much the increase; or what they did. In the fiscal conference preceding 

the last one, Premier Douglas was on there; he was a great agitator and has a pretty slick tongue. He 

agitated and agitated, and when he got through and got the thing organized, he demanded an increase 

from the federal government of $2 billions, and he was the instigator of that request. 

 

You can shake your head all you like — that doesn‘t change my idea of it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Fleming‘s statement. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He was the chief agitator at that time. I don‘t blame Mr. Diefenbaker one bit if he 

said to you. He said, ―All right, we‘ll fix this thing up so the people who pay the taxes will see who 

spends the money.‖ That‘s all the changes that are in the bill. I don‘t blame them. I think that should 

have been done from the very beginning. Both the Liberal and the Conservative governments should 

have done this — it should be set out on your income tax to show exactly how much money goes to the 

dominion government and what they are handing back to the provinces, and then there would be no 

quibbling about it. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

80 

I think when you commence to agitate for having these taxes, which are probably in the bill now, that 

fiscal need should be the basic consideration in determining the amount to each province; it‘s the wrong 

thing; it lends itself to hard feelings and arguments of various kinds. Today as I see it, what Mr. 

Diefenbaker said, and he was then really speaking what St. Laurent said, that ―The definition of 

equalization has been as the Prime Minister put it, to bring revenues from the three taxes in all the 

provinces up to the level of those of the highest two.‖ There you have a base that you can solve, and 

there is no need for anybody to think that he can swindle out of it, and get any more than he is entitled 

to. 

 

We have this bill before us, setting up this medical scheme. I don‘t think there is much to say about that 

bill because there‘s nothing in it except to give power to the government to do almost anything they like. 

I don‘t blame the medical association when they said they don‘t want anything to do with it. I believe 

that you will find that this thing will have to come in from an entirely different angle. I believe what 

they state now is the administration of public health in this province — it should be set out more clearly, 

because when you get practically unanimous opposition by the medical profession that they will not 

accept this bill of bargaining, or as a chart for their operation in this province of Saskatchewan, I think it 

should be looked at very carefully. It is necessary. I think you should have the municipalities, your 

organizations come in. I agree that you should divide up the province into certain health centres, and a 

lot more . . . to each one. You have a private plan up in Swift Current. The Premier has spoken of that 

many times in this House, and no doubt, with a few changes which experience has taught them were 

necessary, that plan has worked satisfactorily. Why shouldn‘t it work satisfactorily? Why shouldn‘t that 

system be spread all over the province of Saskatchewan, and leave as much as possible of the economy 

of operating these services in the hands of the local administration? 

 

You have as good men out in the country as you have in the city of Regina. You didn‘t think so when 

you appointed this continuing committee, but I can tell you that this province has been well, well 

represented in the last 30 or 40 years with the splendid character and ability of the men who have 

conducted the municipal affairs . . . 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

81 

Mr. Danielson: — He has been disregarded by this government . They have been neglected by this 

government; they have been pushed aside for political appointments — and they haven‘t forgotten that. 

The time has come when, because we paid the shot we should have something to say about who is going 

to call the tune. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from what you heard me say I don‘t think I need to tell you I shall vote for the amendment, 

but I shall not vote for the motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, I want to associate myself with others who 

have congratulated the mover and seconder of the Address-in-Reply. I want, too, to associate myself 

with those who, on behalf of their constituents, have said words of appreciation to the Minister of 

Agriculture and his department for the action which they have taken and are taking in the face of the 

very difficult and severe conditions facing the agricultural industry. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, there are a 

great many people in the province who are exceedingly happy that when a crisis of this kind does occur, 

the government does not need to and does not wait for a meeting of the legislature to deal with it, but 

proceeds to deal with it on the basis of policies already established. 

 

The member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) who just took his seat has reminded us in the course of his 

speech that history repeats itself. He demonstrated it in a number of ways in a number of the things he 

said, and which he has said before in this legislature. I think that the opposition as a whole, those who 

have spoken, have given quite a bit of evidence during this last week and one day, of just how history 

does repeat itself. One is inclined to remember that Liberals may come and Liberals may go, but the 

party line seems to go on forever. I would just like to give some examples of this evidence of repetition 

of history which has been put before us during this last week. 

 

It began with the address of the Leader of the Opposition, when he spoke immediately following the 

mover and seconder. After he had spoken, I looked up a press statement which is noted as 1946, and 

which has to do with a radio address made by the then Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Tucker. Mr. 

Tucker, like the Leader of the Opposition here the other day, quoted from 1944 statements, 1943 

statements, 1942 statement, 1941 statements and he went on 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

82 

to attempt to illustrate how these statements had not been carried out. 

 

That was in 1946. We have heard practically the same address in every session of this legislature, and 

we know it has been repeated untold times throughout the country. It seems to me that the Liberal party 

ought to take stock of the effect of playing this tune so continually; that they ought to measure it in the 

one kind of measurement to which it seems to me they are relatively sensitive, and that is in terms of 

votes. Before they started making this speech in 1944, they got in that election 35 per cent of the total 

provincial vote. After making it for 16 years in a row, there was an election in which they got 33 per 

cent of the total vote. It seems to me they ought to take note of the effect of repeating the same speech so 

many times in this, very effectively it seems, means of measuring its effect. 

 

Then the member from Melville (Mr. Gardiner) contributed his proof of how history repeats itself, too. 

You may remember, Mr. Speaker, that in discussing the report of the advisory committee and the 

proposals for medical care, he used the phrase that this was the ‗greatest joke ever perpetrated on the 

Saskatchewan people‘. Now, Mr. Speaker, those of us who have been in the House for a number of 

years will remember another Liberal member, the former member from Moosomin who used almost the 

same kind of language in talking about the automobile accident insurance, when it was first introduced. 

He labelled it as ‗the greatest hoax ever perpetrated on the people of Saskatchewan‘. We have a 

relatively similar kind of statement and a relatively similar kind of attitude being shown here, but we 

know the Liberal party has changed its tune considerably about automobile insurance since that time, but 

that was their initial reaction to it. 

 

The reaction to medical care as well smacks of the reaction to the Saskatchewan hospitalization plan 

when it was first introduced into this legislature. They have tried to persuade us that the time for this 

plan is not now; the time is never now so far as the Liberal opposition is concerned; that it would be 

much better if it were done in little bits and pieces on a local basis; that it is going to cost too much. 

Well, this same sort of a statement was made by Liberals at the time the hospitalization plan was 

introduced into this legislature. One of them made the statement that this was just another scheme for 

extracting money from the people of the province — that we were going to make a lot of money out of 

it. Mr. Tucker, speaking in 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

83 

1946 said that there were no adequate assurances that the promised services could be provided; they 

claimed there was no prospects of providing them between now and the end of 1946. He went on to state 

that much more money was going to be needed. At a meeting of the Liberal women here in Regina 

reported on October 26, 1946, there were five of them who dealt with various health agencies, and the 

conclusion of each speaker was against the government plan. 

 

So again we have the same kind of attitude with regard to the medical care plan that was taken to the 

Saskatchewan Hospital Services plan when it was introduced. Now of course they are all for it. 

 

Then we had too the statements repeated again by the member for Melville, with regard to the 

population trends in Saskatchewan over a period of years. You may recall, Mr. Speaker, that he said in 

1929 we had more people in Saskatchewan than there are at the present time. Then he went on to say 

that no province had a record to equal this as this one of people leaving. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can go to a statement from Hansard in order to get a comment on this — a statement 

made February 23, 1951, page 624 which says: 

 

―In 1939 Saskatchewan had 906,000 people. By 1945 our population dropped to 845,000 people.‖ 

 

Mr. Danielson: — How many were in the services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — 

 

―A net loss of 61,000. It‘s only within the last few years that these people have come back and we 

have recovered our population.‖ 

 

I am quoting, Mr. Speaker, the hon. Leader of the Opposition, when he was a member of the House of 

Commons from Saskatchewan. Let me deal a bit further with this statement. You recall the member for 

Melville said first of all in 1929 we had more people in Saskatchewan than at the present time. Mr. 

Speaker, the statement is incorrect to begin with. In 1929, June 1, we had 803,000 people in the province 

of Saskatchewan. On March 1, 1961 we had 914,000 and that is not less than 803,000. Let‘s look just a 

little bit at the trend. From 1929 to 1934 we had 914,000 and that is not less than 803,000. Let‘s look 

just a little bit at the trend. From 1929 to 1934 the population of the province increased by 45,000 — it 

wasn‘t a Liberal government. In 1934 to 1944 the population went down 92,000 people. There was a 

Liberal government in the province at that time. From 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

84 

1944-61 it went up 78,000 people. Again this is a statement that has been repeated too often. I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that everybody will realize that in describing a loss of population of 92,000 for the years 1934-

44 it would be quite unfair to say this was all due to the government of the day. It was due to certain 

developments and trends in our agricultural industry, in particular — the same kind of trends and 

development which have influenced population since that particular time. 

 

Then we have the usual kind of statements with regard to crown corporations. Again I want to draw on 

some information from Hansard of a number of years ago to indicate that maybe these crown 

corporations‘ records aren‘t so bad as we are sometimes lead to believe. It is a statement of inter-change 

that took place when Dr. McCusker was the M.P. for the city of Regina, and was speaking on May 2, 

1952. Some of the comments are interesting. Dr. McCusker referred to the fact that ―transportation is a 

monopoly and should be made a profitable one, yet he says they have made no money.‖ 

 

―Mr. Thatcher: — Certainly they have made money.‖ 

 

―Mr. McCusker: — Then there is the box factory in Prince Albert: It‘s a failure.‖ 

 

―Mr. Thatcher: — It was not a failure.‖ 

 

―Mr. McCusker: — The Fish Marketing Board has practically ruined the fishing industry in northern 

Saskatchewan.‖ 

 

―Mr. Thatcher: — It is doing very well.‖ 

 

―Mr. McCusker: — . . . as to the sodium sulphate plant, they sank a million dollars into that.‖ 

 

―Mr. Thatcher: — Look at the production of that plant.‖ 

 

―Mr. McCusker: — Then they bought the woollen mill.‖ 

 

―Mr. Thatcher: — It employed 125 people.‖ 

 

―Mr. McCusker: — Then comes the insurance company and they lost heavily in that venture.‖ 

 

―Mr. Thatcher: — The lowest insurance rates in Canada.‖ 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

85 

―Mr. McCusker: — Yes, but the company is practically broke as a result.‖ 

 

―Mr. Thatcher: — It is not.‖ 

 

―Mr. McCusker: — There are two public utilities listed here — power and telephones which were 

established in the old days by a Liberal government.‖ 

 

―Mr. Thatcher: — They were always losing money in those days.‖ 

 

―Mr. McCusker: — Private enterprise was driven from the province. It would be rather nice to have 

them stay in Saskatchewan.‖ 

 

―Mr. Thatcher: — How much oil was discovered under the Liberals in the province of 

Saskatchewan?‖ 

 

The major record of the crown corporation has been touched on by the Minister of Mineral Resources, 

and others. I am not going to deal further with that at this time. 

 

Then we have, too, that repetition — a sort of a little pause when we say, ―Now let‘s all praise famous 

Liberals and famous Liberal governments.‖ There was reference made in the speeches and asides that 

were tossed across the House, (if that is what one does with asides) about Quebec and about New 

Brunswick where there are Liberal governments, and supposedly where things are much better. The 

quotations which I make here, Mr. Speaker, are quotations taken from the reports of the proceedings of 

the dominion-provincial conference, July, 1960. I quote them not to be derogatory, but simply to point 

out that perhaps things aren‘t quite as rosy in these provinces where they have Liberal governments, as 

some members opposite would like to have us believe. For example, here is Mr. Lesage, of Quebec, 

speaking about unemployment. He said: 

 

―The situation is particularly alarming in the province of Quebec, where we have about 40 per cent of 

the unemployed of the whole country.‖ 

 

Quebec has about 30 per cent of the total population of the whole country but about 40 per cent of the 

unemployed in the whole country. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

86 

Then we have Mr. Smallwood speaking of the extremely difficult situation in Newfoundland, and all of 

us can appreciate some real reasons for this, pointing out that it was the highest taxed province. I think 

he could perhaps see that New Brunswick may have been higher, but something to that effect. 

 

We have Mr. Robichaud, Premier of New Brunswick, speaking of taxation in New Brunswick and 

saying: ―Is there another province which levies a personal property tax on automobiles ranging from $65 

to $200 each year? Is there a province other than New Brunswick that levies a municipal poll tax, 

ranging from $10 to $45?‖ 

 

I would conclude from these remarks that perhaps everything isn‘t quite as rosy in these provinces 

where they have Liberal governments, as the opposition might like us to believe. 

 

Then we have, too, the certain repetition of history in the theme that all the services, after all, were 

started by Liberals. This we have heard before. An attempt to illustrate this was by the member for 

Melville, (Mr. Gardiner), I think, who said the lady member from Regina (Mrs. Cooper) talked a lot 

about health regions and about how this government had started the organization of health regions in the 

province. He said, ―This isn‘t true. The first health region in the province was started in Gravelbourg in 

1930 something and was discontinued in 1940 something.‖ This was their record of establishing health 

regions in the province. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition put in a little aside at this time, and he said: ―They put on an act‘ (they 

referring to the previous Liberal governments). The fact is, of course, that they put on a great many acts 

about health and about other things. The fact is that the curtain came down on their acts in 1944, and 

there has been no request from the audience for a repetition, of those particular acts. 

 

Secondly, I want to deal with some of the contradictions which are so apparent in what has been stated 

by various members of the opposition. We have, for example, the member from Pelly (Mr. Barrie) 

asking for an easing of conditions under which people obtained social aid and other kinds of assistance, 

and we had the member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) just a little while before that referring to social aid in 

the province, using such words as ‗the biggest scandal in the province‘; using such words as ‗robbery‘ in 

connection with social aid. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

87 

We have also the urge from the other side of the House that there should be a program to give work, to 

provide more employment to alleviate some of the hardships. At the same time they persist in criticizing 

the carrying on of the various projects which do give work. An example is the building of the head 

office for the power corporation; they have criticized, Mr. Speaker, the fact that money has been 

borrowed for such projects as power and telephones, which have created employment and which are 

creating employment right now. One can think of the Squaw Rapids River Dam; one can think of 

construction of the South Saskatchewan River Dam. We are criticized for having borrowed money to 

finance developments of that kind, and at the same time they say we should be doing more to create 

employment opportunities. 

 

I submit, Mr. Speaker, they cannot have it both ways. The lesson is a pretty elemental one, but it seems 

necessary to repeat it because of the stand which the opposition takes. 

 

There are a number of projects under way which provide employment, and I have mentioned several of 

them. A large construction project here in the city of Regina; a large construction project on the 

Saskatchewan River in the northern part of the province; a large construction project, costs of which are 

shared by the federal government on the South Saskatchewan River; the announcement made by the 

Minister of Education yesterday, which will provide additional work opportunities in the three centres in 

the province. 

 

I turn now to the call which has been made by the opposition with regard to the fall session, and the fact 

that there was nothing in the Throne Speech with regard to agriculture; the fact that the government is 

not putting any proposals before the legislature at this time with regard to agriculture. The reason as to 

why a session of the legislature was not called to deal with agriculture is the reason I stated at the 

beginning of my remarks. The government didn‘t wait — the government didn‘t need to wait; to call a 

special session in order to deal with the emergency problems facing the people of the province. Instead 

of waiting, it acted instead, and we had from the Minister of Agriculture this morning, a detailed record 

of the action that has been taken. We point this out that we did not, however, just begin to act when the 

emergency was upon us, that a great many of the things which have been done over a period of years, 

have been or have served to alleviate a situation which we would otherwise have had. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

88 

Let me just recount some of the developments in the province which, if they hadn‘t occurred, conditions 

would have been much more serious than they are. One of the kind of developments to which I refer is 

the diversification of industry in the province; and the diversification within the agricultural industry. 

Saskatchewan, as you will recall, Mr. Speaker, went into the 1950‘s with approximately 25 per cent of 

our production non-agricultural in nature. We came out of the 1950‘s with over 50 per cent of our 

production non-agricultural in nature. 

 

This has served to give us a better tax base; this has served to provide employment and generally 

stabilize our economy. Let me break this non-agricultural development down into several groups. First 

of all, let us look at the increase in the gross value of mineral production. the Minister of Mineral Affairs 

reminded us when he was speaking the other day, that Saskatchewan now occupies fourth place in the 

provinces of Canada insofar as mineral production is concerned. From 1959-59 in all of Canada the 

average annual increase in mineral production was one of then per cent. For the prairies during that 

period the average annual increase was 14 per cent. For Saskatchewan during the same period the 

average annual increase in the gross value of mineral production was 23 ½ per cent, an increase which 

exceeded the rate of increase on the prairies and in Canada as a whole. 

 

So when you look at the rate of growth of the net value of non-agricultural production in Canada, the 

prairies and Saskatchewan — take the period from 1950-58, the average annual change for all of Canada 

was 1.9 per cent. For the prairies it was 12.4 per cent and for Saskatchewan it was 16.4 per cent. Let me 

take still a third indicator, and that being the consumption of power for the years 1950-59 — a 

particularly good indicator, I should think, as to what is happening within an area. The average annual 

increase in the consumption of power across all of Canada during those years was 7 ½ per cent. The 

average annual increase in the consumption of power on the prairies was 5.3 per cent; the average 

annual increase for consumption of power for the province of Saskatchewan was 14.8 per cent — nearly 

twice the increase in all of Canada. 

 

Looking at it from another direction, in 1950, Saskatchewan consumption of power was 10 per cent of 

that in the three prairie provinces; in 1959 it had increased to 17 per cent of the consumption of the three 

prairie provinces. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

89 

Mr. Speaker, that is some indication of this diversification of the economy which has gone along; which 

has given us this better tax base; which has given us more employment; more revenue from resource 

development. If this had not happened, then the problems facing our farm people and all the province 

would have been much more severe than they are. 

 

Secondly, may I just mention for the sake of the record again the diversification which has taken place 

in the agricultural industry. Here again the Minister of Agriculture has outlined this this morning, and a 

good deal of the credit for diversification in agriculture goes to the persistent and effective leadership on 

the part of the minister and his department. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Sometimes we have piles of scorn from across the floor heaped on the idea of 

having meetings with people, of persons such as agriculture. reps. and other specialists going out and 

meeting, and getting the people together and talking about things. This extension work is extremely 

necessary, and most people realize that it has had an emphasis which has assisted in the diversification 

of our agricultural economy. The emphasis which has been placed on the development of community 

pastures; assistance to northern dug-outs at a time when the P.F.R.A. was not doing work in northern 

Saskatchewan; leadership in helping municipalities organize veterinary districts; grants to help them to 

obtain the services of veterinaries in these districts; scholarships to students wishing to take the training 

of veterinarians; the work of the agriculture. reps., the livestock specialists and others in the department 

— all of this has assisted in this diversification of the agricultural industry. This too is something which 

has made our position better than it would otherwise have been. 

 

Thirdly, let me refer to the development of a number of programs which effect farm people and which 

are being turned out by departments of government other than agriculture. Sometimes one gets the 

impression, listening to members of the opposition at least, that the only thing important for farmers is 

that which happens through the Department of Agriculture. Many things that are done through other 

departments are a part of an agricultural program. I am going to mention first of all the program of 

hospitalisation. I think there is no one in the House who will deny the fact that it is precisely in a year of 

this kind 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

90 

that a program of provincial hospitalisation does mean a great deal to people. It means a great deal in 

any year, but it is in years of this kind that its value is certainly emphasized. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — We refer to the steady increase in assistance that has been given to the schools of 

the province; an increase which in the last decade has meant that grants have gone up from about $6 

million to about $31.6 million in that ten-year period. If it had not been for the increases in grants, and 

the changes in organization — changes which haven‘t always received much support, to put it mildly, 

from the members across the way, Mr. Speaker, then there would have been many more educational 

problems facing the people on the farms and in the small urban centres than there presently are. 

 

In regard to education too, I had the privilege and pleasure I may say, a couple of weeks ago, one day 

when the Minister of Education (Mr. Blakeney) happened to be absent from the city, of signing some of 

the forms which provide for payment of non-interest bearing loans to students at universities, or 

teachers‘ college, or the technical institute, or who are taking training as nurses. this kind of assistance, 

together with the scholarship plan has meant a great deal — particularly in a year like this, there would 

have been literally some thousand people, I would say, not able to continue with education had it not 

been for the existence of assistance of that kind. 

 

Certainly it is important to remember, too, that it is many years ago since this government began to 

deliberately shift the burden of social welfare from the municipalities, and when the federal government 

finally came into the picture to take part of the cost for unemployment relief, more of that shifting was 

done. 

 

If one goes back not ago when the municipalities carried 50 per cent of the cost — one can find in the 

middle ‗fifties that this had been changed and the municipalities were paying only 25 per cent of the 

cost, and today the situation is that the municipalities pay only about 7 per cent of the cost; the 

remainder being paid by the provincial and federal governments. 

 

May I say this, that since 1956-57 this changing in the distribution of costs of social aid have saved the 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

91 

municipalities of the province about $3 million. If it had not been for this conscious decision to relieve 

them of some of this burden, they would have paid out in those years, over $3 million more than they 

did pay out in social welfare. In 1950-51, the municipalities paid $420,000 out of a total bill of 

$1,400,000; in 1959-60 they paid out $310,000 out of a total bill of $4 million. This change means much 

this year, as it has in the past, but more this year, because there will likely be much more paid out — a 

great deal of it to the municipalities. 

 

I want to turn to one other program about which a great deal of mention has been made in this 

legislature, and that is water — the development and use of water as a resource. This government, Mr. 

Speaker, has recognized, the importance of water as a resource — both for rural and urban people, for 

farm living and for industry. Since 1959 in locating water and developing its use, in other words in the 

development of the resource generally, we have spent in excess of $5 1/2 million since 1959, in 

conserving and helping to make good use of our water resource. The South Saskatchewan River 

development project, $2 1/2 million, the Saskatchewan Research Council has spent something in excess 

of one-half a million dollars. The Family Farm Improvement Branch, Department of Agriculture has 

spent about $800,000 — this is not only in using water; it has resulted in improvement in quality of 

water in many cases. It has resulted certainly in farm people being able to enjoy more of the amenities of 

life and it is having an effect on the production of the farm, particularly as far as milk and eggs are 

concerned. 

 

The Municipal Water Assistance Board has spent almost $1 million, and the current year‘s drought 

assistance program has amounted to about $700,000. A total since 1959 of about $5 1/2 million. 

 

In addition to that, services by the Department of Agriculture, and goods supplied by them, have 

amounted to very sizeable amounts of money — probably in the neighbourhood of $1 million. Services 

by way of their pumping assistance; services of the Family Farm Improvement Branch. So since 1959 

we have some $6 1/2 million which has been spent in the development and use of this important 

resource — water. This, Mr. Speaker, doesn‘t include any of the expenditure which is being met on the 

Saskatchewan River and the Squaw Rapids Dam, where the water is being impounded for the purposes 

of power, but which, when it is completed, will provide a large body of water in that part of the 

province. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

92 

We can look further at some of these ways in which we have been improving the dependability and 

quality of this particular resource in the province. There‘s the South Saskatchewan River, for example. 

This has already been mentioned in this House several times during this debate, and it does not need to 

be belaboured at this point. But I think it is worthwhile to remind ourselves that if this project had been 

begun when Liberals said it was going to be begun, it would have been in use at this time. If this had 

been done, then there would have been thousands of acres producing tens of thousands of tons of fodder 

available to meet the situation here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Hon. members will recall a statement made by the then federal Minister of 

Agriculture in 1945 election, saying that ―work on this project will begin as soon as men and materials 

are available.‖ It wasn‘t, as we know. 

 

May I suggest this is a good example of the Liberal attitude of getting things done. You see, they 

couldn‘t do it because the time wasn‘t ‗right‘ then to do it; they didn‘t do it because it hadn‘t been 

demonstrated to be a ―prudent‖ expenditure at that time. They didn‘t suggest having a vote on it, but that 

was about the only one of the tactics they did not employ. 

 

Now to say a bit more about the Saskatchewan Research Council program with regard to water. This is a 

program which was initiated in 1958 and about one-third of the budget of the Saskatchewan Research 

Council has gone on each year. It is concerned with underground water, with surface water and with 

atmospheric water. The Saskatchewan Research Council program, Mr. Speaker, may not cover from the 

cradle to the grave, but it does go from away down in the earth to away up in the sky. 

 

The program has been broken up into a number of parts. First of all some valuable research was done in 

order to improve the techniques of locating water and of measuring and analysing water. It is a 

particularly valuable field of research. Still one of the big questions is, ―How to find water?‖ 

 

Secondly a geological survey has been undertaken with regard to the 100,000 some square miles in the 

southern part of Saskatchewan. This is now about half done. Two reports have been published; water 

probability maps have 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

93 

been prepared covering some 30 rural municipalities and are being used. Some are being used by some 

of the urban communities and some being used by well drillers throughout the province. There have 

been drilling programs in some four or five areas of the province. There has been experimentation with 

regard to the pure possibility of purification of salt and brackish water, because a considerable amount 

of the underground supplies that we have are not good for human or animal consumption, because of 

their salt content. This is being researched into. 

 

Finally, there have been experiments as well, to discover better methods of reducing the evaporation of 

supplies of surface water. Everybody is familiar with the fact that we lose a great deal of our water by 

surface evaporation and that if a method to reduce this can be found, it would be good. 

 

I want to deal also in regard to water with some of the activities under the Ground Water Conservation 

Act passed a few years ago by the government, and administered by the Department of Agriculture. This 

is an act which provides for control of water with regard to drilled wells particularly, and which provides 

for the collection of certain data. The water rights branch of that department, as a result of data which it 

has obtained from the well drillers, the research council, from the Department of Mineral Resources who 

have it from the petroleum companies, produce something like 700 written reports on ground water. 

There has been a rather interesting and fortunate increase in the number of people looking for water. 

Maybe it would interest the legislature, Mr. Speaker, to note that from March, 1960 to September, 1961 

there was an increase of some 65 well-drilling rigs in operation in the province. Since July, 1959, more 

than 3,000 wells have been drilled; over 2,000 of them producing water. 

 

The staff of the Department of Agriculture, through a short course at the university and through field 

trips, sought to improve the techniques of those people who are drilling for water. 

 

These are just some of the programs which have been advanced, and which are tending to remove some 

of the difficulty which would otherwise be prevalent in this position in Saskatchewan. 

 

I should mention too, Mr. Speaker, the winter works program which municipalities are taking advantage 

of in greater numbers this year, and which costs are shared 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

94 

between the province and the dominion and the municipalities. It is a good program so far as it goes; we 

are happy with it, but we wish there were more of it and that it were not quite so restricted in its 

application. 

 

I am sure that one thing that must have particularly struck all members of the legislature as they listened 

to the opposition was the fact that they refrained from mentioning the real — the big problem facing 

Saskatchewan agriculture. It has been mentioned by several people on this side of the House — I need 

only mention it again. The big problem doesn‘t arise out of the fact that we have had a drought this year. 

The big problem arises out of the fact of income deficiency which has gone back over a period of years 

insofar as Saskatchewan is concerned. 

 

It may or may not have been accidental that the opposition didn‘t mention this — I don‘t know, because 

I don‘t know how long it takes a leopard to change his spots, or I don‘t know whether a leopard can 

change his spots. I say that because I have here a statement from the Prince Albert Herald, September 

18, 1956 — not very long ago. It is by one Mr. Patrick Nicholson, who was speaking about Mr. Thatcher 

urging the government of that day to abolish or deduce subsidies, especially those paid to wheat farmers, 

cattlemen, the dairy industry and — he also mentioned the C.B.C. and coal-mines, just to make it 

complete. 

 

I don‘t know whether this feeling on the part of the Leader of the Opposition at that time that there was 

no case for any assistance to this particular industry carries over to his present position or not, and 

whether or not this accounts for the fact there has been so little explanation of this particular point there. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I don‘t know what particular speech that Mr. Nicholson is referring to, but I could 

certainly say I have never made a speech on any suggestion that subsidies be taken off of wheat — I 

think he was talking about a butter subsidy. I certainly opposed it then, and I would oppose it today. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I don‘t think that is a point of order . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — If the Leader of the Opposition wants to make two or three extra little speeches I 

don‘t think we should object too much probably, Mr. Speaker. He is credited with it on 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

95 

September 18, 1956. They say that the records of his position in the House of Commons with regard to 

matters of this kind — butter subsidy is one that is particularly one . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — That is still the same. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: — Now then, with regard to the fact of income deficiency, Mr. Speaker, I am not 

going to suggest that it is necessary to take our word for the fact that the position of the farmer with 

regard to getting an adequate price has been deteriorating, or to take our word for it that this is 

something new. I refer briefly to the submission of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool to the House of 

Commons Committee on Agriculture and Colonization on Farm Machinery prices. They point out 

among other things that from 1956-60 the indices for the purchase of the commodities and services used 

by the farmers went up by 26 per cent, and the price received by the farmer went down by 25 per cent. 

Up 26 per cent in costs; down 25 per cent in price. The important thing here is that this period from 

1950-60 is a period during which we had, for the most part, a federal Liberal government. The Liberals 

in power in Ottawa ignored those deteriorating cost-price relationships, and in general the Liberals in 

Saskatchewan defended this ignoring of those cost-price relationships. But I know they have had a 

change of heart, Mr. Speaker. I know that since 1957 they all feel much differently about all these things 

now. 

 

All of us will realize that the main economic problems of the farmer are going to be solved only if 

appropriate action was taken at the federal level. If the income deficiency had been corrected, then this 

year‘s crop would not have been such a severe blow to the farmers of this province. 

 

I am going to say only a word about two other topics, Mr. Speaker. The tax sharing and the medical 

care. I will only say a word about them because later on, in connection with other bills I shall be 

speaking at greater length with regard to them. But the statement that has been made by several 

members of the opposition that what has been asked for by this province had somehow had something to 

do with the decision of the federal government, needs only a little bit more comment. 

 

I can imagine what the members of the opposition would have said if we hadn‘t asked for what was 

considered to be adequate to the needs of the province. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

96 

May I refer just briefly to what some of the other Premiers asked for. The report of the proceedings, for 

example, would indicate that Mr. Frost, the premier of Ontario, suggested that the three taxes, income, 

personal income, corporation and succession duties ought to be divided 50-50-50. The report will show 

that Mr. Lesage suggested they ought to be divided 25-25-100; that the provinces ought to get 25 per 

cent of the personal income tax instead of 13; that they ought to get 25 per cent of corporation tax 

instead of 9; that they ought to get 100 per cent of succession duties in place of the 50 per cent which 

they now get. 

 

The report will indicate that the premier of New Brunswick, the Liberal premier of New Brunswick, 

suggested a very considerable increase which ought to be given to the province. 

 

I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that every provincial government was unanimous in saying that if they 

were going to be able to finance their own services; that if they were going to be able to provide for 

local governments adequate assistance to their services, then it was essential that the figure percentage 

of these three shared tax fields find their way back to provincial governments. That is all this 

government said, that is all the other governments said. If the opposition want to attempt to get some 

political kudos out of suggesting that we have — I think the member from Arm River (Mr. Danielson) 

used the word ‗fiscal blackmail‘ on the federal government, then I guess they are welcome to do it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the point here is this, I think. We are concerned not with the principle, because we seem to 

be agreed on it; we will be concerned later on with the level of taxation which is to be imposed under 

these acts. All of us should be concerned with the purposes to which the taxes are put; we should be 

concerned with the kind of distribution. Much has been said about Canada‘s position and 

Saskatchewan‘s position, too, with regard to taxation and other countries. There has been some 

suggestion that we in Saskatchewan, perhaps we in Canada, are highly taxes in relationship to other 

countries and as a result are not getting the kind of productivity which we would otherwise get. 

 

I think it is important to remember, Mr. Speaker, that productivity is not the function of just the tax-load. 

Productivity is also a function of the health and well being of people and the services which they provide 

for themselves. If one just takes a brief look at various tax-loads in different countries of the world, 

United 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

97 

Nations statistics indicate that Canada stands twelfth in terms of the relationship which the taxes she 

imposes bears to the gross national product of the country. In other words, there are 11 other countries 

which impose relatively greater taxes than does Canada, and these countries in general give more social 

services than we do. 

 

I want to make one more reference. It is a table which is quoted in the publication ‗Merit News‘, an 

article by Mr. H.D.G. Young, the President of Canada‘s Productivity Council. He points out that in 

seven countries, Japan, Germany, Italy, France, the Netherlands, Sweden, United Kingdom and Canada, 

the growth in productivity from 1950-60 has been greater in these other countries than it has in Canada. 

Most of those countries which have had this greater growth are also the countries which have been 

taxing themselves higher in order to provide more social services for their people. I submit it is 

important in dealing with this that we realize that the productivity and the prosperity and the standard of 

living of the country is more than just a function of tax load; it is also the function of health and well-

being of the people and the services which they provide for themselves. 

 

With regard to medical care, again it seems to me that the Liberal position on this is pretty clear. It is 

clear because of its lack of clarity. That is the best I can say on it. I am sure that nobody can say at this 

moment just what it is that they really think about medical care. I have suggested they have said the 

same things almost the same in this debate about medical care as they said in the debate when 

hospitalization was introduced in this province. So their stand is consistent only because of its 

inconsistency. It is the kind of stand they have taken on hospitalization; the kind of stand they took on 

government insurance; the kind of stand they took on larger school units, and I could go on and on and 

on. some day they will come back to this House, Mr. Speaker, and claim that they started it. It seems to 

me almost certain that the footprints left on the sands of time by the Liberals in Saskatchewan are going 

to be distinctive for one reason; they tend to point in all directions at once. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne brought before this legislature two important issues; one of 

them with regard to tax agreements with the federal government. In this we have little discretion other 

than the right to determine the tax rates which will be imposed. The other one 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

98 

is a bill which will establish the framework for a comprehensive, publicly supported and publicly 

administered medical care pro in the province of Saskatchewan. This bill introduces an opportunity for 

the people of the province, an opportunity for the medical profession of the province to make come true, 

in the best tradition of medicine, the functions of that great profession. There are many people who have 

waited a long time for just such a moment, and many people who will applaud heartily a legislature 

which brings this moment into being. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not support the amendment; I will support the motion. 

 

Mr. Gallagher: —Mr. Speaker, just before the 5:30 adjournment . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — Will the hon. member permit me to raise a question to the House. He may not 

wish to speak for five minutes; he may want to confine his speech until after the supply hour. If that is 

agreeable to him we could deal with Motions for Returns and get them out of the way. 

 

The Assembly recessed at 5:30 o‘clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly resumed at 7:30 o‘clock p.m. 

 

Mr. Bernard D. Gallagher (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, before I start to say anything about the Throne 

Speech, I might comment on some of the things that were said by the last speaker, the hon. Provincial 

Treasurer. He still seems, after sitting here since last Wednesday, not to be understood the position of 

the Liberal party and the opposition in regard to medical care in this province. 

 

I can only say that the member for Saltcoats (Mr. Snedker) and the member from Melville (Mr. 

Gardiner) having spent some three hours dealing with medical care and still not having enlightened the 

Provincial Treasurer‘s mind to date, I am sure I will not be able to in the time I am going to devote to the 

Throne Speech this evening. 

 

There were many comments that he made that were said by members on this side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker, that I could discuss but I don‘t think I will waste too much time. He seems to get a big bang out 

of Dr. McCusker, Mr. Thatcher, 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

99 

Dr. McCuster, Mr. Thatcher, etc. so I hope he enjoyed himself. Anyway, I will say this much about our 

leader, Mr. Speaker. There is one thing that he possibly inherited as a socialist was a thick skin, and 

that‘s one thing he has held onto, so you‘re not going to bother him too much, but as far as his socialistic 

tendencies are concerned, Mr. Speaker, he was a man of courage and when he decided he was going 

along the wrong road, the crooked road, he departed and straightened himself out. I‘m glad that he has 

hung on to that one socialistic characteristic that he is still thick enough skinned that it won‘t hurt his 

feelings, as to what the Provincial Treasurer or anybody on the other side of the House might say. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don‘t think I will waste too much time in commenting on what the Provincial Treasurer 

had to say. There was one item he did mention while he was talking on taxation and the legislation that 

was going to be brought into this assembly. He said they were going to be concerned with the level of 

taxation, and I am very glad to hear that from the Provincial Treasurer, because in the last 17 years they 

have not been too concerned about how high taxation went in this province. 

 

Going on to deal with what the Throne Speech contained, Mr. Speaker, I must say that anything I might 

say this evening has probably been said three or four and half a dozen times before tonight. It is the first 

Throne Speech for many years that this government has had the Lieutenant Governor read a speech that 

wasn‘t full of praises of this government. It is quite understandable, Mr. Speaker, why this is so. It is the 

first time since the socialists were elected in 1944 that they ever had to stand up in a time of a real crisis, 

and instead of standing up to the crisis, and facing things as they are today, they are acting like the 

ostrich with his head in the sand. Rather than dealing with the problems that confront the people of this 

province at this time, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech contained only the two items, the medical care 

plan and the taxation question. 

 

I am not criticizing the government for calling the session at this time. I think it was very necessary; it 

was the duty of the government to call a session at this time, but I am going to say this, that I don‘t think 

the people of this province will look too favourably upon a government that is calling a session, 

practically simply and solely to give the Premier a glorious send-off into the federal arena. I know that 

medical care is important. I 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

100 

think all members of this House agree that medical care is important; but it is no more important in 

October, 1961 than it was in October, 1960, and in view of the fact, Mr. Speaker, that the government 

did go to the trouble of setting up the advisory committee on medical care, you would think they would 

have at least given this advisory committee time to get not only an interim report out, but to get out a 

final report before they tried to pass any legislation that was going to give us a medical care plan. I say it 

is an insult to the intelligence of the people of this province that the elected representatives of the people 

be called into session at a time like this, and instead of dealing with the real problems that face the 

people of this province today, they are called in here to satisfy the whims of the NDP leader in this 

country. It is just another publicity stunt as far as I am concerned, to give him a good send-off. 

 

I suppose, Mr. Speaker, it would be only right that I congratulate the mover and seconder of the motion. 

I must say that I could not agree with everything that was said by the hon. member from Regina (Mrs. 

Cooper). I, too, would like to show my appreciation to the members of the advisory committee on 

medical care. One of its members, namely Dr. C.J. Houston, who incidentally is my own personal 

physician whom I know very well is a man who even though he possibly has one of the largest general 

practices in this province, has always been willing to give public service when he was called upon to do 

so. His contribution, along with the work done by his committee, is something that members of this 

assembly and people all over this province, should be very grateful for. 

 

As I said a moment ago, Mr. Speaker, this interim report was sent to us about two weeks ago. I believe I 

got mine a week ago last Saturday and have tried to digest it once, and gone over parts of it the second 

and third time. But I think the government should consider very seriously giving this interim report a 

good deal of consideration before they make their final decisions on what type of medical care plan they 

intend to institute in this province. It seems interesting to me, Mr. Speaker, that a minority report was 

submitted by the members of this committee who are supposed to represent the people of this province 

who are going to provide medical care service, and I am going to suggest to this assembly this evening 

that it is my view if we are going to have a medical care plan which is going to work in this province, 

that this minority report must be considered very seriously. I am going to 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

101 

remind this House that if the medical profession is ignored, then the people of Saskatchewan not only 

won‘t have a medical care plan; they won‘t have medical care period. 

 

It would seem from the remarks by the mover of the Throne Speech that she is inclined to agree with the 

member of the advisory committee who cast a dissenting vote, and although she may take exception to 

me saying this, most people on this side of the House think that after she had finished speaking, she 

agreed almost wholeheartedly with Mr. Smishek. I am going to say, Mr. Speaker, that she probably 

things she is getting herself in good with the labour voter in the city of Regina by agreeing with Mr. 

Smishek, but as far as I am concerned, he does not represent the working people of this province. She 

might have summarized her remarks by reading from a newspaper advertisement of the Leader-Post, 

dated October 4, 1961, which I will read: 

 

―Let Saskatchewan‘s health scheme serve the people. We oppose creation of a medical care insurance 

commission; fee-for-service charge; deterrent charges; direct personal premium. We support health 

services to be administered by the department of health; doctors paid on salary basis; no deterrent fee; 

financing through corporation and personal income tax.‖ 

 

Then there is a place to put your name, address, sign this ad, and send to the Communist Party of 

Canada, Saskatchewan Committee, 100 Northern Crown Building, Regina. 

 

Sure, Mr. Speaker, I don‘t think the lady member from Regina would align herself with a radical group 

such as the Communist Party of Canada, but I don‘t think the people who are working people in this 

province or any others, want to be associated with the kind of thinking that comes from a group who 

inserted this ad in the Leader-Post. 

 

I said that I did not think Mr. Smishek‘s suggestion, as far as I was concerned, represented the feeling of 

the working people of this province. He may be speaking for a small percentage of working people in 

the province, but the vast majority of workers in Saskatchewan who want a medical care plan want to 

have to pay for a medical care plan, and they also want to do nothing, Mr. Speaker, that would deter 

doctors from coming into this province, or do anything that might antagonize doctors that they would 

leave the province. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

102 

So, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to the government that whatever type of plan is set up, it should be kept in 

mind that the people of Saskatchewan should have the best medical care that we can afford, and do 

everything possible to acquire and retain the best medical personnel that is humanly possible. And while 

I am still on the subject of medical care, I would like to quote from a story carried by the Winnipeg Free 

Press, September 16, 196l. This story is entitled ―How Health Plan Works Done Under,‖ written by Mr. 

Dean Walker: (I will quote from parts of this story): 

 

― . . . when law-makers want proof that these things do work out in the end, they can always point to 

the experience of the country that has the oldest such scheme, New Zealand. 

 

―In New Zealand a radical labour government first declared in the 1930‘s that the community as a 

whole, and not the unfortunate individual, should carry the cost of sickness and accident.‖ 

 

Then it goes on to talk about the opposition that this government got from the doctors before this plan 

was set up. 

 

―Labour‘s first suggested legislation, however, seemed deadly to the doctors. When the government 

started collecting social security taxes, they threatened a medical strike. The government was non-

plussed. for two years it collected tax money for a service it could not offer. Finally it bowed to the 

main wishes of the profession and drew up a scheme which the British Medical Association approved. 

It was operating by 1941, and it was not significantly changed since.‖ 

 

It goes on to say how the medical plan works in New Zealand, but here is a paragraph on the costs of the 

New Zealand medical plan: 

 

―The taxpayer is happy enough about the cost of the scheme, because he is used to paying high taxes 

anyway. The health scheme in New Zealand costs approximately 4 or 5 per cent of the countries‘ gross 

national product each year. Taxation is weighted to the middle-income family man at the expense of 

richer men, with fewer dependents. For example, a married man with three children, earning the 

average wage of $2,250 a year will pay only $150 a year in direct tax. A 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

103 

single man earning $5,000 a year will pay over $1,100.‖ 

 

The closing paragraph of the story might be interesting to some members of this House: 

 

―Although doctors are happy enough with the scheme, they watch its implications closely. They have 

one great fear that the large public hospitals may start to resemble Russian-styled clinics where all the 

medical care in the community emanates from the one centre, and a state-controlled one at that. 

Should it move in that direction in New Zealand, doctors will once again down stethoscopes and leave 

them to politics as enthusiastically as they have done in the past, and perhaps more effectively.‖ 

 

So you see, Mr. Speaker, from the story which I have just read there are many pitfalls we can run into in 

the setting up of a medical care plan in this province. I think the government should be very careful to 

institute and develop a medical care plan with all caution, so that when we have this plan set up, we 

know it is not only going to give service to the people, but will be a plan that is welcomed by the people 

of this province. 

 

The other point, of course, in the Throne Speech was the tax question. I, too, sympathize with the 

member from Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) and the Premier that we find ourselves in this tax jungle today. 

I noticed for once in his speech the Premier gave some credit to the Liberal party. I guess he has decided 

by now it was better to be the government of this province when we‘ve got a Liberal government at 

Ottawa, than when we have a Tory government at Ottawa. 

 

He was accused, Mr. Speaker, and rightly so, of helping to scuttle this tax-rental agreement. As long as 

there was a Liberal government in power at Ottawa, a government that had the welfare of the people of 

Canada at heart above politics, the Premier of this province could get away with what he was doing. But 

Mr. Diefenbaker, after he took over, decided to show our Premier and our Provincial Treasurer that he is 

now the boss. I‘m going to say right now it is not only the demands this government has been making, at 

dominion-provincial conferences — not only the demands that have helped to scuttle this agreement. 

The Premier has gone up and down this country for the last 12 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

104 

or 15 years, and he has boasted about all the accomplishments of this government and he never gave any 

credit to anybody for the accomplishments of this government except himself until John Diefenbaker 

decided, if you‘re going to do all the blowing about what services you are getting in Saskatchewan, you 

can take the blame for collecting the tax. But I‘m going to say this, Mr. Speaker, that when he leaves this 

province and the Premier‘s chair for one of his colleagues, there is going to be one thing he will be able 

to boast about after he‘s left. He‘s going to be able to go out from this chamber and say, ―Well, I helped 

to scuttle the tax-rental agreement that helped Saskatchewan for the last 16 or 18 years.‖ These, Mr. 

Speaker, were the two items contained in the Throne Speech, and now that I have covered them briefly I 

intend to deal with a few more items which the Throne Speech did not contain, and I wish it had. 

 

I was elected to the House by the people of the Yorkton constituency. I am very proud of those people 

and am very glad to be able to represent them. It makes me feel much better when I think that 65 per 

cent of the people of Yorkton constituency voted anti-Socialist, when they wanted to be represented by a 

member on this side of the House. Although all of the 65 per cent of the people of the Yorkton 

constituency did not vote for me, I know that every one of them who voted against this government 

voted against it because they don‘t want any socialist running their business. 

 

I might also say, Mr. Speaker, that I am very proud, after listening to some of the explosions from the 

other side of the House about how that party, the CCF, or New Democratic Party represents labour, that 

a majority of the working people in the city of Yorkton supported me. After listening to some people on 

the other side of the House, and especially some of the members from the cities you would think they 

were the only defenders of the worker in this country. But in view of what has taken place during the 

past two years in the formation of this supposed-to-be new party, I am going to say at this time that the 

time has come for some political party to take the case of the working man and save him from being 

dragged into a den from which there is no return, and that, Mr. Speaker, is what is happening to the 

working people of this country since the formation of the New Democratic Party. 

 

They can gloat all they like over their big convention down in Ottawa. Sure, labour was well 

represented, but did the working people of Canada organize that convention? 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

105 

No. That convention was organized by the Claude Jodoins and the Stanley Knowles and the David 

Lewises. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the union members were not even consulted — not only as to whether or not they should 

contribute to this new party, but as to whether or not they should join this new party. I am going to tell 

you right now that — and I hope the Premier is listening. I have a good many friends who are members 

of labour unions, and not one of them was ever consulted as to whether or not he wanted to be part and 

parcel of any new party, or any political party in this country. The working people in Canada have voted 

Liberal consistently from 1935 to 1957, and because they voted Liberal, because the working people in 

Canada were in the main, electing Liberal governments for years, the Premier and some of his cohorts 

decided there was only one way to try and get the working people to vote CCF, and that was to try and 

grab off their union leaders, whom they felt could deliver the vote. 

 

I would like to inform the hon. Premier that I think my guess will be pretty close when I say that after 

four or five years of Tory rule, the working class of Canada will be glad to vote Liberal once again. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — The average working man and woman in Canada wants to have the right to work. 

They want to earn his or her own living, and not be told by the New Democratic leader or some greedy 

union leader what he must do and when he must do it. You know, Mr. Speaker, I think the Premier of 

this province is going to be in for a shock. Labour in this country has earned the right to organize, and 

they earned it under a Liberal government. They have the right to collective bargaining; they got that 

under a Liberal government; they have the right to strike, if need be, and they earned that under a 

Liberal government. Practically all the labour legislation that has helped the working people of Canada 

for the last 25 or 30 years has been under a Liberal government at Ottawa. And now that the working 

people in Canada have made progress, the Liberal party is going to have to save the working people of 

Canada from destruction by their own union leaders. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that some of the socialists and trade union bosses are trying to drag the working 

people 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

106 

of Canada into a socialist political net, but I am sure the working people of Canada are not that easily 

led. I said a moment ago I think the Premier is in for a shock. I believe that he is, because you know 

Canadians are pretty easily led people, but they are pretty hard to push. 

 

Then the New Democratic Party leader tries to sell the socialist philosophy of production for use and not 

for profit for working people of this country. He is going to be in for a surprise on that account, too. 

Working people are the same as farmers or storekeepers, or professional people or anybody else. They 

want a profit on their day‘s work, and I don‘t think the Premier of this province, or any socialist 

politician is going to convince workers that they should work just for use any more than they can 

convince business men or farmers or professional people, that they should work just for the use of 

working. Whatever they over what they can use, they should give to the planners. I think, Mr. Speaker, 

the Premier, even though he was delegated to lead this new party, is going to have a pretty hard time 

selling the working people of this country on this kind of philosophy. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Let me worry about that — no sense of you worrying about it. 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — We have heard some CCF speakers for years talking about this philosophy; they 

have talked about production for use and not for profit; price control and all the rest. But your 

philosophy contains more than price control. When you go to speak to the working people of this 

country in Hamilton, Windsor, or Montreal or Toronto, you don‘t suggest you have to have price control 

or profit control, or wage control, production control and every other kind of control you can think of. 

That is your philosophy. I don‘t think, as I said a moment ago, that you‘re going to be able to sell that 

philosophy to the working people of this country any more than you can sell it to the farmer. You found 

out that after you had been in office here for 17 or 18 years that you weren‘t getting very much past the 

border of Saskatchewan, so you are trying to enlarge your field — so I have heard several members on 

the other side of this House say. Because of the fact that your party has a new leader, and a new name, it 

doesn‘t necessarily say that the philosophies of this party have changed. As far as I am concerned their 

philosophies are as old as the hills; they date back to the time of Karl Marx. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

107 

I heard mention made the other day — I believe it was the member from Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst) — he 

got hold of a little piece of paper that was handed around at the Yorkton federal nominating convention 

several weeks ago, and was reading off a lot of things about Farmer John. Of course, the point he was 

trying to make was that Farmer John was rejected by the Liberals of the Yorkton constituency. They 

wouldn‘t nominate a farmer. Well, I should inform my friend, the member from Wadena, that there was 

Farmer John, Farmer Bill and Farmer Lou who got the most votes. There was businessman Pat too, but 

he didn‘t get very far. Anyway we still got a farmer. We picked the youngest farmer because we knew 

he would give you the worst time. 

 

Premier Douglas: — That‘s what we like. 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — I would like to turn now to some of the problems of my own constituency. Our area, 

as you are probably aware, is one of the most densely populated farm areas of this province. We have 

been most fortunate in the past that we have very seldom had a crop failure. This year, unfortunately we 

have had one of the worst crop failures in the history of that part of the province. I would like to remind 

this House, Mr. Speaker, that it is an area where the farms are small; the people on those farms cannot 

stand a crop failure as well as where the farms are larger. Most of these people make just a very meagre 

living, and when a calamity hits such as this year, they are going to feel it more than the people in areas 

where farms are larger. But I‘m not going to blame this government for the drought, although I think I 

could safely blame them for almost anything else. I would like to remind the Premier that the farmers in 

my constituency are still wondering where this ‗more abundant living‘ is going to come from. 

 

There are a good many farmers in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, who are not going to be able to pay 

their power bills. I don‘t see the minister in charge of the power corporation in his seat but I wish he 

were, because I wonder if he is going to cut off their power. Because there have been a few of them who 

have come to me and told me they have been served notice that, if their power bills are not paid 

forthwith, their power is going to be disconnected. I am going to suggest to the minister in charge of the 

power corporation, that we might have a long dark winter ahead of us, and I hate to see those people 

sitting in the dark until next fall, when they can get a crop harvested — if we get a crop. I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that in view of the 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

108 

light of the problem, if the government can borrow enough money to build Cass Beggs a castle down 

town in Regina, they can extend the farmers of Saskatchewan credit until next fall, so that they can pay 

their power bills and not have their power discontinued. 

 

It won‘t be too long, Mr. Speaker, before the hospitalisation tax is going to be coming due, and I am 

going to tell the Minister of Health that there are a good many people in my constituency that are going 

to find it pretty tough to pay the $48 hospitalisation tax. I wonder if this government is considering 

refusing giving these people hospital care, or if they are going to extend their credit until such time as 

they have their $48 to pay their hospital premium. I wonder what steps the government has taken to 

protect the farmer who, through no fault of his own, might be a few years behind in his taxes. With the 

municipal and school taxes as high as they are today, Mr. Speaker, if a man misses a year or two of taxes 

it amounts to quite a bit of money. Some of the people on the other side of the House seem to talk quite 

glibly about taxes not being too high, but during the past few months I have seen five letters, no less, 

informing farmers in my part of the country that if their taxes were not paid within 30 days, the 

municipality is going to apply for their title. I heard the member from Wadena (no — I shouldn‘t accuse 

him of it), but it was one of the members from the other side of the House talking about the Farm 

Security Act. I wonder what kind of an act you are going to pass to keep the municipalities from getting 

title to some of the farmers‘ land if the farmers can‘t pay their taxes this fall. 

 

I said that some of the people on that side of the House have been pretty glib about talking of taxes not 

being too high — or that there wasn‘t anything wrong with the taxes. The Minister of Mineral Resources 

the other day seemed to think it was a big joke. I am going to say that taxes are high, Mr. Speaker, as a 

direct result of policies followed by this government. If they don‘t think the taxes are too high; if they 

don‘t think that local government has had any trouble in this province, just to put it on the record I am 

going to read the answers to some returns which I asked for last winter at the winter sitting of the House. 

One of these was the total combined debenture debt plus capital loans from the provincial government of 

all the school units in the province as of December 31, 1959, and the figure given was $11,674,202.85. 

The combined total of debenture indebtedness of all the R.M.‘s in the province as at December 31, for 

each year from 1959-59 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

109 

inclusive — for the first year, 1950 was $74,824; 1959, $255,317 — or just tripled to what it was nine 

years before. On December 31, 1959 the cities in this province owed $82,713.846 — the towns owed 

$11,644,535.00. 

 

I also asked for a return showing the capital loan and debenture indebtedness of all the school units 

around Yorkton for each year from the time these units were formed, up until December 31, 1959. I am 

just going to read the first and last figures for each five-school units, to give the Minister of Education, 

the Provincial Treasurer, and some of the others who might not be concerned, an idea as to whether or 

not local government is having its worries. In the Canora school unit in 1954 the year after it was 

formed, the total capital loan and debenture indebtedness was $115,964.62; in 1959, five years later, 

$203,307.82. Sturgis School Unit, 1946, $14,590; 1959, $100,657; the Foam Lake-Wynyard school unit, 

1945, $26,561; in 1959, $197,963. The Kamsack School unit in 1947 when it was formed, nil; 1959, 

$103,630. Yorkton school unit, $48,658.86 in 1953; $286,985 in 1959. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know what the figure was for the year before 1953, when the unit was formed in 

Yorkton. We had in Yorkton $12,000 cash assets over all liabilities. In 1959 we only owed $286,985, 

but I got the answer to a question I submitted the other day, and now I see the Yorkton school unit 

instead of owing $286,985, they owe $415,478.44. Surely, Mr. Speaker, members of the government to 

your right are not foolish enough to state that local government in this province is not having trouble, or 

that taxes are not too high in this province. Taxes are high, and the reason school units and 

municipalities are in debt is because they dare not tax the land any higher than it is already taxed, 

because they know the people on the land couldn‘t pay the tax and I think maybe there are some people 

on the other side of this House who don‘t seem to care. 

 

You know, there are people who came to this country or this province many years ago, worked hard on a 

small farm; and in their retiring years have rented that farm and hoped to make a living from rent of their 

farm and their old-age security pension. Those people in a year like this won‘t be able to pay their taxes 

out of a third of the crop if they got nine bushels to the acre. I am renting two half-sections. This year the 

crop yielded 9 or 10 bushels to the acre, and one-third of the crop won‘t pay the taxes on those two half-

sections of land. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

110 

In fact, I would go so far as to say, Mr. Speaker, that on a year like this there would be a good many 

farmers in this province who would be hungry if it were not for legislation passed by the federal Liberal 

government in 1938 to see them through for the next six or eight months, and when I say that I am 

referring to the Prairie Farm Assistance Act. 

 

I remember in a speech made a few years ago by the former Provincial Treasurer, the Hon. C.M. Fines, 

and I believe the new Provincial Treasurer made some such remark this afternoon. Anyway, Mr. Fines 

was telling us how the economy of this province had changed from an agricultural economy when they 

took office to an industrial economy today. I believe the Provincial Treasurer this afternoon suggested 

that the tax base in this province was widened now, because Saskatchewan is industrialized. So, I 

suppose they take it from that when there is a crop failure in Saskatchewan that the province can get 

along quite nicely anyway, because we are a highly industrialized province. That‘s the meaning they are 

trying to convey, Mr. Speaker. I suggest some of the members opposite ask some of the store keepers, 

some of the implement dealers or service station operators, or fuel dealers or anybody else that is in 

business, if they are not feeling the pinch of it. Every one of them will tell you they are. All the talk that 

comes from the other side of this House is not going to fool anybody into believing that Saskatchewan‘s 

economy has changed any appreciable amount from the time this government took office until today. 

 

Before I go on any further, Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment on several things that were said the 

other day by members on the other side of this House. One of the things that was said — of course this 

is old socialist talk, that the Liberals represent the corporations. I have a copy of the speech made by the 

Premier, and I believe he called them the cat‘s paw for the insurance underwriters and mortgage 

companies. Somebody else said they represented the corporations and banks, and mortgage companies, 

and I would just like to make a few comments on these remarks. First of all, maybe some of the people 

in the back rows on the other side of the House don‘t know what corporations are. I think the gentlemen 

in the front row, if they have any business brains, are probably investing money in the corporations. 

Many of them should know that the majority of corporations in this country have a majority of their 

shares held by the middle-income people whom they are supposed to be representing. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

111 

Farmers, workers and professional people and business men that have a little savings invested in these 

corporations — they might not necessarily invest in Canada Packers, or Massey Ferguson, or Ford of 

Canada, but they invest through an investment dealer — you find them in every city of this province, 

because they not only help to develop this province but by investing their money, if they have $500 a 

year to invest, they will get a higher rate of interest on it than if they put it in the bank, or if they bought 

Canada Savings Bonds. 

 

I think some of the cabinet ministers who must be making enough that they could invest $500 or $1,000 

a year must be investing in corporations. Or if they are not, I would advise them that they should. But 

these people on the other side of this House have been crying about the Liberal party representing the 

corporations. I don‘t know how foolish they can get. Sure; there are corporations that are controlled by 

several rich shareholders, but the majority of corporations in this country have the majority of their 

shares held by small shareholders — farmers and business men, working and professional people, and 

why they always try to suggest to this legislature and all over this province and this country, that we 

were a party that was defending a pack of wolves, is more than I can figure out. But you know what a 

corporation is, and to suggest that we are the big brother of the corporation or friends of the corporation, 

is kind of a ridiculous suggestion to make. 

 

You know, the Liberal party or Liberal governments down through the years, realized that corporations, 

even though they might be controlled by small investors, are better able to pay taxes than individuals, 

and because of that Liberal governments imposed the 50 per cent corporation tax on the corporations. 

But we are supposed to be the good friends of the corporation; we represent the corporations, and as the 

Premier said, we are the cat‘s paw for the mortgage companies and the insurance underwriters. Well, it‘s 

a funny kind of a big brother that would impose a 50 per cent corporation tax. 

 

I suppose that the mortgage companies asked the Liberal government in the past to set up the Debt 

Adjustment Board, to try and take some of their money — they were the big brother of the mortgage 

companies, so the Debt Adjustment Board was set up by the Liberal government to take some of that 

money away from the little brother. I suppose the line elevator companies asked the Liberals to help 

establish the co-operative elevator system in this province — the 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

112 

forerunner to the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. I suppose the mortgage companies asked the Liberal 

government of this country to set up the Farm Loan Board, and reduce interest rates from 8 ½ per cent to 

6 per cent. It seems kind of a queer friend to have if he does things like that. Do you remember back in 

the First World War, any one of you who are older should — when the Conservative government was in 

office and they rescinded the Crows‘ Nest Pass Agreement. I suppose some of the members on the other 

side of this House think that the C.P.R. went to MacKenzie King or Sir Wilfred Laurier to reinstate the 

Crow‘s Nest Pass rates. That would be a very friendly gesture, wouldn‘t it, if it was your good friend 

that you were doing it for. 

 

I suppose the farm implement companies, being friends of the Liberal party asked the Liberal 

government in Ottawa, to take the 27 ½ per cent tariff off farm machinery and cream separators, and 

reduce it to nil. Some of this talk on the other side of the House is absolutely ridiculous. The automobile 

manufacturers, I suppose went and asked the Liberal party to reduce the tariff on automobiles from 42 

per cent to 17 ½ per cent. 

 

Just for the record, Mr. Speaker, I think these are some of the things the members on the other side of 

this House should be thinking about before they get up and spout off this line about the Liberal party 

representing the vested interests — we hear that — the vested interests, the mortgage companies, 

insurance underwriters, banks, the line elevator companies, machine companies and all this talk. Mr. 

Speaker, surely the hon. members on the other side of the House should be bright enough to realize that 

if we represented the corporations whom they claim not to represent, then we didn‘t use the corporations 

too well after some of the things I have stated to you were done by Liberal governments when they were 

in office in this country. 

 

Before I sit down, Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a comment about something that has been said by 

several members on the other side of the House regarding statements made by the hon. member for 

Melville (Mr. Gardiner) the other day. They seem to take exception to him saying anything about the 

Premier, or suggesting anything about the Premier. I know the Premier has been in politics long enough 

that he knows the expression, ―an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth‖, and that if he engages in a little 

mud-slinging he can expect to get back a little of the mud that he throws. Some of the members of the 

government have forgotten how their leader and others on your right, during the past 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

113 

17 years have tried to defame leaders on this side of the House. They have done this continuously, and 

they are still doing it. 

 

I have some quotations here made by the Premier. I‘m not going to read them all, but I am going to read 

one or two. They think that it was an insult to say what the member for Melville said about the Premier. 

I wonder what they would think about what the Premier said about the former member from Redberry 

(Mr. Korchinski) who used to sit on this side of the House, and here are the words of the Premier: 

 

―When I am shooting grizzlies I never want to take a shot at a weasel.‖ 

 

Well, now, if he thought the member from Redberry resembled a weasel I suppose that‘s all right for 

him, but then I don‘t think that members on the other side of the House should take any exception to 

people on this side of the House doing the same thing as he is doing. He has been in politics a long time 

and he should expect it. I have heard him, time after time on public platforms, running provincial Liberal 

leaders down. I remember the time he said to one former leader that if he swallowed him, ―the Premier‖, 

that he would have more brains in his stomach than he has in his head. He told the last provincial leader 

that he wasn‘t dry behind the ears. 

 

I know the Premier has been pretty glib about making remarks about leaders on this side of the House, 

and one of the leaders — a former premier of this province, and federal Minister of Agriculture, seemed 

to me to be his pet, and I have heard him on many occasions at public meetings, try to belittle the former 

Premier of this province and a former Minister of Agriculture. I am going to say this, Mr. Speaker, that 

after the Premier has been in public office, if he should live as long to be in public office as long as the 

Rt. Hon. James G. Gardiner was in office, elected by the people of this province — after he has been in 

office as long as that and can look back and say that he has done as much for the people of this province 

as the former Premier and Minister of Agriculture, then he can be a very proud man. 

 

During the past few days, Mr. Speaker, we have heard quite a few definitions of socialism — or the 

word socialism, and I cannot agree with the definition given by the Minister of Education and several 

other members on the other side of the House. That‘s why I am not sitting over on that side of the 

House. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

114 

Premier Douglas: — That‘s not the only reason. 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — As far as I am concerned, socialism stands for control and stands for regimentation 

and it stands for compulsion; it stands for the muffling of individual thoughts. In every country in the 

world that has a socialist government, although there may be things enacted by those governments that 

might seem progressive, under socialism private initiative is destroyed. Individualism is a forgotten 

thing, initiative is killed and people tend to lean on the government for their existence. 

 

It has been said during this debate, Mr. Speaker, that liberty and freedom are on trial in the world today, 

and I believe that all members in this House will agree that they are on trial today. I for one, am not 

willing to sacrifice a dollar‘s worth of my freedom for the kind of security that we get from a socialist 

government. For that reason, and because this government has no policies, or no hope of having policies 

that will help the rural people of this province, and because during the last 17 years they have done 

nothing, absolutely nothing, to provide work — to create industry, to bring industry into this province 

that would give the native sons and daughters, and the people of this province jobs, I shall not support 

the motion. I will support the amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull (Minister of Co-operatives): — Would the hon. member permit a question? I 

believe the member for Yorkton said that he rented two half-sections of land, and if he had a nine bushel 

quota, the amount that would be due as rent which would be one-third of this, I took it, three bushels 

wouldn‘t pay the taxes. 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — I said a nine-bushel crop. I said one-third of a nine bushel to the acre crop would not 

pay the taxes on those two half-sections of land. 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: — That would be three bushels, right? 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — Three bushels per acre, yes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: — I wonder if the hon. member would give the assessment of this land, and give 

the rate of taxation, because the way I work it out, it would have to be more than 50 mills and it would 

have to be assessed at . . . 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

115 

Mr. Gallagher: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell the hon. member that on one section — this other half I am 

not sure what the taxes are, but on one section the taxes are approximately $820; half of that would be 

$410. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — We do not want too much comment on the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: — Would the member give the assessment of this section? 

 

Mr. Gallagher: —I wouldn‘t be sure, Mr. Speaker, but I can tell him that I know what the assessment 

of the highest quarter is, it is $3,600 and I think the lowest quarter is about $3,100 — I‘m not just sure, 

but I know the highest quarter is $3,600. 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: — Would the member be able to give us the rate of taxation? 

 

Mr. Gallagher: —I can tell you that our school tax has jumped to more than double in the last eight 

years. 

 

Mr. Ed Whelan (Regina City): — Mr. Speaker, as have members on both sides of the House, I am 

very pleased to offer my congratulations to you for having ably represented us at the parliamentary 

conference of the Commonwealth Nations in Great Britain. A photograph of Your Honour, reproduced 

on the front page of the Western Producer of October 5, 1961, (I hold it up in order that the House may 

see it) is a fine advertisement, I think, for the type of democratic associations that are developing 

between representatives within the Commonwealth. The picture tells a story and establishes a bond of 

association in the minds of Saskatchewan residents. I am pleased of course that the Western Producer 

recognized this fact and reproduced the picture on their front page. 

 

The motion, Mr. Speaker, in reply to the Speech from the Throne was moved very ably by my colleague, 

one of the members for Regina city. Her presentation was, in my opinion, courageous and objective. I 

am proud as a fellow member from Regina city that she was chosen to move a motion on the Speech 

from the Throne which proposed the most advanced health legislation ever introduced in a legislature in 

the dominion of Canada. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

116 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — The seconder of the motion was described by my hon. friend the Leader of the 

Opposition, as the genial member from Touchwood. The hon. member for Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) is 

not only a genial member, but as his presentation indicated he is well informed and capable of making a 

clear, logical, objective presentation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in making a contribution to this debate there are three items I should like to cover. First — 

programs that might directly benefit the people of Regina and Saskatchewan. Second — some 

comments on the statements made by my hon. friends opposite. Third — a concise statement of my own 

position regarding the medical care bill. 

 

In speaking of the operation of businesses, government industry and transportation, this has certainly 

increased and helped my constituency. The population of my constituency, according to the last census 

has now reached 110 thousand. Recently, as a Trans-Canada Air Lines plane came in for a landing at the 

Regina terminal, two men who were seated close to me were discussing the city of Regina, and the 

provincial government located here. Needless to say, if I‘m going to repeat it, I was very pleased with 

what I heard. One fellow said that Regina was his favourite western city, and he visited all of them quite 

often. About the legislative buildings he said — ‗I don‘t always agree with these people.‘ Then my ears 

were really standing up. But he said ‗we must admit the people of Saskatchewan have the most 

courageous government in Canada, the people who lead it and handle the departments of government are 

very able and have plenty of courage.‘ Needless to say my wife introduced herself to the gentlemen as 

we left the plane. 

 

Those of us who represent Regina were very pleased to hear the announcement that the university site 

and adjacent areas will be developed as part of a program to celebrate Canada‘s hundredth birthday. 

Aside from providing necessary employment, there could be no more fitting cultural tribute to the 

people of Saskatchewan than a program of this kind. 

 

Something else that comes to my mind each day that I come to the buildings, and it is this. I am sure all 

of you have noticed the condition of Wascana Lake and the fact that (I was going to say puddles) there 

are small 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

117 

pools of water lying on the parched bed of Wascana Lake. I sincerely hope that a dredging program can 

be undertaken, jointly by the city, the province, the federal government, perhaps as a winter works 

project, because of the water shortage and because it would also provide employment. I was pleased to 

learn from the Minister of Education, who was working on the university program that careful 

negotiations are proceeding regarding this project. 

 

The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation left their annual report on our desks. This publicly owned 

corporation has been under fire from some of the federal government members at Ottawa. I remind the 

members of the House, Mr. Speaker, at a cost of $57 million to the Canadian people each year, or 

approximately this amount, the CBC provides many hours of entertainment weekly. Special features 

such as Close-up, News Magazine, national sporting events, all of these valuable programs being offered 

and presented to the people of Canada. The CBC at the $57 million figure costs the Canadian people one 

cent per day per capita. I remind the members of the House, Mr. Speaker, that no other form of 

entertainment comes to Canadians at such a low figure. There is a gap however. There is a gap in the 

CBC television in Canada. The CBC has no T.V. station in the province of Saskatchewan. Recently a 

CBC T.V. station was completed in Edmonton, and there has been a CBC T.V. station in Winnipeg for 

some time. I suggest to this House, Mr. Speaker, that entertainment, education, opportunity for training, 

opportunities for employment for Saskatchewan people could be made available by the establishment of 

a CBC television station in our province. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, a steel plant has been established in our community, due in large 

measures to the assistance of the provincial government. The industry is here, the future development of 

its facilities, making use of iron ore deposits in the province, will guarantee employment . . . the hon. 

Leader of the Opposition says we are ―hostile to business‖, and although the steel plant certainly comes 

under the heading of, and I quote the hon. member again ―responsible enterprise‖ — political criticism, 

particularly by the Leader of the Opposition must annoy investors who put their money into the plant, 

employees who were doing their level best to produce the produce, and citizens of this province who 

understand the need for industry. I am pleased, Mr. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

118 

Speaker, that this industry is located in Regina city. It is here to stay, and I predict that it will operate 

successfully and expand. I wish it well. 

 

I would like to spend a little time, Mr. Speaker, if the House will allow, in answering some of the 

irresponsible comments and criticisms that have been emanating from the members of the benches 

opposite. My friend, the hon. member for Notukeu-Willowbunch, (Mr. Klein) I see he is not in his seat, 

criticized the Premier of this province, quoting the ‗Financial Post‘, and I am sure all of the hon. 

members heard it. It was October 14, 1961, the ‗Financial Post‘ headed up ‗More Eloquence Than 

Sense‘ and on and on he went. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, it was the member for Athabasca, not the member for Notukeu-

Willowbunch. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that it was made because I heard it in detail, and I 

recognized it because I read the ‗Financial Post‘ very carefully. I am a subscriber to the ‗Financial Post‘ 

and I read the ‗Financial Post‘ very carefully because it is a well-organized and well-written paper. I am 

sure that most of the hon. members know that Jack Schreiner who sat in the gallery here last year, who 

was quite an able representative of one of the local papers is now a feature writer of theirs. I recommend 

that you read the ‗Financial Post‘ to keep track of Jack Schreiner, if for no other reason. But this paper is 

the organ of the business world and presents news on behalf of the business organizations. And to use 

the vernacular, when you are reading the ‗Financial Post‘ you discover that the business world ‗lets it 

hair down.‘ Their praise and admiration for us on this side of the House is very limited, and we seldom 

get a line. You may be sure, therefore, that the following quotation regarding the Premier is an 

understatement, and that it would not have been used unless it was well deserved. I suggest to members 

of this House that it comes much closer to describing the Premier in an unprejudiced manner than does 

the criticism quoted by my hon. friend the member from Athabasca (Mr. guy). And I quote: November 

7, 1959. Page 17 ‗Financial Post‘ under the heading ‗Letter from London‘. 

 

―Let us praise a Canadian visitor to England. The Premier of Saskatchewan, the Hon. T.C. Douglas, 

made a splendid impression when he addressed the Canada group of the Conservative Commonwealth 

Council in a committee room in the House of Commons. Without flamboyancy or false 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

119 

modesty he gave a picture of his province which was admirable in its clarity, nor did he try to hide the 

shadows which darken the scene in the great west. It is hard to remember any recent Canadian visitor 

to Westminster who has made so good an impression with so little effort.‖ 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Those of us in the CCF know, and even some of our opponents grudgingly admit that 

Premier T.C. Douglas has the qualifications to be the Prime-Minister of Canada. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — The hon. Leader of the Opposition, my friend the member from Morse, in his opening 

remarks in this debate referred to the scrapping of the dominion-provincial agreements. On page thirty 

of the records of this House for Wednesday, October 11, 1961, he said and I quote: 

 

―One of the major reasons probably why the Prime-Minister and others felt it necessary to scrap these 

agreements was the nagging criticism year after year, from governments like this one that they were 

not getting enough.‖ 

 

First, let me ask the hon. members opposite this. Are they suggesting — is their leader suggesting that 

we should say to the federal government that we are getting enough, and that all the provinces should do 

likewise? Is this their version of how to bargain, how to obtain a better deal for the province? How can 

the hon. members associate this reason with the responsibility of making representations and we have 

made strong representations, and I think that we must continue to do this. I remind the House, Mr. 

Speaker, that we have never hung crepe over the parliament buildings as did Newfoundland. We have 

never gone to the people of this province on this kind of an issue, and on this issue alone, as did the 

Premier of Newfoundland. 

 

I wish to make it very clear, I have no criticism of the Premier of Newfoundland for doing this. No 

criticism whatever. But this may come under the heading of nagging, and I suggest that if Mr. 

Smallwood, the Premier of Newfoundland is going to discharge his responsibilities as an elected 

representative, even though I disagree with him on a good many things, I commend him for making 

representations 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

120 

on behalf of the people of Newfoundland. Let me quote what he said in 1960 at the dominion-provincial 

conference in Ottawa. This is the quotation from the statement made by the Premier of the province of 

Newfoundland, and I quote: 

 

―I do not desire to trouble my fellow Premiers, and the Prime-Minister and his colleagues too much 

with other problems of Newfoundland. I am well aware that every province has its own problems. I 

think, however, that I should remind my fellow Canadians, here today, that Newfoundland still, after 

12 years of union with Canada, has an unstable economy and a very low standard of living. We have 

the lowest per capita income of any Canadian province, lower even than little P.E.I., lower even than 

that, and that is not funny. That is not funny either to Prince Edward Island or to Newfoundland. We 

have the lowest standard of living of any part of the Canadian provinces. We have by far the lowest 

standard of public services in Canada. The earning power of our people is the lowest — by far the 

lowest, while the capacity to pay our people is the lowest in Canada, yet the rate of taxation is the 

highest in Canada. We have the lowest earning power. We have the lowest wealth production. We 

have the lowest standard of personal living, yet we have the highest taxes in Canada, and this is 12 

years after confederation.‖ 

 

Let me ask the hon. Leader of the Opposition this. In my humble estimation the statement made by Mr. 

Smallwood was on a particularly with statements made by some of the other provinces, with this 

information on hand and with this knowledge, does the hon. member for Morse, Mr. Speaker, think Mr. 

Smallwood should have said to the Prime-Minister as follows — something like this: 

 

―If I am really nice and promise not to do any nagging will you promise not to scrap these 

agreements?‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, can you imagine the comedy of such representation? Over and over again from the benches 

opposite, suggestions have been made that the New Democratic Party is connected with Jimmy Hoffa. 

the name of Hoffa has been tossed back and forth across the House, again and again. I am sure the hon. 

members opposite know that the teamster‘s union is not a part of the Canadian Labour Congress. Their 

friends in the press and in the news media have tried again 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

121 

and again to use Jimmy Hoffa as a club to discredit union organization and to discredit all working 

people. Mr. Speaker, on one occasion Mr. Hoffa was quoted favourably by their friends in the press, and 

on that occasion his statement received an excellent location on the front page of the ‗Leader Post‘ 

September 30, 1960. The heading — New Party under Fire. I quote: 

 

―Teamster‘s president Jimmy Hoffa predicted Thursday night that workers will rebel against the 

proposed CCF-labour alliance in Canada. (on and on he goes and he says) 

 

―The alliance backed by the same Canadian Labour Congress that had expelled the teamsters for 

raiding — was never the intention when they elected leaders, Hoffa said.‖ 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I think he‘s right; the workers will rebel. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Yet, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite toss the word Hoffa to us. He agrees with 

their thinking regarding political action. His views coincide with theirs. He is their political pal in this 

instance, and that is why this was on the front page of the local press. 

 

During the Throne Speech debate, the hon. Leader of the Opposition referred to the commitment that the 

government had made, and I quote one of these. I could hardly believe it, and I read it again and here it 

is — something like this: 

 

―As near as I can gather we have committed ourselves on the South Saskatchewan dam, the provinces‘ 

share to roughly $135 million.‖ 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the tone of voice and the manner of delivery and the emphatic presentation, left the 

impression with me (I am going to use this, left the impression) that the hon. member for Morse was 

criticizing the government for making this commitment. Now after advocating the dam for many years, 

and after sending surveyors to the site just prior to each federal election, and we all saw them, and the 

hon. member for Morse made speeches about it in the House of Commons — after using it as election 

bait for years and after telling the people of our province that 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

122 

it would provide a source of feed and fodder and water for the communities and for the farm people of 

Saskatchewan; the hon. Leader of the Opposition now has the audacity to criticize the government for 

this commitment. And at the same time, Mr. Speaker, and in almost the same breath, introduce an 

amendment in this House which asks for a no-confidence vote because we are doing nothing — nothing 

and I quote ―to solve the problems confronting our rural people.‖ Let me say this, if the dam had been 

undertaken when we saw the surveyors on the South Saskatchewan River just prior to the 1949 election, 

and if the then federal Liberal government had entered into an arrangement with the province of 

Saskatchewan that year, I submit that feed, fodder, and water would have been available now, but not in 

five years from now as will be the case when the dam is completed, Mr. Speaker. In summing up this 

expenditure, how can the hon. members criticize this commitment on behalf of feed and fodder and 

water and at the same time insist that the government is doing nothing ―to solve the problems 

confronting our rural people.‖ 

 

The whole transcription isn‘t ready yet, but it is my impression that the hon. member for Qu‘Appelle-

Wolseley in his speech said ‗the only agricultural programs of other government had was a carry over 

from previous agricultural programs of other governments.‘ For some time I worked in a department of 

the government that handled legislation effecting agriculture, and some of the legislation on the statute 

books which we administered had been introduced by the previous administration. The provincial 

Mediation Board Act, Mr. Speaker, and the Moratorium Act. The Moratorium Act, I concede was a 

piece of legislation introduced and passed by a Liberal government. And I contend that it was necessary. 

It was a true expression in legal terms of social machinery to meet an economic situation. This 

legislation was used sparingly, but it was effective when negotiations on behalf of farmers became 

difficult. It was also a thorn in the side of some of the financial interests, and these interests represented 

a small group, and most were fair and reasonable, and representations made by them were 

straightforward and accurate. 

 

But now to return to my point, the Moratorium Act, by its very nature, was bound to be challenged and 

challenged it was, I think in the year 1954, if I am correct, and to the credit of the Court of Appeal in 

Saskatchewan, when it was referred to them, they ruled that the act was valid. However, Mr. Speaker, 

when the act was referred to the Supreme Court of Canada, and our legal representatives 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

123 

appeared in support of the legislation, those challenging its validity also appeared. Who were they? The 

mortgage companies, and their organizations; the banks; and to the everlasting discredit of the Liberal 

party, for they had put this act on the statute books, a legal representative acting under instructions from 

the federal Liberal government at Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. On a split decision the legislation was thrown 

out by the court. 

 

I remind the hon. member for Qu‘Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. McFarlane) that this particular piece of 

legislation was not carried over, and in my opinion, the Liberal government at Ottawa was partly to 

blame that it wasn‘t carried over. This legislation is needed at the present time, and I am thinking now in 

terms of the hon. member for Yorkton‘s speech. It would be most useful right at this particular time — 

most helpful in negotiating extensions and in protecting the farmer from creditors. But it has been 

destroyed, and I submit, Mr. Speaker, going back to the statement that was rolled over and over again in 

his talk, I question now, who would appear in this instance, to be the cat‘s paw for the mortgage 

companies? 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Now the hon. member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) in his speech in this House, 

spoke in a very derogatory manner and I have heard him on other occasions when he spoke in a 

derogatory manner of the services supplied and granted to the commission-operatives by this 

government. On many occasions I have heard him reiterate this charge. Well let me tell him this, Mr. 

Speaker. For many years I have been closely associated with the commission-operative movement. 

Some of the people I know, leaders of the commission-operative movement in other parts of Canada 

have said to me many times that they wish they had a department of commission-operation like 

Saskatchewan, to assist them. A very good friend of mine in Ontario, each time that I see him, says that 

he doesn‘t agree with the CCF, but he thinks that they should have a department of commission-

operation like ours in Ontario. This man is impulsive and I don‘t always agree with his judgment, but he 

is most vocal and insistent on this point. He is on the board of the united commission-operatives of 

Ontario and this man was a Liberal candidate. He‘s been with the commission-operative movement 

since he was 15 years of age, yet he wants a department of commission-operation in his province, like 

they have in the province of Saskatchewan. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

124 

Now the hon. member for Yorkton, (Mr. Gallagher) in his comments read an advertisement in the paper 

and suggested that the hon. lady member for Regina (Mrs. Cooper) agreed with this advertisement that 

was inserted by the Communist party. Well he may say this, and he may also say that Walter Smishek 

doesn‘t represent the working people. He may think too, Mr. Speaker, that this will stop the hon. lady 

member for Regina and Walter Smishek from making courageous representations. Well let me tell you 

this, he is wrong, and the people of Regina and the members of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour 

will not be influenced by such irresponsible statements. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Now the members opposite seem very interested in who is going to be the next Premier 

of Saskatchewan. I am sure all people of Saskatchewan will be following our convention with interest. 

Let me assure the hon. members opposite that since my friend the Leader of the Opposition has said he 

is going to put his leadership on the line when the Liberals hold their convention, we are very, very 

interested in their convention too. You bet we are, we are interested in the convention for a number of 

reasons. 

 

First — someone might run against him, and they might defeat him, and where would we get another 

helpful Liberal leader. And the second reason we are interested, Mr. Speaker, we are anxious to see if 

some of the noises of dissatisfaction emanating from the Liberal ranks will be backed up by active 

opposition. And the third reason we‘re interested is that if they do pick someone else, will he be a 

Liberal this time. It will be interesting to see whether a municipal figure in the north-east or a municipal 

figure in the hub city can be persuaded to lead the revolt that is already brewing behind the scenes. 

 

I should like to place on record now in this House, Mr. Speaker, my complete approval of the medial 

care legislation for the following reasons. First I think it will give universal care to all who need it. 

Second it will help to develop on a provincial basis and later on a national basis a full-fledged 

preventative care program. And I believe it will eventually provide publicly owned research facilities 

that will solve some of the chronic illnesses that we‘re faced with at the present time. And fourth 

because of this legislation, I feel that facilities and finances for training will develop medical personnel 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

125 

until the demand has been met. Fifth, under the legislation I believe that the medical profession will 

have a choice as to the type of compensation they might want. I say in all sincerity, Mr. Speaker, that 

when the social history of Canada is written that this legislature will have the distinction of having led 

the way toward introducing a federal health plan. 

 

In summary I have tried to bring to the attention of the House some suggestions regarding projects 

which would benefit Regina and Saskatchewan. I have tried to express my opinion regarding some of 

the arguments by the opposition, and also to place on the record my approval of the medical care plan. 

 

Now in yesterday‘s ‗Leader Post‘ there is an account of a statement made by the hon. member for 

Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) suggesting that the Minister of Agriculture, and I quote: 

 

―The minister should have asked for wisdom and guidance from above.‖ 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, knowing the minister as a capable and God-fearing man, he would probably be a 

good agent for us, but after the speeches and comments by the members opposite, I am sure, Mr. 

Speaker, the majority of the people in this House will agree that the guidance and advice we‘re getting 

from the members opposite, and particularly from the amendment is a very poor substitute. Mr. Speaker, 

I shall oppose the amendment, and I shall support the motion. 

 

the debate continuing on the motion and amendment, and the question being put on the amendment, it 

was negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 16 

Messieurs 

 

Thatcher McFarlane Horsman 

Batten(Mrs.) Foley Coderre 

McCarthy Guy MacDougall 

McDonald Boldt Snedker 

Danielson Klein Gallagher 

Cameron   

 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

126 

NAYS — 34 

Messieurs 

 

Douglas Brown Meakes 

Dewhurst Thurston Thiessen 

Williams Blakeney Snyder 

McIntosh Erb Stevens 

Brockelbank Nicholson Kluzak 

Lloyd Turnbull Dahlman 

Nollet Stone Michayluk 

Kuziak Whelan Semchuk 

Cooper(Mrs.) Thibault Perkins 

Strum(Mrs.) Berezowsky Peterson 

Davies Johnson Broten 

Willis   

 

Mr. Speaker: — The debate is now on the motion. 

 

Mr. A. H. McDonald (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, at the outset of my remarks I would like to 

congratulate the mover and seconder of the Address in Reply, and although I cannot agree with most of 

the arguments that were advanced by either the mover or the seconder, I do give them full marks for 

effort, and I think they made a worthwhile contribution to this particular debate. The subject that was 

dealt with by the seconder of the motion is not an easy one and it is a subject that I am sure that some 

members, and a good percentage of the public are not too familiar with. I think that the seconder of the 

motion made a good job in outlining the problem that exists, the history of the taxation agreements down 

through the years, and I know I enjoyed his remarks and I am sure all of the people in the country who 

heard him must have enjoyed it as well. 

 

At this time I also want to thank, Mr. Speaker, the government, the members opposite, and of course my 

colleagues for the flowers and cards of greeting that were sent to me while I was a patient in hospital last 

summer. This was an expression that one appreciates under such conditions, and I would like to formally 

and publicly thank both the government and individual members in this House for their kindness on that 

occasion. 

 

I was pleased to learn this evening that my friend the last speaker, was interested in the Liberal 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

127 

convention that is coming up at the end of November. You know, Mr. Speaker, there is one great 

difference between that convention and the convention that will be held on the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd of 

November in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Thatcher has placed his leadership on the line, and I 

think this is a good thing. I think that leaders of political parties should be prepared to do this whenever 

the occasion arises, and I compliment Mr. Thatcher for having made this move. I don‘t know whether 

there will be anyone contest his leadership or not. I doubt it, but I would predict that if anyone does, they 

will be defeated, because I‘m as confident as I‘m standing in this chamber that Mr. Thatcher enjoys the 

confidence, not only of the Liberals in the province of Saskatchewan, but he enjoys the confidence of a 

good many people who are opposed to socialism. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — In the event that someone should decide to challenge his leadership, then they will 

be given every opportunity to gather support, and to express their opinions, and the delegates at that 

convention will choose the leader of the Liberal party. But that will be quite different from the 

convention that is going to be held on the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd. The leader of that political party, who are 

holding their convention on those particular dates has already been chosen. Not by the delegates who are 

going to the convention, but they have been chosen by Claude Joidoin and Walter Smishek. The hand 

has been placed on the shoulders of the successor of the Premier, and the delegates that go to that 

convention, as far as selecting a new leader is concerned, may as well save their expenses and stay 

home. This so-called democratic party are no long a democratic party. They are no longer controlled by 

the delegates of the CCF party or the new party, they are controlled by the labour bosses of 

Saskatchewan, of Canada, and of the United States. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I am rather amused again, how one speaker after the other from the other side of the 

House have stood in their place and criticized the present leader of the Liberal party, as they criticized 

myself, when I led the Liberal party, and as they criticized my predecessor. And when we are going 

about Saskatchewan and other parts of the country doing our duty, as the leader of an opposition group, 

pointing out the 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

128 

weaknesses of the government that sit opposite, pointing out the problems that exist in our province and 

that the government has refused to deal with, then we have been told by members opposite, that why we 

are running down our province, that we would do anything to prevent the industrialization of our 

province, that we would do anything to prevent the growth of the province of Saskatchewan, and to 

prevent Saskatchewan from prosperity, Mr. Speaker, people who say and do these things, in my opinion, 

don‘t deserve to be members of this House. These people are not even honest with themselves. I wonder 

how many of my friends who sit opposition happened to watch a television program last night, in which 

the Premier of this province, the leader of the New Democratic Party in Canada was the speaker. You 

know I think he used some of my notes, only he replaced the word Canada, where I had used the word 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Premier Douglas: — I would never stoop to that. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — This little fellow over here — you couldn‘t stoop to it, because you could get that 

low without stooping. 

 

Premier Douglas: — The only notes you ever had were by Staines. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — . . . that he and his colleagues had used, in regard to myself, present and past leaders 

and other members of the Liberal party. This is exactly what he was doing last night. Canada is a terrible 

place according to the new leader of the democratic party. I don‘t know why you and I stay here, Mr. 

Speaker. You know there are no walls in Canada, preventing you and I, or anyone else from emigrating 

from this country, and if the people of Canada take to heart what my hon. friend said last night, there 

will be as many people leaving Canada as there are leaving East Germany. But I don‘t think people are 

going to be fooled by his arguments. But, Mr. Speaker, this is the tool of any party that is in opposition. 

If we, an opposition, were to give the credit to governments that the backbenchers give to that 

government, there would be absolutely nothing done. This government only moves as fast as the 

opposition has forced them to move over the years. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Of course there are some ministers in this government that even refuse to move no 

matter how much criticism and opposition 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

129 

faces them. And of course the Minister of Agriculture is a typical example in this particular category. 

 

I want to refer to some of the remarks that have been made by speakers opposite during this debate. And 

this is going to take some time, because there is a lot of misquotations, a lot of expressions that were 

used, and many stories have been told that are not according to the facts, and there are some 

misconceptions and misunderstandings, knowingly or other wise. I can start with the address of the 

Premier. 

 

He started out and he was going to give the Liberal party and the Liberal opposition some kindly advice. 

Well no doubt the Premier has been consulted over the years by many people who were seeking advice, 

and I have reason to believe that some of that advice has been good advice, but the Liberal party and the 

Liberal opposition do not need any advice from the Premier, kindly or otherwise. He has taken on new 

responsibilities, and I think that the sooner he devotes his full time and energy to those responsibilities 

the better it will be for both his party and for mine. I know that there are, not only Liberals that are 

condemning the Premier for not taking over the responsibilities of the leadership of the new party, I 

notice that even some of his party who now sit in the House of Commons are complaining because the 

Premier is not there to give them leadership. And they are saying that they have to read the morning 

papers to find out what the leader of the new party‘s stand is on many issues. It is a funny thing to me, 

Mr. Speaker, that this new party, after this glorious convention that we‘ve heard so much about, surely 

they adopted some program for the guidance of the members we now have in the House of Commons, 

but apparently not. Apparently their program is made and announced once in a while by the Premier, 

when he is not busy looking after the affairs of Saskatchewan, apparently he gives some direction to 

what he hopes some day will be his colleagues in the House of commons. 

 

The second point that the Premier mentioned during his remarks was that in this new medical plan that 

we are now discussing, that the cost of this plan would not be new costs, but it would be a different 

distribution of old costs. Mr. Speaker, I cannot agree with that statement. When you first hear the 

statement you are inclined to agree with it, but after you give some though to it, I don‘t think it is in 

accordance with the actual facts. Today as you know, and I know, the costs of the medical bills are paid 

by people who are ill, or by some insuring company 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

130 

that they hold insurance with. The Premier has indicated to this House and to the people of 

Saskatchewan that under this proposal that is now being made to the House, that all of the people are 

going to share the costs of those people who are ill. The Minister of Education went further. He said that 

he is going to play Robin Hood — that he is going to take from the rich and give it to the poor. Well 

now, unfortunately or otherwise, conditions in Saskatchewan and in Canada are not the same today as 

they were in the days of Robin Hood and Sherwood Forest. I have no doubt that when Robin Hood took 

the purse of the wealthy and distributed it among the poor, that was the end of the need. But that is not 

the case today, Mr. Speaker, and for this government or any other government to say that they can level 

taxes according to the ability to pay, is a false argument, for the following reasons. 

 

Most of those people who have high incomes are people that derive their incomes in such a manner that 

if their taxes are increased so that part of their income is taken away from them, they can adjust their 

income and recoup their losses. But most of the people in the lower income brackets are not in this 

position. Now there is only one taxpayer in Saskatchewan or in Canada and that is the consumer. Those 

people with little or no income, those people with medium incomes — the great bulk of them today are 

spending all of their incomes to maintain themselves. Those people with high incomes, in many 

instances, spend ten, fifteen or twenty per cent of their income to take care of their day-to-day living 

costs. What has promoted living costs to the position that we now find them? The highest in the history 

of this nation. Taxation, Mr. Speaker, is what has placed it there. That is what has increased the cost of 

living — it is the multiplicity of taxes that are imposed on our taxpayers by municipal, provincial, and 

federal governments. This idea that my friends across the way have of playing Robin Hood is neither 

practical nor feasible, and the people who are going to pay for this health plan are the consumers of 

Canada, or the consumers of the province of Saskatchewan, and of course those people with low 

incomes will be paying taxes on all of their income, those people with high incomes will be paying a 

consumer tax on maybe ten or fifteen per cent. These people may think that they can bring this about — 

they cannot. I know that they believe that this is not possible but they hope to convince the majority of 

people who are in the low income brackets, which is the majority of people in our province and in our 

country, that they are going to receive something that the wealthy are paying for. This is neither 

practical nor feasible. The people who will be paying the majority of this shot, irrespective 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

131 

of what type of new taxes are imposed to pay for the plan are the medium and low-income bracket 

people. 

 

I was also a little surprised at another statement the Premier made, when he was referring to a document 

that came into the hands of the Leader of the Opposition outlining what certain tax increases, the amount 

of revenue it would produce to the province of Saskatchewan. The Premier said that there was only one 

place that this could come from . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — I said there were two places. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Two places, I beg your pardon, then he said that the receiver of stolen property was 

just as guilty as the person who stole it. Well, Mr. Speaker, if the information that I have is correct, and I 

have every reason to believe that it is, then the Premier was the receiver of certain stolen property before 

the members of the medical health commission were appointed and the staff that was made available to 

them. I think he should think this one over before charges are made. 

 

Reference has been made to means tests. This government, and it has been pointed out by previous 

speakers, have a record that is equalled by no other government in Canada with regard to the imposition 

of a means test. This government and the members who sit opposite time and time again have been 

asked, either to amend the regulations imposed under that means test, or to do away with the means test 

in its entirety. Without exception they have stood in their places and voted against it. The way they 

voted against extending help to the farmers here this evening. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Another remark of the Premier was that health is too important to be left to the 

average individual‘s financial position as to whether he can afford it or not. When did he arrive at this 

momentous decision? Has this happened in the last year? This has always been the case, Mr. Speaker, as 

far as I know. The Premier and his government have been here for eighteen years, but when he decides 

to leave the province, then he recognizes this fact, and now he wants something done about it, in a short 

space of a few months. I am one of those who believe that the providing of complete medical services 

for our people, under an insurance plan, is a wise and a proper thing for governments to do. This 

government has enjoyed the pleasure of office for eighteen years, and 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

132 

could have implemented this plan any time during the regular session of the legislature in those eighteen 

years. Why have they not proceeded with it? Why is it so important at the moment? Why did this happen 

all at once? I think everyone knows the answer, Mr. Speaker. The Premier wanted a red herring in the 

last election. He wouldn‘t dare go to the people with the record of he and his government as an issue, so 

he wanted to cloud the issue, he wanted to get a whipping board, confuse the electorate — and hold the 

election on an issue that should not have been an issue in that election. It should have been implemented 

by he and his government many, many years ago. 

 

The Premier went on during his remarks, and he wanted to know what group the Liberals supported. 

Liberals don‘t support any group. The Liberals of this country down through history have made their 

services available to people from every walk of life. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — From the top to the bottom, and the day that they change their attitude, I for one will 

no longer be a Liberal. 

 

Premier Douglas: — . . . Go back to the Tories. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Well I might even do that. You know you and I both were Tories. 

 

Premier Douglas: — No, I never was a Tory. That is one thing I haven‘t got on my conscience. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — The only thing is I came right from the Tory party into the Liberal party, and I have 

no apologies to make. I am just as convinced today, more convinced, than I was the day I made the 

move, that I made the right move. I didn‘t shilly-shally around with two or three other parties in 

between. I didn‘t go and ask for or seek the nomination of two or three parties at once. When I made the 

decision I told the then leader of the Liberal party that I was going to run as a Liberal. He said, ‗you 

shouldn‘t do it you‘ll get trimmed‘ and I said ‗Well I don‘t think I will but I‘ll take a chance.‘ But I am 

glad I made that move and I‘m glad that I belong to a party that is not a class party. I‘m glad that I 

belong to a party that is not dictated to by any one pressure group in Canada. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

133 

Mr. McDonald: — The very foundation of the Liberal party, down through history has been broad 

enough to attract people from every walk of life and from every income group. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — The idea of being the mouthpiece of the vested interests, sometimes when I look at 

my pocketbook I think it might be a good idea. The Liberal party has no more interest in the vested 

interests than my friends who sit opposite. The Liberal party, to my knowledge, never made a loan of 

$16 million to some vested interest, some personal friend in Texas. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — Three hundred and eighty million. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Some promoter. It‘s never been done in the history of the Liberal party. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Did you never hear about the pipeline? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Certainly I heard about the pipe line, and my hon. friends can sit there are grin, but 

if we had a government and ministers in a government in Canada today, who had the courage to put into 

effect policies and programs and projects that would put the people of the nation back to work, then they 

would be worthy of the support of the people of Canada. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — If it had not been for the good business sense and the stout heart of men like C.D. 

Howe, this country would have found itself in the doldrums in which we now find ourselves, a very few 

short years after the close of the last world war. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — It is in the doldrums nevertheless. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — . . . but because we had people who were prepared to do what was right for Canada 

irrespective of what the politicians wanted 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

134 

to do, that is the only reason that Canada prospered, produced full employment, produced a good 

standard of living for people in every walk of life in Canada, and I‘m proud that I had the opportunity of 

associating with people of that type. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Then Mr. Thatcher was criticized for having made a trip to Europe. Well Mr. 

Thatcher discussed this with myself and I am sure many of his colleagues, before he ever went to 

Europe, and he said ‗you know what this outfit are going to say — look at Thatcher, becomes the leader 

of the Liberal party and all of a sudden he‘s over in Europe.‘ In my opinion Mr. Thatcher had a 

responsibility and a duty to perform. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Please refer to the hon. member as ―hon. member.‖ 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I‘m sorry, Mr. Speaker, but I get carried away when I am speaking about a personal 

friend. The Leader of the Opposition had a duty, and I told him so, to go to Europe. He explained part of 

his reasons for that trip, and I think ably and well. The advancement of many countries in Europe, since 

the last world war has astounded people who know anything throughout the world. There must be 

reasons for that. Governments must have played an active part in the promotion and rebuilding of the 

nations that were so devastated. Industry has grown quicker in Europe during the last twenty years, than 

it had ever grown in any part of the world in history today. I repeat, there must be reasons for it. We 

would like to see the same growth in Saskatchewan, so I think the Leader of the Opposition was well-

advised to go to Europe, or any place else, where he might be able to acquaint himself with the moves 

that were being made by businesses and s in order to promote the activity and the growth and the 

welfare that is being provided in these nations a few short years after they had been devastated by war. 

 

There is a great difference between the Leader of the Opposition going to Europe and paying his own 

expenses, than my friends who sit opposite who go to Europe repeatedly at the expense of the taxpayers. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Some of them went over there and even went to school to equip 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

135 

themselves for their retirement from public life at the expense of the taxpayers, not at the expense of 

themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that not only the Leader of the Opposition and cabinet ministers and some 

individuals, private members should make an effort to travel more. I think travel is a wonderful thing to 

broaden one‘s mind. The people who are dealing with public matters should acquaint themselves with 

what is going on, not only in the country to the south of us our neighbour the United States, but the 

things that are happening throughout the world, and making a better place in which to live. It is very 

difficult to learn much of what goes on in Britain, France or Germany while we‘re sitting here in 

Saskatchewan, and I would encourage every member of this legislature to take every opportunity to 

travel in Saskatchewan yes, in Canada, in America, and in as many countries of the world as they can 

afford to. This is good for the individual and I think it is good for Saskatchewan. 

 

The Premier again said that the Liberal party should get off the fence in regard to medical care. The 

Liberal party, Mr. Speaker, have been off the fence since prior to the last election as far as medical care 

is concerned and the program in Saskatchewan. The Liberal party was the first party to announce a 

medical care program in Saskatchewan prior to the last provincial election. We are on record as to where 

we stand. Mr. Speaker, I want to be fair and go further than that. I do not honestly believe that there are 

very many people in Saskatchewan of any political faith, who are opposed to prepaid medical insurance. 

I think most people in our province, be they Conservatives, Liberals, CCF, or Social Credit or 

Communist who are opposed to prepaid medical insurance. I think this is true. But having said that, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to say this, that there is a great divergence of opinion in the type of medical insurance 

that would be best suited to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. I recall that during the last 

election campaign, when the Premier was outlining his party‘s principles that he expounded and here 

they are. First — it should be the prepayment principle. In other words you pay the premium in advance, 

insure yourself; that it should have universal coverage; that it should provide a high quality of service; 

that it should be administered by the Department of Public Health; but most important of all, that it 

should be acceptable to both those providing and those receiving the service. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Plebiscite . . . 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

136 

Mr. McDonald: — No, I don‘t think the Premier mentioned that. But he did say that it should be 

acceptable to both those providing and receiving the service. Now, Mr. Speaker, we find ourselves in a 

peculiar position, when headlines like this appear in the daily press: ―Doctors say No.‖ I don‘t think this 

ever needed to happen and I do not believe that a successful plan can be brought into operation unless 

the fifth point, as expressed by the Premier during the last election, is in existence when a plan is 

brought into being. I want to repeat that I do not believe that it was ever necessary for the doctor 

animosity that apparently exists now. 

 

I want to go back a few years, Mr. Speaker, not to the last election, but to the election preceding that, to 

the election of 1956, and to the regular session of this House of 1955. The Liberal opposition at that time 

made a proposal to this government and I made the proposal myself, that what was needed in the 

province of Saskatchewan at that time was a provincial local government conference to discuss this 

issue, along with all of the other issues that confronted Saskatchewan at that time, and I say today that 

they are still with us. No such conference to my knowledge was ever held. After the 1956 election some 

representatives of local government and a lot of other people were invited into this chamber (well I don‘t 

know what you‘d call it, the word that I would use would be un-parliamentary) — the members of the 

legislature were invited as guests to sit behind the rail and say nothing. This, Mr. Speaker, was supposed 

to be in the minds of the gentlemen that sit opposite, a provincial local government conference. The only 

thing that emanated out of these discussions has been the suggestion that we should scrap all local 

government and bring in a county or modified county. Mr. Speaker, this is one of the issues that should 

have been discussed. Medical services; the school question; the question of financing hospitals; the 

question of building more mental hospitals; more geriatric centres — there is a thousand and one 

questions that should have been discussed and dealt with and policies brought into being and into effect 

by this date. 

 

This government was not prepared in 1955 or 1956 to take local government into their conference, and 

they are not prepared to do it today. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

137 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I am as convinced as I‘m standing here that if this government had 

taken local government into their conferences, made a decision as to what type of taxes were going to be 

allowed to rise; divided those tax revenue with local governments, that we could have had a prepaid 

medical care plan in effect today, with the complete and wholehearted commission-operation of the 

medical profession. I oppose the position that we now find ourselves in. I don‘t know how you can 

provide a medical care plan if the doctors are opposed to you. It would be like trying to keep law and 

order and fight the police force at the same time. 

 

Surely we are not in such a rush that these differences cannot be worked out, so that we can go forward 

with the backing of the general public, and the backing of the medical profession, hospital boards, 

nurses and all of those people associated with medical care, so that we can provide a service for our 

people that the people are going to welcome with open arms, and that those people who have to provide 

the service are going to be willing and prepared indeed to get going with the job. This is not the case. 

 

I am disturbed because the government has not seen fit to wait for the final report of the Thompson 

commission before proceeding with this plan. There is more to providing medical care for our people 

than just, as the Premier says, the only difference will be is that now the government will pay for your 

medical care instead of you paying. Medical care goes much further than that. What about our mental 

hospitals? Are we going to take $20 million or whatever is necessary to provide medical services and 

disregard the mentally ill? When these people were left out, under certain payments that were paid by 

the federal government of Canada to the province of Saskatchewan, you will recall the holler that came 

forth and emanated from the people who sit opposite. But now they are guilty of the exact same practice. 

They are saying to the mentally ill, ‗Oh well you‘ve got some other kind of illness, you don‘t come 

under this plan.‘ 

 

What about the aged, the crippled and the maimed? Do you know, Mr. Speaker, that of the last dozen 

cases that were brought to my attention, and my help was solicited to have these people placed in 

geriatric homes throughout the province, twelve of them out of twelve died before they ever got into a 

geriatric centre. Are we going to say to these people, ―Well you don‘t come under this plan.‖ 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

138 

Mr. Speaker, all of the problems should be included in any medical care plan that is worth its salt to the 

people of Saskatchewan or any place else. These people are ill. There are not adequate facilities in 

Saskatchewan to take care of them. I think they are just as important as the patients that are ill because 

of other causes. One could go on and include many, many groups and many, many health problems that 

are being excluded under this proposed plan because of the rush to get it through. I repeat, you‘ve been 

here eighteen years, why didn‘t you do something? Now you have to do it in a few short weeks to 

release the Premier onto the poor and the innocent of Canada. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Well, after waiting eighteen years on this government, Mr. Speaker, I don‘t think it 

would hurt us to wait another few weeks until the final report of the Thompson commission is made 

available. Not made available to the proposed commission that is supposed to administer this plan, but 

made available to the members of this House. This is where that report should be made available, and I 

think in all sincerity, it should be made available to us even before it is made available to the Toronto 

Star, even if the Toronto Star is the mouthpiece of the new party. I don‘t think they should come ahead 

of the members of this legislature. 

 

I want to refer to some of the other statements that have been made by the members opposite. You know 

I was rather amused when the member for Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst) was making his contribution, and he 

talked about many things, most of them he didn‘t know anything about, but one of them was a pulp mill, 

and I never thought for one moment that anyone on the other side of the House would ever mention the 

word. You know we‘ve had a lot of discussions about pulp mills, ever since I became interested in 

politics. We‘ve been promised enough mills by the other side of the House . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — . . . switch from potash to pulp mills. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — . . . that if they were all built, Mr. Speaker, there would be no unemployment in 

Saskatchewan. We would be importing labour from Europe and all over the world just to cut pulp for us. 

When I led the Liberal party I used to have a lot to say about pulp, because a lot of these promises were 

made when I 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

139 

happened to hold that position, and the one promise was made on the eve of the 1956 election. Oh this 

was a grand announcement. You recall it, Mr. Speaker. Why the headlines, instead of having just one 

big headline like this, there were three or four lines, pictures of the Premier and the then Provincial 

Treasurer, and their colleagues Campbell from Vancouver sitting in the office signing the document. I 

happened to be in Wilkie with my friend the member from Wilkie, making a speech, and either he made 

a good one or I did because he is back, but one of the things that I said at that meeting, I challenged the 

Premier to make this document which he had signed with Mr. Campbell public, and I said if the Premier 

refuses to do that I will be my last five-cent piece that we don‘t get a pulp mill. Do you know what the 

Premier said. I will read it: he was making a speech at Kenaston. You know he used to flit around the 

province quite a bit in those days, but now he‘s on wagon wheels, but in this speech at Kenaston here is 

what the Premier said and I quote: 

 

―Liberal leader A.H. McDonald came out with a petulant request for the government to make public 

the agreement made with the company which is to build the pulp mill at Prince Albert. The Liberal 

leader had stated at Unity, Friday night that if the agreement were not made public before the election 

I‘ll bet my last dime that the mill will never be built. Did you ever hear a more childish outburst?‖ 

 

Childish outburst said the Premier, speaking to the poor innocent people at Kenaston. A more childish 

outburst. We have had seventeen childish outbursts with the Premier and his colleagues with regard to a 

pulp mill, and we‘re further away today from getting a pulp mill than we‘ve ever been. Our 

neighbouring provinces are building pulp mills. There was an announcement here two or three days ago 

of another mill being built in Alberta. But just to hear a pulp mill, I have said it before and I‘ll say it 

again, that a pulp mill will never be built in the province of Saskatchewan as long as that man is the 

Minister of Natural Resources. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Premier Douglas: — Same thing about potash and oil. 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

140 

Mr. McDonald: — Then my friend went on and talked about the cement plant in Regina, the member 

for Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst), and you know I wouldn‘t think that they would ever mention the cement 

plant in Regina. You know the history of the cement plant, Mr. Speaker. It was started here initially by 

those people that are now promoting the steel mill, Mr. Sharpe. I imagine that the Provincial Treasurer 

and the people that sit opposite can read a balance sheet, and maybe I am giving them a little more credit 

than I ought to, but I would think that anyway they could look down to the bottom and find out how 

much profit came from the cement plant on their Canadian operations. If they haven‘t looked at it I 

would suggest that they do, because out of those total profits, $340 thousand of them were made at this 

cement plant out on the outskirts of Regina at the expense of every user of cement in this province. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, this is the only cement plant that I know of that has no factory door 

price. Do you know that the cost of a barrel of cement to the consumer in the city of Regina is higher 

than any place else on the North American continent. You will recall when Mr. Fines was trying to 

soften up the opposition and to get us in a frame of mind where we were prepared to loan some money 

to this business, why he said, ―This is going to be a wonderful thing for Regina and Saskatchewan.‖ The 

Provincial Treasurer said this was going to employ so many people; it‘s going to bring down the cost of 

housing; and by the time he finished I was even convinced. But this hasn‘t been the case. A bag of 

cement costs more in Regina today than when the minister made his speech. The only effect he had was 

he upped the price of cement. Do you know, Mr. Speaker, the price of cement here today is the 

Winnipeg price, or the Alberta price or the Edmonton price plus the freight? Some of our contractors 

have even got more sense than the people who sit opposite. They wouldn‘t put up with this and they‘re 

bringing cement into Regina from the city of Winnipeg. This is a fantastic arrangement. I wish the 

Minister of Agriculture were here, because he is doing the same thing today. Now we have Canada 

cement trucks drawing cement from Winnipeg to Regina and Saskatchewan cement trucks drawing 

cement from Regina to Winnipeg. 

 

Premier Douglas: — This is the free enterprise you like, isn‘t it? 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

141 

Mr. McDonald: — This is this planned economy. And you know, the Minister of Agriculture . . . 

 

Premier Douglas: — You‘re really mixed up now. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — . . . for the amount of money that he has spent in freight assistance on moving feed. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if I were responsible for what is going on in Saskatchewan today in this regard, I‘d 

crawl in an ink well and pull down the lid rather . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — You could make it to. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — This Minister of Agriculture has implemented a program that pays the freight for 

truckers to move Alberta hay down to Moosomin and Manitoba hay out to Swift Current. You see loads 

of hay going west — zoom, zoom, zoom — Manitoba hay. When they‘ve gone by then there are loads 

going east — zoom, zoom, zoom — Alberta hay. The minister says if you get it within 25 miles of home 

we won‘t pay anything, but if you go to the Yukon after it we‘ll pay the freight. The only attributes this 

man apparently has is that he can talk to Alvin Hamilton. He said ‗I told Alvin.‘ 

 

Premier Douglas: — Alvin must have told you too. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — The only deals that were ever made were deals between Alvin and you. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let‘s go on to some of the other speeches from the other side of the House. Well 

there‘s a lot of them here, and I suppose most of them are not worthy of even answering. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh we‘ve had so much why not a little more. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Well if you want some more we‘ll give it to you. You know the member for 

Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst) when he built up to his remarks about medical care, he said you know there is 

certain groundwork that has to be laid. They couldn‘t bring in medical care until some other things had 

been taken care of. Hospital beds and other things had to be provided. Mr. Speaker, there is a lack of 

hospital beds in most of the communities that I know anything about in Saskatchewan 



 

October 19, 1961 

 

 

142 

today. In my hometown of Moosomin we have a lack of hospital beds. If they could hang sick people 

up, they would have them hanging on pegs in there, because there are no beds to put them in. 

 

Premier Douglas: — There are a lot more beds than there were a few years ago. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — When I was a patient in the hospital here in the city of Regina; a lack of beds there. 

We have money to bring in new plans but we cannot operate the ones that are already in existence. 

Hospital boards throughout the province have a deficit and nobody to pay for it. Why didn‘t the member 

for Wadena see that these problems were taken care of before we advanced. I was going to refer to free 

cancer and mental treatment, but after the speech of my colleague the member for Arm River (Mr. 

Danielson) surely to goodness the government and some of those people who sit opposite now have it 

through their heads that we provided the free cancer treatment in Saskatchewan. I consider it an honour 

to represent the constituency now that was represented by the individual who brought free cancer 

treatment to Saskatchewan, the late Dr. Munroe. I give credit to Dr. Munroe and to the Anderson 

government for the foresight that they had in bringing this service to our province. 

 

Let us give credit where credit was due. Dr. Munroe was a Conservative and a good one, a personal 

friend of my family, an excellent family physician, an excellent Minister of Public Health, and I think he 

was a credit to the province of Saskatchewan and to the people of this province. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — The next item on these scraps of paper, Mr. Speaker, is entitled ―Brock‖ and I think 

that should give me leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o‘clock p.m. 

 


