




















































Hansard: November 17, 1961


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

18th Day 

 

Friday, November 17th, 1961 

 

The House met at 10:00 o‟clock a.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

Mr. Douglas T. McFarlane (Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley):  Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are 

called, I believe there is a great deal of confusion in the minds of some of the people in the province 

today pertaining to a question I asked the other day of the Minister of Agriculture. May be some of the 

people in the province haven‟t it straightened out as to whether the government intends to extend the 

deadline beyond November for the assistance in the movement of fodder for livestock. Now I think 

some think that the answer you gave was December 1, was that right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  I made my reply very clear, I think. The date is extended to January 31st. 

 

QUESTION RE: RETURN NO. 12 

 

Mr. D. Boldt (Rosthern):  Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I would like to ask the Premier 

— on October 16 I moved for a return No. 12. Would it be possible that this information could be made 

available to us latter on in the day. 

 

Premier Lloyd:  It is a return, Mr. Speaker, which called for certain information in regard to the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation. The information is not available as yet. I think it is because of the 

rather lengthy nature of it. It is unlikely it would be made available by this time. We will check and if it 

is possible to obtain it we will do so. 

 

The Assembly then resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. McFarlane: 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

2 

“That this Assembly deplores the failure of the Government to establish and maintain adequate fodder 

reserve banks for the feeding of cattle and recommends to the consideration of this Government that 

immediate provision be made for establishing and maintaining fodder reserve banks in this Province.” 

 

And the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Thurston: 

 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 

 

“commends the Provincial Government for its prompt and effective emergency program in meeting 

the severe drought situation and its long term policies directed towards solving chronic fodder 

shortages in Saskatchewan.” 

 

Mr. Frank Meakes (Touchwood): Mr. Speaker, in the dying hours of this legislature, I realize that a 

lot of members on both sides of the House are keeping their fingers crossed hoping that I don‟t speak too 

long. I will not make a promise that I will not go over three hours. I am sure that the hon. member for 

Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. McFarlane) will appreciate that. 

 

Mr. McFarlane:  I don‟t think he can speak for three hours. 

 

Mr. Meakes:  Just what did this motion say and how do we judge the truth or the falseness of a 

statement other than by comparison. Has this government been negligent in assisting the farmers of this 

province in a time of drought — those farmers who needed feed and fodder for their cattle? I couldn‟t 

help but think about other days when we had drought in this province. I go back to the year 1937 and 

that year was the only year, in our area, that we really suffered from drought. I go back to those days, in 

which at that time my father was a municipal secretary, and I was a young man living with him on the 

farm, but at the same time driving a livery. It used to be my job many times, to drive people who were 

sent out from the government who were supposed to help and assist the people of that area at that time. I 

remember, Mr. Speaker, the political heelers I drove at that time, because that is all they were. I stand 

here without fear of contradiction because as I say I rode with them and I heard their conversation and I 

heard their comments after. 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

3 

In another debate, at one time or other in this House the hon. member for Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) 

talked about if you were a Liberal you got a certain type of treatment and if you weren‟t you got another. 

I can say that that is what happened in those days. I can remember that at that time we had quite a large 

herd of cattle and we were forced to reduce that herd. There was nothing done to try and save that herd 

— in fact we came down from a herd of over 50 head to 8 cows, and at that time the prices became so 

low that you pretty near had to tie a $10 bill onto the end of the cow to pay for its freight to Winnipeg. 

 

I remember my dad shipping 5 head of cattle that weighed 42 hundred and some pounds. The cheque 

was for $47 and some cents, after the fright was taken off. Yes, and I remember in that same year 

driving through southern Saskatchewan through an area of the province that my colleague from 

Bengough remembers, and I remember seeing the terrific state of affairs of those people at that time. 

Through those same years I remember the wagons with tents covering the wagons — a cow tied behind 

. . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher:  On a point of order. All this is very interesting but what has it got to do with 

establishing a fodder reserve for this year. It is very interesting I am sure, but let‟s get down to the point. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  I believe that it is the hon. member‟s intention to make a comparison with the type of 

program which is spoken of in the amendment compared to what has been done before. 

 

Mr. Meakes:  Mr. Speaker, I believe I have the right to speak on both the motion and the amendment, 

have I not. I assured my hon. friend the Leader of the Opposition that I wouldn‟t go on too long — that I 

wouldn‟t go over three hours. If he will just be patient for a moment or two, I won‟t burden him too 

long. 

 

Mr. Thatcher:  We should have stayed in committee. 

 

Mr. Meakes:  I want to say this, that this is the only way that you can compare what was done this 

year — whether this was a job done this year or whether it was a good job — this is the only way of 

making decisions by comparison. I suggest that this government this year did something about seeing 

that the cattle did not 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

4 

leave the farms. Seeing that there was a fodder bank — fodder banks in the proper place, Mr. Speaker. I 

don‟t think that the proper place for a fodder bank — down in an airport at Weyburn, or at some place 

over at Mossbank or at Last Mountain — a place for a fodder bank is in the feed lot and the feed yard of 

the farmer who has the livestock. 

 

Government Members:  Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes:  This is the place where a fodder reserve should be. Certainly this government, not only 

this year, but other years in their plan, and I think the Department of Agriculture deserves great credit 

for the encouragement the farmers have received in sowing grass in community pastures — co-operative 

pastures — all this has helped to stabilize feed so that this year there hasn‟t been a great loss of cattle — 

cattle that would go to market that would have pushed the market down. 

 

I would like again, to put on the record, (I don‟t know if the Minister of Agriculture is going to speak) 

but I would like to put on the record of this House some of the things the Department of Agriculture of 

this government have done. There has been much talk of the shortage of water. Certainly there was a 

shortage of water in my constituency. If it hadn‟t been for the prompt action of the Department of 

Agriculture putting out a pumping outfit on May 3rd — the first one, May 16th — the second pumping 

outfit went out, June 24th — the third one went out, August 4th, — the fourth one went out, and August 

5th — the 5th one went out. This was an emergency that kept the cattle on the farm. 

 

I think one of the things that the Department of Agriculture did that was most opportune was when they 

threw a fear into the farmers and they made their announcement in the latter part of June about the feed 

shortage and the necessity of farmers cutting their cereal crops. This was another very important factor, 

Mr. Speaker. Their radio and TV programs pointing out that feed was going to be terribly hard to get — 

that this drought covered the biggest part of Saskatchewan, a lot of Alberta, Manitoba and also down in 

the States. This I know myself — these programs made me sit up and think — what are you going to do. 

Without hesitation we started cutting our cereal crops. Because of that we have feed in our feed lots. 

 

I think, I for one could not allow this motion to come into the House without amendment, because this is 

one of those motions — you beat your wife. If you vote against it — it isn‟t right to beat your wife — 

you shouldn‟t have beaten your wife but you beat her anyway. Certainly this is one of 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

5 

these motions. The amendment, moved by the member for Lumsden, I think, was a very good and a very 

necessary one. 

 

As I promised, and I assured the hon. Leader of the Opposition that I was only going to speak a short 

time. I am not going to say any more because I realize that members on both sides of the House, are 

hoping on going home today. I realize there is another motion on the order paper, that possibly some 

members would like to speak to. I suggest that all members of this House should support this 

amendment, and oppose the original motion as it was. 

 

Mr. Arthur Kluzak (Shaunavon):  Mr. Speaker, I would like to just speak briefly on this amendment 

and I would like to congratulate the Minister of Agriculture and his department for encouraging and 

suggesting to the farmers to cut some of the light crops for feed. Certainly a lot of these crops would 

have had no commercial value had they been cut for grain purposes, and they did supplement to a great 

part — part of the feed shortage in this province. 

 

I would also like to commend the P.F.A.A. branch of the federal government for recognizing crops cut 

for feed as total crop failure for payment purposes. This also, I believe, encouraged the farmers to cut 

these crops for feed. 

 

I went through my constituency quite thoroughly and I represent a constituency in the south-west, parts 

of which have had practically no crop for three consecutive years. It is an area where one would 

naturally expect to find a great shortage of feed. The livestock population in the last 10 years has 

practically doubled in this area. However, I found that there has been very little feed shipped into this 

area from outside sources. 

 

The member for Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. Klein), when he spoke on this resolution, mentioned that 

the Minister of Agriculture was looking for underground water, while he didn‟t know what to do with 

the surface water that had been encountered. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! I don‟t think the member for Notukeu-Willowbunch has spoken in this debate. 

The hon. member speaking must speak to the amendment and not in regard to the debate on the motion 

itself. The amendment, only, is before the House at the present time. 

 

Mr. Kluzak:  It was suggested that there was nothing being done with this water 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

6 

that is encountered in dams. I would like to inform this House that in my constituency, I have four 

irrigation projects which have been sponsored by the Conservation and Development branch of the 

Department of Agriculture. One of these that I am going to speak on particularly is the one at Ponteix 

which consists of some one thousand acres of privately owned land. I had the opportunity this fall of 

being on a tour — a field day at this project. I was amazed at the amount of feed that these people are 

growing on this land. Some of this fodder — alfalfa was yielding up to 4 ½ tons an acre. I was one of the 

farmers there taking off a crop of oats that was yielding 120 bushels, while just up on the bench there 

was no crop. This project alone this year yielded some 27 hundred tons of alfalfa. This is where we are 

getting our feed in Saskatchewan today that we didn‟t get under the old Liberal government. 

 

Now e have another one thousand acre project and it is crown owned and it is cut out in plots and I 

believe there are 28 farmers in that area that have plots in this project. This project also produced this 

year some two thousand tons of fodder and they couldn‟t take a second crop off it and I am sure from 

now on this project will double this yield. We have the Vidora project which is also in a very sub 

marginal area. These areas I speak of are areas where people just couldn‟t stay if they didn‟t have this 

type of assurance for winter feed. This project at Vidora this year produced 35 hundred tons of alfalfa 

plus a great amount of grain. These are very worthwhile projects that are being sponsored under our 

Department of Agriculture. I defy anyone to say that this department is not doing anything in the line of 

supplying feed to farmers. When we have such projects in our area as this, we don‟t have to worry about 

feed banks. We know that these projects will produce. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! I must point out to the hon. member that he is not at this time able to discuss 

the matter of feed banks. I believe so far he has been discussing the effective emergency program of the 

government, which is quite in order. But the motion itself has to do with adequate fodder reserve banks, 

and is not under discussion at the present time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. It is contended in the original motion that the 

government has been negligent with development of fodder reserves. This amendment commends the 

government on what it has done to counter the suggestion made in the original motion. I think the hon. 

member is absolutely right in speaking about fodder reserves. This was what the original resolution 

specifically mentions. 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

7 

Mr. McFarlane:  Mr. Speaker, I believe it has been your ruling that we speak on the amendment first 

and when this has been disposed of speak on the original motion. Now that was the understanding on 

this side of the House. Is that not correct, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker:  That is true. As I earlier pointed out I believe that the member speaking has been quite 

in order in referring to what has been done the provincial government in regard to the emergency 

program because that is in the amendment. I suppose in that regard the preparing of fodder reserves is 

possibly part of it, but the hon. member speaking to the amendment is not at liberty, to discuss the 

establishment — the deploring of the lack of action of the government in regard to reserves or otherwise. 

The discussion of maintenance and the establishment of adequate fodder reserves for the feeding of 

cattle is not before the House at this time. The government‟s program is, so you can make a distinction 

in regard to these things. 

 

Premier Lloyd:  On a point of order, I would like to ask a question — if the establishment of fodder 

reserve banks was part of the government program in meeting the drought situations would it then 

become a proper topic for discussion. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  I would say so. 

 

Mr. Kluzak:  Mr. Speaker, I also wish to add that the Vidora area, which is very sub marginal, that I 

have visited farms there in the summertime and I have seen quite a lot of feed left over that will carry 

them on to the next year and of course they are adding to it. They grow more feed, in other words, than 

what they can utilize in one year. 

 

Now these opportunities for these projects have laid there for years and years, I am sure, but the Liberal 

government didn‟t have the insight or the initiative to develop them like we have under this government. 

I certainly will support the amendment. 

 

Mr. McFarlane:  Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, when we reply in this debate do we have to reply 

to the amendment or can we discuss the amendment — if I speak now would I be closing the debate? 

 

Mr. Speaker:  No, I would assume now that you were speaking to the amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank:  He can speak on the amendment and then 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

8 

he can close the debate as the mover of the motion, but of course he can‟t play the same record again. 

 

Mr. Douglas T. McFarlane (Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley):  I was very interested in the remarks made by 

the speakers to the amendment and I must say, Mr. Speaker, after listening to them I haven‟t found out 

in any instance of the speakers who have taken part — the mover of the original amendment, and 

speakers who have followed, where they have found any instance where they could commend the 

government on the establishment of the prompt and efficient emergency program to meet the severe 

drought situation, the long term policies directed toward the solving of chronic fodder shortages in 

Saskatchewan. It is very obvious that no mention has been made by speakers who have taken part in this 

debate of fodder reserves. The only mention I heard of fodder reserves was by the last speaker. It only 

goes to substantiate some of the charges I originally made — that there has been no long term program 

for the establishment of these reserves and therefore no action has been taken in meeting this 

emergency. 

 

I suggested earlier the measures I thought should have been taken. What I want to point out is this — it 

says that they commend the government for the long term policies that they have brought about to take 

care of this situation. During the summer when it appeared that we were going to have a very serious 

situation in regard to drought, and it appeared as though the government was going to have to give some 

aid to the farmers because of the lack of these reserves — because of the lack of a long-term program or 

even a short term program to take care of this situation, we found that there was no supply of hay in the 

province at that time. Then in a moment of desperation, the Minister of Agriculture issued a statement 

stating that the farmers could have access to the hay along the highway and the road allowances — the 

farmers could have the access to the hay and grass along the road allowances. Mr. Speaker, as far as 

government programs are concerned, as far as any measures set-up to prevent this situation, when it 

came to a climax, the only thing they could fall back on was the hay and grass along the road 

allowances. 

 

In all sincerity, I ask the Minister of Agriculture, what type of a program was this? Down in the eastern 

area of the province, if you were to go out and cut the hay along the highways and road allowances, all 

you would get is about four bales of Russian Thistle and about six cartons of broken beer bottles. That 

was the type of a fodder reserve the government had at that time. 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

9 

The mover of the amendment said that it was too bad that dairymen had to go to Alberta and he regretted 

that the Liberal party hadn‟t built the South Saskatchewan River Dam and what he was referring to at 

that time were the dairymen who had to go to Alberta to get sufficient hay and fodder for their herds for 

the winter. Mr. Speaker, if this government had, in their long-term programs or even a short-term 

program — if they had utilized reserves and water resources that were in the province at the present time 

to set up areas where they could grow and irrigate forage and fodder, as was mentioned by the last 

speaker, then possibly farmers wouldn‟t have to go to Alberta. To say that the South Saskatchewan 

River Dam should have been built and would have been available now is only evading the issue because 

there is nothing to take care of a situation such as we have at the present time for the next two or three 

years, even though work is going on on the South Saskatchewan River Dam. As far as the excuse is 

concerned there again, they have not provided anything to take care of the situation. 

 

Then, of course, the mover of the amendment said that the Department of Agriculture had instructed the 

farmers to show summer fallow only. Mr. Speaker, in many cases if you listened to the experts you 

would be entirely wrong. It is fine for an expert after conditions have arisen to say this is what should 

have been done. In too many cases we have heard that. We have seen how farmers have suffered after 

listening to advise by experts — these so-called experts. I am going to give you another instance. It was 

only two or three years ago when the experts advised us not to grow durum wheat — they told us there 

would be no market for durum wheat, and advised the farmers not to grow durum wheat. Then what 

happened? the very next year there was a terrific demand for durum wheat because there was no durum 

wheat in the country. Then again last year there was a terrific demand for durum wheat, and it is going 

on in the future. To say that experts have advised them to sow summer fallow only that is no practical 

and efficient way of dealing with an agricultural crisis, especially after seeding has taken place, then you 

can‟t evade the issue on that. 

 

The other statement, in trying to convince us on this side that the government has some long term 

policies — went back to 1937 — which is a favourite trick of the members on the opposite side — the 

members to your right, and said if you were a Liberal you got relief and if you weren‟t a Liberal you 

didn‟t. Mr. Speaker, to bring in issues like that to try and support a government feed program, I submit it 

is absolutely ridiculous. Too often we have listened to this type of thing in the House. It used to be the 

favorite statement of the 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

10 

former Minister of Highways to say that at one time when they attended a meeting in the country there 

were 14 cars and found out that they were all P.F.R.A. individuals. What he didn‟t tell the people in this 

House is that not too many years ago, there was a meeting in my own constituency — there were 11 cars 

there, but 11 department officials — people went there to try and get an increase in their old age 

pensions, or supplementary pensions. It took 11 cars with 11 of a staff to tell these people they couldn‟t 

get it. Now I think that was no excuse to try and support an employee of this type. 

 

Then they tried to suggest that in those times cattle prices were substantially lower than they are in the 

emergency we went through. Mr. Speaker, for any member on the government side to get up and try and 

indicate to this House, or the people of Saskatchewan that they are responsible for the high cattle prices 

in Saskatchewan at the present time, is absolutely ridiculous. It isn‟t the agricultural policy of this 

government that has kept up the cattle prices of this province, it isn‟t anything they have provided for 

the farmers that have kept them up. The only thing that has kept the prices of cattle in Saskatchewan, 

yes, and in western Canada, today is because of the terrific demand for feeder stock in the United States. 

In too many cases, year after year, these same people across the way have condemned policies, they 

have condemned personalities, and condemned everything practically within the United States. Then 

when we come to a period of economic distress, a period when we need the help on the farms to be able 

to sell our cattle we find that our best market for western cattle is still across the American border. So I 

suggest the only reason farmers of Saskatchewan today are enjoying a high price for their cattle and the 

only reason they are not in a economic hitch and having to sell their cattle at sacrifice prices, is because 

of the terrific demand for those cattle in the United States. In the States they had terrific corn crops, and 

they are utilizing their reserves and their soil banks for the feeding of cattle. 

 

I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, regardless of what this amendment says, regardless of the fact that they 

are trying to commend the provincial government for something they have not done, they had better start 

thinking right away in terms of doing something for the next 2 years to try and sustain and protect the 

1,900,000 head of cattle we have in this province at the present time. That I think is the main issue 

today. If they are only gong to depend on the policies they have had this year to try and carry them 

through another year, then the people of Saskatchewan might as well go out of the cattle industry. 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

11 

It is all very well to say to us — sow summerfallow. If next year is the same as this year, there won‟t 

even be a spear of grass in summer fallow. It is all very well to say that we have 2 or 3 little areas down 

in the south-west part of the province where we have a reserve of fodder at the present time. If we have 

another year next year, the same as this year, the little amount of fodder that is down there will only 

sustain a few local herds. When they condemn the past government of this province, under the 

conditions they had to operate under during the 10 years of the drought stricken thirties, at that time as I 

pointed out earlier, we had to go into Manitoba — we had to go into Alberta, and we had to get hay in 

the United States. I suggest to the minister and to members of the government that this year may have 

only been the first year of a crisis, but what they have to start planning on and start planning on now is 

something to try and preserve this cattle population in case we have 3, 4, or 5 years of similar climatic 

conditions — as they had last year. That is why we on this side of the House and those of us who are 

farmers, those of us who want to try and sustain the large cattle population of 1,900,000 or 2 million 

head of cattle. We want some assurances that if we are going to go through climatic conditions such as 

those we have had this year that we will be able to sustain at least a herd that we can get by a drought 

period on. 

 

I suggest that if the markets in the United States ever crumble, then you may come to the point where 

you will go down to a cent a pound for cattle — as some of the members across the way tried to 

indicate. As long as the only salvation for our cattle industry today is the willingness of the American 

farmer to come up and buy our stock and feeder types of cattle, Mr. Speaker, I will not support the 

amendment. 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture):  Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think I will have any great difficulty 

in answering the hon. member for Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. McFarlane), who spoke against the 

amendment and for the original motion. If any evidence was needed of more support for the original 

motion, he made a perfect demonstration of that in speaking against the amendment. 

 

There are two points which stand out in this debate and in regard to this particular matter. In 1937, Mr. 

Speaker, he said quite rightly, that we imported into this province some 500 thousand tons of fodder 

from outside sources of supply. He also stated that we had built up no fodder reserves in this province. I 

want to reply to those two propositions, Mr. Speaker. First of all . . . 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

12 

Mr. Speaker:  Those things I believe were said in regard to fodder reserves when the hon. member 

was moving the original motion, unless I am mistaken. I do not believe that is under consideration at the 

present time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  I am speaking in support of the amendment which commends the government, 

rather than condemns the government for building fodder reserves. My contention is that we have done 

all of these things and that the original motion has no justification. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  The hon. member is quite in order in regard to fodder reserves in pointing out their 

relation in regard to the long-term policies or the effective emergency programs. That is what is under 

discussion at the present time. To go back and discuss the fodder reserves separately apart from the 

amendment could not be in order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  Mr. Speaker, I am speaking to this amendment. The amendment being the opposite 

to the original motion commends the provincial government for its prompt and effective emergency 

program . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher:  We know what it does Toby . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  . . . in meeting the drought situation and its long term policies directed towards 

solving chronic fodder shortages in Saskatchewan. 

 

I‟m first of all going to speak in connection with the latter part of the amendment, Mr. Speaker, and this 

is what I was doing in the first place. Putting it this way I suppose I am in order. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I assumed the portfolio of agriculture in this province, I noted then the almost 

complete absence of any field staff in the agricultural representative field. I could see no facilities or no 

government agency that would assume the responsibility for irrigation development, for dry land 

reclamation development or for drainage reclamation. There was no such organization in the provincial 

Department of Agriculture. The provincial Department of Agriculture, prior to 1944 did not develop any 

land for irrigation in this province, nor did they develop any land for fodder production or pasture 

production in this province. None whatever, Mr. Speaker! They had no facilities, they had no equipment 

of any kind to do it. There was no organization whatever, Mr. Speaker. We had to build an organization 

from the very start, not only in the field of extension by painstakingly building up, not only an ag. rep. 

service but a complimentary local agricultural committee service, supplementary to the ag. rep. service. 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

13 

The hon. member for Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. McFarlane) well knows this. There was a complete 

absence of any policies of assistance to farmers and groups of farmers who had been organized 

co-operatively and could develop fodder projects or pasture projects. There were none of these programs 

available. The hon. member for Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley ought to know. I told him if he should take an 

annual report of the provincial Department of Agriculture now, and compare it to 1943, if he wants 

factual evidence, but the man doesn‟t want factual evidence. 

 

I am not going to talk long, I don‟t have to, Mr. Speaker, but what I have to say are facts on the basis of 

the programs developed by the provincial Department of Agriculture over the years — let‟s look at some 

of the results. This year it is generally accepted was just as dry as 1937. In 1937 — 

 

Mr. Danielson:  Don‟t talk nonsense. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: Yes the hon. member, before he took his seat, he almost expressed the wish that 

another year would be a dry year. The hon. member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) said in this House 

that we haven‟t seen anything yet. Just get a few more dry years and he said it very gleefully as though 

he‟d welcome that so this government would be embarrassed and so they could claim the proposition 

that we have built up no fodder reserves. It is a mighty good argument because I had a representative in 

his constituency. I suppose one of these hopped up characters that called me over the phone and took 

sheer delight in the fact that the municipalities had ordered 30 thousand gallons of grasshopper 

chemicals in one day and he said — now you‟re up against it — now you‟re on the spot. Burn and sizzle 

will you. This is the kind of propaganda and the kind of people and mentalities that they develop in the 

rural areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! There is a point of order being raised. 

 

Mr. McFarlane:  I wasn‟t sure . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  I am sure he hasn‟t a point of order but I will sit down anyway. 

 

Mr. McFarlane:  I wasn‟t sure whether he said that person was in my constituency or . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  No. In the constituency of the hon. member for Arm River. 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

14 

Mr. Danielson:  He has brought my constituency into the debate. I think he should give me the name 

of the municipality where this person resides. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  Yes I‟ll do that. The rural municipality of Craik. I don‟t know the gentlemen‟s 

name. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  One of the best CCFers in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Opposition Members:  Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! the hon. member is not taking part in the debate at the present time. 

 

Mr. Snedker:  On a point of order. I think it would be quite in order to demand the name of the 

person he is referring to. He is referring to a person in debate in this House and I think it is quite in order 

for members in this House to demand to know who said this. 

 

Mr. Danielson:  That gentleman spoke when he was talking to his friend and this is why he was so 

free with his language. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  This is not a point of order, but another one of those imaginary, illusionary 

assumptions that the hon. members opposite like to make. I said the particular gentleman who called me 

was a resident of the R.M. of Craik. 

 

Mr. Thatcher:  You said he was hopped up. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  . . . I don‟t know his name. I don‟t even know his name because he was so tight 

that he could hardly mutter his own name over the phone when I asked him to give me his name — a 

man that would make an outlandish statement like he did . . . 

 

Mr. Snedker:  Mr. Speaker, I honestly don‟t believe that the hon. member should use this as a 

reference when he can‟t give the gentleman‟s name, when on his own admission he was drunker than a 

skunk when he was talking. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  . . . the hon. members of the legislature have that authority to do so. 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

15 

Mr. Foley:  On a point of order. I don‟t think it becomes the hon. Minister of Agriculture to refer to 

any resident of this province in the terms that he used. Certainly if a man cannot phone the Minister of 

Agriculture and issue a complaint without being referred to in this rather disrespectful manner, we‟ve 

come to a pretty pass in this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  Mr. Speaker, these are not points of order at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  I do not believe there is any ruling in regard to parliamentary procedure in this regard. 

I think it is a matter for the hon. minister to take under consideration himself. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  It hurt the hon. members opposite, but I have to put up with some of these 

instances — these reactions that you get. This particular gentleman took a sheer delight in the fact that a 

great calamity had struck the province, and as a matter of fact I asked him, how long he had been out of 

grasshopper chemicals. “I just came in from the field”, he said, “and I just ran out.” I told him there 

would be a supply for him in the morning, but he persisted in his argument — oh you fellows are going 

to roast now. Now you‟re up against it. In fact he reflected the kind of talk that I hear in this legislature 

from the hon. member from arm River (Mr. Danielson) when he is sober, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, to go on, let‟s take a look at the results . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher:  Another bale of hay, that is the result. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  . . . this year in contrast to 1937 we have brought in from outside the province 

about 75 thousand tons of fodder. We have to date approximately 150 thousand tons, which certainly has 

reduced the over all need of going outside the province for fodder supplies, particularly in light of the 

fact that our cattle numbers are vastly greater now than they were in 1937. But some of the more basic 

things that have been done towards building up fodder reserves and alleviating the problem of drought 

as much as we possibly can. I mentioned the program — the reorganization within the department in 

order that all of the branches of the 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

16 

Department of Agriculture would be directed primarily towards two objectives. To bring greater 

productive stability to the agricultural economy of Saskatchewan. We all went through that 1930 

experience. I did as the reeve of a municipality. One of the first objectives that I could see that we had to 

do was to bring greater stability to overcome as far as possible the handicap of moisture deficiency in 

this province. It was for this reason that for the past year we have been developing this kind of program, 

which have to a measurable degree alleviated circumstances this year. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we certainly can‟t take all the credit for what has been done under P.F.R.A. 

programs or our own programs for being in a better position to meet drought in this province. In all 

fairness there are other factors that are very important, Mr. Speaker. The advent of better machinery, 

better cultural practices, better attention to moisture conservation and better scientific knowledge being 

available to the farmers — extensive advice such as, Mr. Speaker, that in a year like this or a year that 

will be forthcoming if we have very little snow, the sound advice to give is to put oats in your summer 

fallow for feed. The hon. member for Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. McFarlane) thinks that is not good 

advice, but deep down in his heart he knows this is good advice. There were tangible and concrete things 

done as well. You can‟t meet situations just through extension of this sort of thing — other action had to 

be taken. 

 

There were other help-mates too. Agriculture is mechanized. Communication and transportation 

facilities are much better than they used to be. Rural roads are better and highways are better. We are 

able to move fodder about with greater facility than we did in the 1930‟s. We can thereby make a 

redistribution of fodder from one area to another more adequately. To go back to the long term policies 

and their contribution toward alleviating the drought problems and the building up of fodder reserves. 

 

In the administration of land — we have tied in land branch policies with this over all policy by making 

available to individual farmers who had undersized units more land wherever this was possible. We 

carried on, Mr. Speaker, a very intensive program of land classification in order that we could dispose of 

millions of acres of vacant crown land and put them to use. Since 1950, Mr. Speaker, we have brought 

into use some 2 million additional acres of vacant crown land. This has given a contribution. There are 

at the present time some 20 thousand leases in effect for grazing, for hay production, and cultivation 

leases. In addition, Mr. Speaker, and this is often overlooked when people speak about P.F.R.A.‟s 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

17 

contribution, which has been notable, it must be remembered that the provincial government through the 

land utilization board of the lands branch has the responsibility of acquiring land for all purposes and 

making it available for P.F.R.A. pastures, for provincial pastures and for co-operative and municipal 

pastures. Over the years the provincial contribution to P.F.R.A. pastures in terms of land has been 

1,600,000 acres — land acquired for P.F.R.A. pasture purposes. 

 

We haven‟t stood still and depended on P.F.R.A. When I became Minister of Agriculture in this 

province we had one major provincial pasture in Saskatchewan. Since then what have been the results 

— let‟s look at them. At the present time we have under operation and development some 36 provincial 

pastures, in addition to that under our earned assistance policy and on crown land, which the crown 

made available, there policy and on crown land, which the crown made available, there are established 

102 fodder co-operatives, municipal pasture projects, making a total of 111 co-operative and municipal 

pasture projects. This makes 142 pasture projects, either co-operative or under the administration of the 

provincial Department of Agriculture. Let‟s add to that some 57 fodder projects that have been 

developed either by the conservation and development branch itself, or under our earned assistance 

policies. This gives us 200 projects for pasture and fodder production. Thousands of acres of land have 

been improved both with the community pastures, and on these fodder projects as well, Mr. Speaker. 

Thousands of tons of hay have been produced that would have never been produced otherwise in this 

province. Why, Mr. Speaker, we have hay from doffer projects that we developed in the constituency of 

the hon. member for Cumberland, and this hay was made available in the south. This is true all over the 

province. You can‟t have that many projects, Mr. Speaker, without seeing them, and I must assume that 

the hon. member for Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. McFarlane) and the hon. members opposite were aware 

of these policies and the extent of these programs before they ever brought this motion in the House. I 

rather resent the motion, Mr. Speaker, because I have taken a great pride in the fact that we‟ve made 

wonderful progress and . . . 

 

Government Members:  Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  I‟m not saying, Mr. Speaker, that we‟ve reached the ultimate by any means. We 

should be doing twice as much as we‟re doing in these fields if we are to overcome the reoccurring 

expense of emergency assistance. 

 

We add to these pastures, the 60 P.F.R.A. pastures in Saskatchewan, and to give you some indication of 

our co-operation 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

18 

with P.F.R.A. in this province, we have more community pastures and fodder projects in this province 

than any other province in Canada, including P.F.R.A. pastures. There are no P.F.R.A. pastures in 

Alberta and there are some 10 in the province of Manitoba. I wish the hon. member for 

Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. McFarlane) would write that down in his notebook. Insofar as fodder 

reserves are concerned in the province of Manitoba, on a long-term basis, they don‟t exist. Insofar as 

emergency encouragement for fodder production is concerned, in this province as a result of the $5 per 

acre payment, we have about 60 thousand tons more fodder than we probably would have had, had we 

not given this incentive to farmers. In this one new branch alone, the conservation and development 

branch, there was an expenditure of well over $17 million for dry land reclamations, for irrigation 

reclamations, and for reclamation by drainage. The drainage program looks good too, Mr. Speaker, and 

it does give a contribution also to our fodder supplies because land under water can‟t produce fodder, 

and land that is drained with proper gates put in the dam, the water can be released from that dam and 

used for fodder. Under our drainage and flood control program, and the hon. member for 

Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. McFarlane) knows something of this, he knows for example that there were 

very nearly $6 million spent on land reclamation program. All these figures, Mr. Speaker, are available 

in the annual report of the Department of Agriculture, if he wanted to sit down and honestly look at facts 

for a change, and not bring a lot of baloney into this House, and mislead the general public. 

 

Government Members:  We can‟t hear you Toby. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  Mr. Speaker, I know they are not too far way, but by putting these facts on a higher 

little louder level might penetrate some of those thick skulls and some of this political partisanism that I 

note so well from the opposite side of the House. 

 

How many projects were worked on and developed, not completely, some partially developed certainly, 

and some on which only the engineering services were done. Most of them had received some attention 

in ditching. There were 453 projects — drainage reclamation projects worked on since the conservation 

and development branch was organized. Still the hon. member for Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. 

McFarlane) says that nothing has been done. Other programs were introduced as I mentioned, to 

encourage fodder reserves. The program of assistance for forage seed under the plant industry branch, 

under which we make forage seed available at cost to farmers. The orders for this seed run up to 5 and 6 

thousand orders a year, 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

19 

which is enough for seeding 150 thousand acres a year to forage production. It is estimated that over the 

years we‟ve made enough seed available to sow well over a million and a half acres of land to forage 

production. I agree again, Mr. Speaker, that this program too ought to be stepped up, and many others as 

well. 

 

I will not take the time of the House to go into any more detail, merely to point out that the effect of this 

kind of development has made it possible for us to overcome a very, very serious fodder shortage in this 

province this year. Everyone knows that if we have another dry year, as dry as we had this year, than 

certainly there is no one, between now and then, can do anything about growing fodder. There isn‟t 

enough time to do it. But we can do these things on a long-term basis, Mr. Speaker. I think the results 

speak for themselves. We haven‟t had to import since I have been minister, the same amount of fodder 

from outside sources. This has been one of our worst years and I‟m happy to report to the House, as 

everyone knows, we met the situation in good style, Mr. Speaker. No one over on this side of the House 

has ever suggested for one minute that the provincial government was taking any credit for cattle prices 

in this province. We‟ve never done that, although, we‟ve been condemned a good deal by the opposite 

because of the high farm costs for which similarly we are not responsible. Therefore we are not 

responsible for the one and we can‟t take credit for the other which depends on national policies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have received a few letters that make me feel fairly good. One from the Saskatchewan 

Federation of Agriculture which says that at a recent meeting of the agricultural board a motion was 

passed expressing the appreciation of the farmers and farm organizations for the excellent assistance 

provided by the provincial Department of Agriculture in averting disaster in the livestock industry 

because of the drought and subsequent feed shortage. I appreciate these letters of appreciation coming 

from an organization like the Canadian Federation of Agriculture, the Saskatchewan Dairy Association, 

who extended similar appreciation for the help and assistance that was made available to them, and from 

municipalities in the constituency of the hon. member from Saltcoats (Mr. Snedker). He might like to 

have me read it to the House. This is the rural municipal council of Fertile Belt: 

 

“On behalf of the council I would like to take this opportunity of thanking the minister and yourselves 

for the splendid co-operation and assistance we received while moving fodder from Edmonton to this 

municipality. Without your help it would not have been possible to supply our farmer‟s needs.” 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

20 

Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that we have endeavoured to build up our livestock population, our forage 

crop production because we are certain that it will bring greater productive and income stability to our 

provincial economy. A great deal more needs to be done and we are hopeful that if and when this comes 

into existence, that it will be a comprehensive program under which further assistance can be given both 

to the province, to the municipalities, and to the farmer to make still greater progress in this direction. It 

is particularly needed in the northern part of the province where we‟ve stressed the development of 

community pastures and fodder projects. On this fringe area of Saskatchewan there is a great need for 

adding to the land resources of those farmers who have undersized units. This must be done. Then too, 

expansive programs for assistance in the utilization of water that is stored for irrigation purposes. 

Stepped up programs for increased assistance for small stock-watering projects generally. It has been 

mentioned that we haven‟t utilized irrigation water. We certainly have. We‟ve worked on some 54 

irrigation projects involving some 36 thousand acres of land that has been developed. We didn‟t wait for 

the South Saskatchewan. We‟ve been developing the smaller irrigation projects principally throughout 

the south-western part of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Having said this and having given this information to the House, Mr. Speaker, I must support the 

amendment and I certainly in the face of this evidence could not support the original motion. 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville):  Mr. Speaker, I did not intend to take part in this debate, but the fact 

that I have to depart shortly for a water and sewer opening in my own constituency, to take part in that, I 

felt I should speak now following the statements by the minister — that possibly I should make some 

statement with regard to the activities of the government in connection with the so-called program that 

they carried out during this last spring and summer, with regard to the emergency situation on the farms 

in this province. 

 

I think one would probably be remiss if he did not give at least a „thank you‟ for those things that have 

been done by the minister and his department. I am sure there is no one on either this side of the House, 

or anyone in the province of Saskatchewan that would deny the fact, and if he could there would be 

much more room for condemnation of this government, if there was nothing to thank them for on this 

particular occasion. 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

21 

But as the minister has stated in his address here today, and has taken credit for some of the actions that 

the government has taken during the past few months, he forgot to say at the same time, as he usually 

does, that the farmer himself had to pay for most of these so-called actions on behalf of the government 

of this province. I want to thank the minister for the fact that there have been water pumpers around the 

province — some that have been operated by his department, some that have been operated by the 

P.F.R.A. with the assistance of the federal government. No one denies the fact that all farmers and the 

communities that have had the use of these pumpers are grateful for the fact that the pumpers are there. 

But that is where it stops, Mr. Speaker, because there isn‟t a farmer, to my knowledge, that the minister 

could point out that hasn‟t paid for the cost of this pumping. 

 

I remember calling the minister, and personally I don‟t agree with the minister‟s idea that anyone that 

calls you on the phone whether you have his name or not, that you can use something that he is 

supposed to have said to you, as proof in a debate in this House or any place else. It reminds me of a 

previous statement made in this House some years ago, by a member who quoted a person who had 

passed away and was no longer around to defend himself. The Minister of Agriculture quotes somebody 

he says came from the constituency of Arm River, who phoned him when he was drunk and then he says 

the man never gave him his name. Now how can anyone go out and prove that this conversation ever 

took place or the minister was ever attacked in the manner he was. I think that is a fairly poor statement 

to come from any minister of the crown any place, and to try to use as the methods of abuse that he is 

taking in his department. I can assure him that I have full knowledge that anyone that holds the position 

that he does will take a lot of abuse throughout his holding of that office, and if he is going to bewail the 

fact that he is taking that abuse from people throughout this province or any place else, well then if he 

can‟t stand up to that abuse he should step out of the position that he is holding. Anyone knows, who 

serves in any public field, that there are going to be those individuals, without facts and without 

information, will attack and abuse those that have powers and that are in public life and have to carry out 

government actions. So as I say to him across the way, that I can‟t be too sympathetic for the fact that he 

has had some abuse heaped on him during the past year because I know he and some of his friends took 

great delight in heaping abuse on others in years that have gone by, in even more vicious terms than he 

ahs stated to the members of this House — at times of troubles and difficulties throughout this province. 

 

We‟ve also heard from some of our friends across the way, the seconder of this amendment, and it is not 

the first 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

22 

time he has made these statements, about running around with people that worked for governments and 

making wild statements, not mentioning any names, saying this happened, and that happened. It is the 

same old type of thing that he has been doing in this House ever since I cam in 6 years ago, but he has 

never backed up once with the proof, or once with the name of any individual who could be approached 

to find out if this particular thing ever took place. That is the type of evidence that is presented to us as 

members in this legislature to try to say that this government is doing something different than a 

government did 22 years ago, when most of the members who are sitting here today were not even in 

public life and had nothing to do with public life. But my friends across the way like to bring up factors 

that took place 25 years ago, when they were kids or something and somebody told them that a 

somebody went without relief because he didn‟t happen to be a Liberal, or somebody didn‟t get feed or 

he didn‟t get into the hospital because he wasn‟t a Liberal. They keep making these statements across 

the way, and to this day I have never had one iota of proof from the member for Touchwood (Mr. 

Meakes) or anyone over there, — that could be considered proof — statements that names were actually 

used that anyone could use as evidence in the legislature, or court, or any place else in our country to 

prove a case. We have had dead men brought up; we‟ve had men that are a good distance from here that 

most of the members in this House have never heard of; their names have been brought up at times in 

evidence to prove things that have been done by previous governments years ago. It is not the 

government of 25 years ago that is on trial before the people of this province, and the people of this 

legislature, it is the Minister of Agriculture, and the Department of Agriculture and this government that 

are on trial in this province, and after the exhibition of this past summer, of course organizations are 

going to write letters. I would presume that with some assistance I would write a letter too, but it isn‟t 

assistance that the people were looking for this last year, it was leadership, and that leadership wasn‟t 

forthcoming. Sure, after demands were made — after requests were made — after delegations came in 

— after letters were written — after telephone calls were made — sure something was one and for that 

as I said before, we must be grateful for small mercies. 

 

Let us take into account the two most important programs for a drought year. The one I mentioned a 

moment ago about the assistance with water. At the beginning, and I must say that last year it was very 

dry and without rains this spring, we knew we were going to be in this situation, but at the beginning of 

the problem, there was one pumper available, then it was increased to two. 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

23 

For a long time that is all we had in the province — two outfits working. At the present time I 

understand that there are anywhere from 5 to 10, but they aren‟t all government outfits. Some of them 

are owned by individual owners who have turned over that equipment, and the government is providing 

assistance in price in order to make it workable. But this has all taken place during the last few months, 

when it should have been provided for long before this present year. It should have been provided last 

year in anticipation of this very thing, because we knew there was a danger of drought. We knew there 

was a danger of a lack of water in this present year. But last spring when many farmers required a great 

deal of water in their dugouts for their cattle the pumpers weren‟t available, and there were many areas 

that had to wait until August or September in order to have their dugouts filled. Some of those farmers in 

the meantime had to dispose of some of their stock because they didn‟t have enough water for them and 

they didn‟t have enough feed. 

 

Again, with regard to the movement of feed. Certainly, any organization in this province, I don‟t think it 

is very fitting of the Minister of Agriculture to get up and read the letter from an organization as if they 

are supporting this particular motion that is before us today, and use it in support of this particular 

motion, that this legislature should commend the government for its action. Any organization, even if it 

was just the smallest amount of help, would feel that they had to send such a letter to any government 

organization and extend their thanks for any help that is given. But when the member used letters like 

that to come here and tell the members of the legislature, that because he got a letter from the livestock 

producers thanking him for any help they were able to give to them during this emergency, and asks us 

as members to vote because of a letter like that — to vote for this motion commending the government 

for the great part it has played in solving the problems of the farmers, then I say again that that evidence 

is not very conclusive for any member in this House to vote on this particular motion that is before us at 

the present time. 

 

I say again, that of course, every farmer in the province of Saskatchewan that receives some financial 

assistance for the movement of fodder should of course give thanks for that amount of help, but as I 

have stated before, this program is nothing new. It is not a program that was developed by this 

government here in the province of Saskatchewan, it isn‟t something that hasn‟t been done by 

governments in this province for years and years. 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

24 

As the minister has stated that in this present year this government has moved 150 thousand tons of 

fodder for the farm people of this province. In 1937, the government of that day moved 450 thousand 

tons of fodder. Surely if we are to thank the government of today for the job of moving 150 thousand 

tons, I am quite certain the Minister of Agriculture shouldn‟t be standing up in this legislature and 

condemning a government, which in 1937, moved 450 thousand tons of fodder into this program to help 

our farmers. 

 

Of course, as he stated a few moments ago, this last year in many ways, I think, was drier than 1937, but 

we didn‟t have the circumstances that led up to 1937. We hadn‟t had the circumstances in many areas of 

this province, not for one year, but for six years prior to the drought of 1937. The situation couldn‟t even 

be compared with the situation that the government had to face and had to deal with in 1937. For the 

Minister of Agriculture in this province today, to stand up and try to defend his actions today on the 

actions taken during the period of 1937, is shameful to say the lest, when he should try to defend himself 

on this resolution by a comparison of that type. We had a government which had come through 6 years 

of the worst depression this province and many parts of the world had ever experienced. We had a 

government whose revenues were low because of the fact that the people couldn‟t pay their taxes. They 

couldn‟t afford to pay them. They didn‟t have the money. They hadn‟t had crops, many of them, for 5 or 

6 years. We were facing that situation, but what is the situation today? 

 

The situation today is that the government knows, and of course realizing that, could have without the 

loss of one cent, to any resident in this province, see to it that the equipment was available at the 

beginning of this year to make certain that every farmer that needed dugouts filled for this coming 

winter, had those dugouts filled. Well I can tell you today that there are still many farmers waiting to 

have their dugouts filled. There are still many farmers that today are digging new dugouts trying to get 

water supplies for them. These problems haven‟t been solved for the government of this province. 

Another thing is when we speak of the cost of this program, some farmers are paying $80, some are 

paying $100, some of them are paying $120 in order to have these dugouts filled. I‟m not certain, the 

minister told me when I phoned him once, that they were just trying to cover the cost. They didn‟t want 

to make anything on this deal with the farmers, they just wanted to cover the cost of the program. But 

today he stands up in the legislature and he wants to take the credit for this particular dugout-filling 

program by the provincial government, and the farmer he told me was going to pay every cent of the 

cost. 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

25 

It wasn‟t going to cost anyone else in the province a nickel. So I say it is nothing to feel proud about, for 

the minister to take credit for it — that some dugouts are going to be filled in this province before 

winter, at the full cost to the farmers who are receiving the service. Anyone could do that. Individuals 

could have drawn up the same program and done exactly the same thing for the farm people. I think it is 

up to the government of this province to take leadership in matters of this type, but not to take credit for 

something that is not coming to them. 

 

Then again, I just want to refer to fodder. The other day I had the opportunity of making up an 

application for fodder assistance. The particular farmer who had brought his forms for me to make out 

for him, by the time I had completed making out the forms with the portion of the cost paid by both the 

federal and provincial governments, this particular farmer was still paying more for the feed than the 

feed cost originally, out of his own pocket — was still paying more for the feed than the feed cost him 

originally, even after the federal and provincial governments‟ portion of the cost had been taken into 

account. So I say here again, that this has been some assistance of course, and this is an old program, not 

something that the present Minister of Agriculture can take credit for or say that his government 

originated it, in the form of a program to look after the conditions that existed in this present year. 

 

Then of course we come down to the final part of the amendment and this is the question of long-term 

policies. It is a little bit too late to be talking about long-term policies in this present year. The member 

for Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. McFarlane) was ridiculed by the Minister of Agriculture for stating that 

the same thing might happen next year. Well, I am quite certain after the year we have come through 

that there is no chance of having fodder reserves for another year such as we have faced this past 

summer. There isn‟t any chance, even long-term policy won‟t be any good for next year. They may be 

good for a drought that that may come along 10 or 15 years from now, but they won‟t be of any use to 

the farmers of this province next year because there isn‟t any fodder around to have for reserves at the 

present time all of it is needed for the cattle that are here now. If there is no hay crop next year the 

minister will have to admit that there are going to have to be many of the cattle that are in the province 

today will probably have to be done away with unless we can get feed from other parts of Canada or 

from other parts of the United States. For him to ridicule the member for Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley for 

suggesting that this might take place and warning the government of this, I think it rather shameful on 

the part of 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

26 

the Minister of Agriculture. Surely this is what we should be doing, is warning the government and the 

farmers of these very facts, and asking the government to take further action. Of course if they had taken 

the actions that were suggested by members on this side with regard to a fodder reserve some years ago, 

when it was first suggested and members over here were urging more action on the part of the minister, 

then he might not have had to face the situation he did this past summer. When I went to him on one 

occasion he said don‟t suggest that the government do anything, we don‟t want to get involved in this 

matter of providing feed to the farmers directly. Whatever you do don‟t get the government involved in 

this thing — it will be just like what happened back in the 1930‟s is what the minister said. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  On a point of order. The hon. member knows that he is leaving the wrong 

impression. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! The hon. member may make a correction at the end of the speech. 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  I think that would be better because if he was gong to correct my impression, I think I 

have the right to take any impression I want, from what the gentleman said. That was the impression I 

got and he made the statement to me two or three times and rang his hands. Oh please don‟t get us 

involved in any arrangements for providing direct assistance to the farmers of this province in the way 

of supply of feed. That is the type of action that we usually get from the government across the way. 

They don‟t want to do anything that might get them involved in a little bit of difficulty because of what 

individuals might say after this job has been completed. We have had the exhibition of some of our 

friends across the way that have tried to take political advantage on individuals in this province for some 

things that happened back in the 1930‟s and I don‟t blame the Minister of Agriculture, in a sense, for not 

wanting to get involved when he knows the way that they handled the situation politically in the 1930‟s 

— I don‟t blame him for not wanting to get his government involved in anything of that type, but I do 

say this, that when members on the other side of the House are going to stand up and commend the 

government for its prompt and effective emergency program, when there are hundreds of dugouts 

waiting to be filled. 

 

There is one chap out with a pumper now, he has 13 dugouts to fill providing the weather stays so that 

he can fill them. If the weather turns cold, and that is just one little community, the P.F.R.A. have 2 or 3 

other pumps going steady in that particular area of the province, at the same time 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

27 

so that the same thanks, if my friends want to give thanks for these problems, the same thanks should 

have been included towards the federal government, because they have been doing exactly the 

amendment thing as our provincial government during this particular emergency that exists at the 

present time. But I say that many of the things that were done during this past summer were done too 

late and too little, in order to help many of the farmers in this province. That is why I could not support 

the amendment that has been moved by members on the government side of the House. I don‟t think 

there is anyone in this province could support something, an amendment which states that there has been 

a program — there has been no program. 

 

As I stated a few moments ago, when this water program started I tried to find out where the pumpers 

were working. I called the Department of Agriculture. The chap I spoke to who was supposed to be in 

charge of the division said he didn‟t know where the pumps were. Well I said have you any idea who 

might know. No I don‟t know who might know. Well I said are you working through the municipalities. 

He said, no we‟re not working through the municipalities. I said who is in charge of this program. The 

fellow that is running the pumper, he said, is in charge of the program. He was supposed to have been at 

that time in our area three weeks prior to that — it had been promised a pump would be there. The 

farmers had been waiting for 3 weeks. They didn‟t know where he was. They didn‟t know how to 

contact him. The Department of Agriculture didn‟t know where he was and no municipal official knew 

where he was. 

 

If that is what you call a program, if that is what you call a co-ordinated and a co-operative program, Mr. 

Speaker, then I couldn‟t vote for a motion which would make a statement such as that. Then when you 

come down to the question of feed. The farmers of this province looked after the question of feed, not 

the minister and his department. Again they paid some of the dollars towards it. Hundreds of farmers in 

my area spent dollars of their own money running back and forth from the north part of this province, 

down to their farm homes, they spent dollars on long distance telephone calls, trying to find out where 

feed was available, and quite often, even at that, when they got to where the feed was supposed to be, 

even when they had been informed by the government — the feed wasn‟t there and they had to run 

around looking for a supply some place else. Yet the minister says we should get the credit because 

there happens to be a feed supply on the farm of most of the farmers in the province at the present time. 

This government is great at taking credit for the fact that the farm people of this province are prepared to 

take action on their own behalf in an emergency such as we faced this last summer, and for him to get up 

and 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

28 

attempt to take political credit for the government of this province for the actions undertaken by the farm 

people themselves, does not sit well on the responsibility of any cabinet minister in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don‟t see how any member on the other side of the House can vote for a program which 

is non-existent, which has been non-existent, many parts of it have been here for years, on the statute 

books and have not been innovations by the government that we have sitting across the way. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, from the beginning of this crisis to the present time, the government has failed to provide the 

leadership; has failed to provide sufficient assistance to our farm people, in a time of great crisis. I say 

that under those circumstances I don‟t think any member in this legislature could vote for an amendment 

which would commend this government for something they haven‟t done, commend this government for 

a so-called program of the future that no one has any idea what it is going to be, except that the ministers 

states this. I have advised the farmers in Saskatchewan — my department has, we have fellows out 

telling them just exactly what they should do if they want to survive in the future. I am going to tell the 

minister, I think that the farm people of this province, they may accept some of that advice, but most of 

them, I think, will be well advised if they do everything in their power to look after themselves, and not 

depend too much on the Minister of Agriculture who sits across the way, and the government of this 

province, because if they are looking for actions, Mr. Speaker, they aren‟t going to get actions from the 

present minister and from the government of this province. For those reasons, I would oppose the 

amendment that has been moved. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet:  Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege and to correct a statement made by the hon. 

member. He said that the department had no knowledge of where the pump units were. They had. They 

were in daily contact with the conservation and development branch. Personally, I don‟t know where 

they are at the moment, but he can get the information from the conservation and development branch. 

They are in constant contact. 

 

I want to ask this question of the hon. member. Would he tell us the date when P.F.R.A. put his 3 pump 

units in the field? He said we were late. We were in the field, as the hon. member for 

Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. McFarlane) knows on May 1st. When did the P.F.R.A. units start? 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  We are not here to either defend or oppose the operations of the P.F.R.A. and I hold 

no brief for the present federal government as my friend knows. Just because of the fact that P.F.R.A. 

wasn‟t into 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

29 

the field quick enough, or didn‟t act quick enough, is no reason for the provincial government being in 

the position that they did not act. We are not here to defend or oppose the actions of a government over 

which we have no control. We are here to deal with your actions. 

 

With regard to the other matter. I was in touch with the conservation and development branch of your 

department and they were the ones that didn‟t know where the pumps were. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: Mr. Speaker, another question. Would the hon. member in all fairness, due to the 

fact you can‟t pump when it is cold say that May 1 was a pretty good date. 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  It was for the little bit of equipment that you had. Since then you have increased that. 

If you had the same number of pumps at that time as you have today, you might have done something to 

solve the problem. The farmers paid for every cent of it. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland):  Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Melville (Mr. Gardiner) has 

told this House that we shouldn‟t support the amendment to the motion. I asked myself this — why 

shouldn‟t I support the government by supporting this amendment, because I do know some facts that 

have been bypassed deliberately by the speaker who spoke. They say talk is cheap and he always speaks 

a great deal but he doesn‟t say very much. Let‟s take a look at some of the facts and what the 

government has done in the past, and maybe the hon. member hasn‟t been to different parts of 

Saskatchewan, as some of the rest of us have been. Only recently I travelled through Meadow Lake, and 

across the north and I have been across other parts of Saskatchewan and I have seen some of the 

conditions that exist. First of all let‟s take a look at the north. We have plenty of hay right now. We have 

plenty of hay to sell right now. I saw as the hon. member from Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) said a few 

days ago, he saw hay going east, and then hay going west, but we see hay going from the north every 

day by the truckload to the south where it is needed. The reason the hay is going to the south is because 

of the policies of this government. 

 

What were some of those policies? First of all the government has encouraged the people in my 

particular area and I think right across the north, and that is why you see those stooks there today of 

cereal hays and wild hay — there is still lots there. 

 

The government has encouraged fodder projects. There are a number of them in my constituency, as has 

been pointed out 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

30 

by the hon. minister. There are a number of them in other constituencies across the north, and isn‟t that 

the place where you should have those fodder projects, where you have probably a little more rain, and a 

different type of soil that will grow lots of hay? That‟s what the government has been doing, and just 

because the hon. member from Melville (Mr. Gardiner) or the hon. member for Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley 

(Mr. McFarlane) don‟t see those fodder projects out here in the prairies, does not mean that we do not 

have them in the province of Saskatchewan for the good of the Saskatchewan people. I invite them both 

to come up and take a look, and I can invite them right on my own farm where I have 30 or 40 tons of 

surplus hay right now, which I have been trying to sell and cannot, because other hay has been moving. I 

suppose I will be able to sell it in due course of time; there are hundreds of tons there available for 

farmers who will need it towards spring. Again, I say it is all due to the policies of this government. 

 

We have grazing areas. We have had this government for a number of years paying money over to 

municipalities to seed road allowances, and in our country and across the north — it doesn‟t matter 

whether it‟s around Meadow Lake or Prince Albert, new roads are being built and these roadways along 

the sides are being seeded down with a mixture of alfalfa and brome grass. This year I have counted 

thousands and thousands of bales of hay along the road allowance, certainly enough for the needs of our 

own people so, if there was other fodder available that was the surplus fodder we had to help these other 

people in the southern part of the province. That is what we are doing; we are helping the people in the 

southern part of the province, and that is due to the everlasting credit of the Department of Agriculture, 

under this minister, because no such program was in effect under the Liberals, as I recall. 

 

You will find the same story, Mr. Speaker, along the highways in my part of the country. Yes, we have 

had drought and poor crops this year, but fortunately we have had good hay crops. As I would like to 

point out to the hon. members when they say people go up to the north and cannot bale hay, there must 

be something wrong because nearly every farmer who has surplus hay has given information to the 

Department of Agriculture, to the municipalities, they are listed in the elevators, there are requests 

coming in from the south and the requests are replied to, and I say anybody that has come up has been 

able to get hay. So this kind of nonsense we have been hearing for the last half hour or hour is not true, 

and I say that this government should be highly commended for the things they have done. 

 

As a matter of fact, I know of some situations where there was some straw which wasn‟t baled because 

it was not needed. In other words, we have had surpluses, Mr. Speaker, 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

31 

and just because people might go to Alberta to get some hay it may be a different quality of hay; it may 

be closer, I don‟t know, but I‟m telling the story as I know it, and therefore I think it very regrettable and 

deplorable that the hon. member for Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. McFarlane) brought in a motion in this 

House, deploring the failure of this government. I don‟t disagree with the latter part — we suggest they 

should consider maintaining fodder plants. The government is doing that, and I think they should 

expand. I have said that on many occasions, because it is good progress but to say that you deplore the 

failure of the government when there has been no failure, I think it is not justified, it is not fair and 

certainly is not true. 

 

Having said these few words, I wanted to make it clear that if the hon. members would come up to the 

northern part of Saskatchewan and see for themselves, they wouldn‟t be sitting in this House talking the 

kind of nonsense they have been talking for the last few days. 

 

Premier Lloyd:  I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

(Debate adjourned) 

 

The Assembly again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole. 

 

THIRD READING 

 

Moved by the Hon. Mr. Erb, by leave of the Assembly: That Bill No. 3 — An Act to provide for 

Services Rendered to Certain Persons by Physicians and Certain Other Persons — be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

STATEMENT RE THIRD READING PROCEDURE 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Before permitting debate on this motion I would beg the indulgence of the House in 

order to clarify a point of procedure. Hon. members will be aware that it has been the practice of this 

House to combine the motions for third reading and passage of a Bill except when the motion is debated, 

in which case the motion is divided into its constituent parts in strict accordance with Beauchesne, 4th 

Edition citation 417. 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

32 

I had asked the Clerk to study this procedure, and I am advised that the second motion is a historic relic 

which has long since been dispensed with in the British House of Commons, and was recently abolished 

in the Canadian House of Commons. 

 

I have informed both the Leader of the Government and the Leader of the Opposition of my intention in 

this regard and I now ask the consent of the House to follow the modern practice of combining the two 

motions in all cases, that is whether the motion is debated or not. That is the motion for third reading, 

and that the motion now be passed. 

 

The House having consented to the proposed change, the debate continued on the said motion: - 

 

Mr. Ross Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition):  Well, Mr. Speaker, I am only going to take three 

minutes. This has been a long debate, and I think the views of the Liberal party on this issue have been 

pretty well clarified on first and second reading, and throughout the committee, so I only have to take a 

few minutes of time to sum up our position. 

 

I want to say again that Liberals do favour the principle of prepaid medical insurance. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! I must point out that there is quite a difficult proposition on my hands with 

regard to handling this third reading. The principle of the bill cannot be discussed on third reading. The 

contents of the bill may be discussed on third reading. Nothing may be added — no motion or 

amendment may be made to add anything to the bill, but we must discuss the contents of the bill as it 

stands at the present time. 

 

Mr. Thatcher:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All I was going to say was that, in order to emphasize that 

we favour the principle of prepaid medical insurance we voted in favour of this bill on second reading. 

That is the only point I was going to make, and we did that even though we were opposed to many 

clauses of the actual legislation. I think it is a fair statement to say that in our British system of 

government, whether it is in Ottawa or London or anywhere else, when second reading is before the 

House you must discuss the principle, and after the ruling you just made, I think it makes it all the more 

clear why we voted as we did no second reading. 

 

I will say again that there are no Liberal MLA‟s 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

33 

here who are not in favour of prepaid medical insurance, but notwithstanding the vote which we made 

on second reading, we indicated at that time if major changes were not made in the committee stage that 

we would be obliged to vote against the legislation in successive changes. 

 

I would point out to you, Mr. Speaker, that in committee we moved amendment after amendment. We 

made proposal after proposal. We suggested a plebiscite, for instance, and we suggested, if I recall that 

there should be regional control. We proposed that the Thompson committee should be brought on to the 

floor of the legislature, and so on, but the government adamantly refused to adopt one single amendment 

or single change which we suggested. As a result, we believe that the bill which is now before us for 

third reading will give us state medicine — not prepaid medical insurance, and thus we feel obliged to 

vote against this bill on third reading. 

 

I want to briefly reiterate our reasons. First, because during the former stages the government has given 

us no assurance that it can obtain the assurance or the co-operation of the doctors, and without that 

co-operation, if the Premier can‟t get that co-operation in the months ahead — this legislation doesn‟t 

mean anything. 

 

The second reason for our vote on third reading is because of the staggering costs involved — $23 

million, or $22 million and the belief that it will likely be larger in each successive year. 

 

Our third reason for opposition again is the unprecedented tax burden, and particularly the five per cent 

sales tax, which we think is vicious and regress. 

 

Our fourth point in opposing it was the fact that, coming as it did in this year of recession and drought, 

and our final reason for voting as we are gong to do this afternoon is that we are afraid that if this does 

pass, Saskatchewan will lose many of her best doctors. 

 

The Liberal party again believes that this bill is being passed for one reason — political expediency, and 

in the long-run we don‟t think it will serve the best over all interests of the people of Saskatchewan. That 

is why I say again we shall oppose it on third reading. 

 

Premier Lloyd:  Mr. Speaker, I think I can reply in perhaps even less than three minutes. Indeed, the 

Leader of the Opposition spoke only for three minutes. There is one thing I can agree with him on, Mr. 

Speaker, 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

34 

and that is when he said they had made the stand of the Liberal party very clear. I agree, but 

unfortunately my interpretation of what this stand is does not concur with the stand which he has 

proposed as that of the Liberal party. 

 

It seems to me unmistakably clear, Mr. Speaker, that a group that has opposed not only the basic 

sections of the bill, but has also consistently opposed any suggestion whereby the costs of the plan could 

be met, could hardly in good faith hold themselves up before the country as being in favour of doing 

something. This, I submit, is the stand very frequently taken by members of the opposition — of 

pretending to be in favour of some particular end, but not in favour of doing the things which must be 

done in order to achieve that particular end. 

 

The only other comment I wish to make is one with regard to costs. The Leader of the Opposition has 

stated again that this is a cost of some $23 million, and corrected that, I believe as being brought down 

to $21 million or something like that. It is true that, in order to finance this particular plan the 

government will have to collect some monies in the neighbourhood of $20 million to $21 million. It is 

not true, and it isn‟t accurate and it is not fair to suggest that this is a new cost on the people and on the 

production of the people of Saskatchewan. The people of Saskatchewan have been paying in recent 

years, an amount of $18 million or in excess of $18 million in order to provide their medical costs. The 

fact is they will now be relived of paying the monies in that particular way; they will pay the money in 

another way. This does not constitute an added burden of cost to the people of the province, such as he 

suggests it will. 

 

Let me put it any other way, Mr. Speaker. If we were not to proceed with this plan does he then suggest 

that the people of Saskatchewan would be $21 million better off? The statement is practically ridiculous 

to suggest that, and I would trust a better interpretation in all fairness to the people of Saskatchewan, 

might be given to the cost of this plan than the one that has been given. The government, it has been 

said, has been unable to give assurance that the doctors would co-operate. Now it is true, Mr. Speaker, 

that we do not have any written pact or written agreement with the doctors of the province. I may say, 

too, Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of Health said the other day, we do not have anything direct from the 

doctors of the province to say they will not. There has been some press reports purporting to be a report 

of a decision made at a meeting in Saskatoon, but to this date to my knowledge 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

35 

there has been no intimation to the government unless the doctors who were responsible for the press 

report suggested speaking to the press — there has been no indication with regard to their proposal. 

 

As I said previously, Mr. Speaker, all that is being asked, in fact, of the doctors here is the acceptance of 

payment through a different medium than many of them accepted previously. The other way we look at 

it is that we are offering to them this system which poses a more effective way of influencing the 

practice of medicine than has ever been offered to doctors before. We can see no reason why the doctors 

of Saskatchewan will not respond in the way that doctors in most other parts of the world have, to plans 

very similar to this kind. 

 

Mr. James Snedker (Saltcoats):  Mr. Speaker, anything that I have to say will be brief. As I 

understand parliamentary procedure in this legislature or any other legislature in the British 

Commonwealth, the first move in consideration of a bill, is that members vote on its introduction, that is 

as to whether or not it should be allowed to be introduced into the House. When it has passed through 

that routine, then second reading is agreement or opposition to the principle of the bill, that is the reason 

for second reading and the meaning of second reading. Finally, the bill enter a period of third reading 

when the bill has proceeded through its stages of committee and the various clauses have been read, 

approved, amended or opposed as the case may be. Then the final bill, in its final form as it leaves the 

committee, is placed before the House for third reading. That is my understanding of British 

parliamentary procedure, and I think it is correct according to Beauchesne‟s Parliamentary Guide. 

 

I would just like to make a few observations, more in sorrow than in anger . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! I do maintain that what is properly before the House at the present time is the 

contents of the bill. 

 

Mr. Snedker:  That is exactly what I make going to speak on. I was making these points before I 

proceeded to do so. But I suppose somebody called me out of order, and we will not enter into the usual 

procedural hassle which usually occurs when I endeavour to get my views before the legislature. 

 

The bill, as it is before us now in third reading is the finished and completed bill as it came out of 

committee, 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

36 

and the remarks which I have to make — I want to say that I make more in sorrow than in anger — in 

regard to actions taken by this government. I voted for this measure in principle, and I stated clearly at 

the time that I had always believed in a comprehensive form of health insurance — a medical scheme. I 

made that quite plain. I also made it quite plain (I think and hope I did) to the hon. members of this 

House that I fought a campaign during the last provincial election, not on the principle of a medical 

scheme, but on the method of its implementation and when I was taking part in that campaign during the 

last election, I stated in no uncertain terms to all people who would listen to me in my own country and 

in other parts of the province, that I believed in a medical plan administered or a regional basis — that is 

that the administration would be by elected officials elected in each region or elected by the people. I 

would be remiss in my duties and obligations to the people who sent me to this House, if I did not once 

more reiterate the things which I said previously in debate, and state my reasons for voting against this 

Bill in third reading. 

 

when we came here it was intimated by hon. members on the other side of the House when some of us 

criticized the haste with which this legislation was being placed before the House, when some of us 

criticized the haste with which the Thompson Committee had been hurried in the report — it was stated 

by members opposite, “Wait until you see the bill.” Then make the suggestions; criticize it and say what 

you please. We waited until we saw the bill, and when the bill came into the House it said that the whole 

medical scheme would be administered by a commission. It was stated by members on this side of the 

House that we didn‟t approve of the bill as it was placed before the House, but that we would make 

those suggestions which we thought should be made; that we would propose those changes which we 

though should be made; and we voted for the bill in principle on that basis, and then we proceeded to 

propose the things which we though should be changed in the bill, and I would draw the attention of all 

her members of the House, as the Leader of the Opposition has already done, that not a single one of 

those proposed changes was accepted by the government. Not one. 

 

One of the changes which we proposed was regional administration. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order! there is one thing in regard to third reading, it is the contents of the bill as it 

stands; we cannot advocate or bring in amendments and things of that kind — we cannot discuss things 

that are not in the bill. 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

37 

Mr. Snedker:  I am discussing what is in the bill — what is in the bill, Mr. Speaker, is administration 

by a commission. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  If the hon. member is bringing, or speaking to something that was asked for to be 

included in the bill, and was not included in the bill, it cannot be discussed at this time. 

 

Mr. Snedker:  What is included in the bill, Mr. Speaker, is administration by a commission, and 

because I oppose administration by a commission because I oppose that method of administering the 

health plan, as opposed to the other methods which we recommended, because that commission will 

lead to bureaucracy, because it will lead to patronage, because it will lead to an ever-increasing group of 

civil servants who won‟t be able to justify their existence; because of those things I am opposing this bill 

on third reading, and I am stating why I am opposing it in no uncertain terms. As I have said before, I 

would be remiss in my duties to my people if I did not say why I oppose it and I think I have that 

privilege. 

 

The hon. members on the other side of the House said we would have the opportunity of suggesting 

changes. Well we suggested them and not one of them was accepted, and as I said, Mr. Speaker, when I 

started to speak, I do this more in sorrow than in anger when I think of the previous promises, the 

previous principles of the gentlemen who sit opposite. I remember those years in the early 1930‟s and 

1940‟s when they believed in freedom; when they believed in democracy and when they spoke of it, and 

yet here they have instituted the very thing which at that time they didn‟t recommend; they have 

instituted administration of the health scheme by a commission which is going to be, in my opinion, just 

another dictatorial organ of a socialist government. 

 

I think I have made it pretty clear, Mr. Speaker, as to the reason why I am going to oppose this bill. I am 

not going to speak any further. I think I have done everything I could to secure a different type of 

administration, the type of administration which I thought and knew would be of benefit to our people, 

but this administration by a commission will not be a part of our people — it will be part of a socialist 

machine. For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I am going to vote against this bill, more in sorrow . . . than in 

anger. 

 

Government Members:  Good! Good! 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

38 

Mr. Snedker:  Well, I‟m glad at least the hon. members on the other side of the House approve of 

something that I am doing. I intend to vote against this bill, Mr. Speaker, because as I said before, I 

believe that administration by a commission will lead to any increased group of civil servants who won‟t 

be able to justify their existence; I believe it will lead to bureaucracy, autocracy, and dictatorship. I do 

not believe that it will lead to that type of self-government which I believe in and which all the world 

today stands in such crying need of. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I picked up this morning‟s paper and what did I see in it? „East Germans Crawl 

through sewers to Escape from East Germany‟. Yes, to get to a country where they would have freedom; 

where they could vote for the things they believed in. Mr. Speaker, can‟t we introduce a little more 

self-government in this country instead of less? Because I believe in those things — because I believe in 

freedom, democracy, self-government; because I believe in what those people believed in when they did 

that — I am proposing this bill for those reasons, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The question being put it was agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS  30 
Messieurs 

 

Lloyd Thurston Meakes 

Dewhurst Erb Thiessen 

Williams Nicholson Snyder 

McIntosh Turnbull Stevens 

Blakeney Stone Kluzak 

Nollet Whelan Dahlman 

Kuziak Thibault Semchuk 

Cooper (Mrs). Berezowsky Perkins 

Davies Kramer Peterson 

Willis Johnson Broten 

 

NAYS  16 
Messieurs 

 

Thatcher Gardiner Horsman 

McCarthy Foley Coderre 

Barrie Guy MacDougall 



 

November 17, 1961 

 

 

39 

NAYS (continued) 

 

McDonald Boldt Snedker 

Danielson Klein Gallagher 

McFarlane   

 

At 5:45 o‟clock p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber, took his seat on the 

Throne, and gave Royal Assent to the Bills presented to him. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor then said: — 

 

MR. SPEAKER AND 

MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY. 

 

It is my duty to relieve you of further attendance at the Legislative Assembly. In doing so, I wish to 

thank you and congratulate you upon the results of your considerations. 

 

Important matters have come before you for discussion and decision. 

 

You have provided an alternate arrangement for the collection of personal and corporation income taxes 

by the Province of Saskatchewan, the need for which arose when the Government of Canada announced 

its intention to abandon the tax rental and tax sharing arrangements which have been in effect for some 

twenty years. 

 

You have approved legislation for the provision and financing of medical care. The inauguration of the 

programme provided for by the Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act will be a significant step 

forward in the social progress which the people of Saskatchewan have achieved. 

 

In taking leave of you, I desire to thank you for the manner in which you have devoted your energies to 

the activities of the session and to wish you the full blessing of Providence as you return again to your 

respective homes. 

 

The Hon. Mr. Blakeney, Acting Provincial Secretary, then said: Mr. Speaker and Members of the 

Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is the will and pleasure of His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor that this Legislative Assembly by 

prorogued until it pleases His Honour to summon the same for the dispatch of business, and the 

Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 


