




















































Hansard: November 16, 1961


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

17th Day 

 

Thursday, November 16, 1961 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

QUESTION RE APPOINTMENT 

 

Mr. W.J. Gardiner (Melville):  Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, in light of an 

announcement which appeared in the press that Mr. Shoyama has accepted a position with the new 

leader of the New Democratic Party in Canada, would the government be prepared to say whether or not 

he has tendered his resignation, or whether the government is prepared to permit leave of absence? 

 

Premier Lloyd:  Mr. Speaker, the government has not yet received a resignation from Mr. Shoyama. 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  A supplementary question, Mr. Premier, if this is the case, is Mr. Shoyama at present 

working with the leader of the New Democratic Party, or is he at his job with the government? 

 

Premier Lloyd:  He is still engaged as chairman of the Economic and Advisory Planning Board. 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  I didn’t ask if he was still engaged. I asked if he was working for the government or 

if he was working for the Premier. According to the newspaper report he has already taken over an 

office with the new leader of the Democratic Party in Canada. 

 

Premier Lloyd:  Mr. Shoyama is working for the government and the Premier of the province. 

 

QUESTION RE VOCATIONAL SCHOOLS 

 

Mr. Bernard Gallagher (Yorkton):  Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the Premier a question in view 

of a statement made by Premier Duff Roblin of Manitoba, that they are considering seven or eight 

vocational schools. 



 

November 16, 1961 

 

 

2 

I would like to know if this government is considering any more vocational schools other than the ones 

announced? 

 

Premier Lloyd:  The Minister of Education made an announcement in the legislature at an earlier 

date with regard to the plans of the government of Saskatchewan in this regard. 

 

CONGRATULATIONS 

 

Mr. Cliff H. Thurston (Lumsden):  Mr. Speaker, I would like to bring to the attention of the 

members the fact that Marion Ganshorn, member of the Regina 4-H Grain Club was awarded the 

championship with her entry of wheat at the Toronto Royal in the 4-H competition. Also that Mr. 

Charlie Wong, a farmer of the Lumsden area won the championship on his entry, of eviscerated turkeys 

and I am sure that members of this House would want to join me in congratulating these people on their 

showing. Not only are they a credit to themselves in this district, but also to the province. 

 

QUESTIONS RE TELEPHONE CHANGES 

 

Mr. Gardiner (Melville):  Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day I would like to direct a question 

to the Minister of Telephones, (Mr. C.C. Williams) as to whether or not the Department has given 

consideration to the request by the Chamber of Commerce and the city of Melville to have changes in 

long-distance service held over until changes are made in all other points in the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams:  Mr. Speaker, that has become a perennial. We propose to proceed with the 

original plan which was made up some five years ago. 

 

Mr. Foley (Turtleford):  (Inaudible) . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams:  That is the custom, Mr. Speaker, and it is certainly quite possible. The matter 

will be investigated. I am sure the hon. member realizes that we have done a good deal of this kind of 

work in this constituency already, and we will certainly look into the matter. 



 

November 16, 1961 

 

 

3 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

The House resumed the debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Blakeney: 

 

THAT Bill No. 3 — An act to amend The Education and Hospitalization Tax Act — be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  In regard to the proposed amendment, or in regard to this motion for Second Reading 

of this bill, I have prepared a ruling in regard to it, but as has in the past been allowed by this House, and 

I think it is a good custom that some discussion in regard to these things be allowed, before I bring in the 

ruling I would be glad to hear from any members of the House with regard to their opinions of this 

amendment, and in regard to the admissibility, so that if it is desirable I may wish to revise my 

statement. 

 

If there are any opinions with regard to this amendment as to its admissibility, I would like to have them 

at this time. 

 

Premier Lloyd:  Mr. Speaker, it does seem that the amendment, because of the scope which it 

proposes, is hardly in order as an amendment to this particular Bill. We are discussing a Bill to provide 

for an increase in one particular field of taxation. This amendment suggests that the whole range of 

government expenditures be explored. It suggests that there are unnecessary expenditures being made, 

and suggests that this exploration be done in order to provide necessary revenues for the provision of 

needed services. One will have to consider the definition of needed services, which could include some 

things in the opinion of some people, and other things in the opinion of other people, that could 

introduce, it seems to me, a debate much wider than would be possible or permissible on an amendment 

to a specific bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  The Order of the Day having been called for resumption of debate on the proposed 

motion of the Hon. Mr. Blakeney: That Bill No. 3 — An Act to amend The Education and 

Hospitalization Tax Act — be now read the second time, I shall proceed to make the following 

statement: 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 

 

Just before the adjournment of the debate last evening, Mr. Gardiner moved the following amendment: 



 

November 16, 1961 

 

 

4 

“That all the words after the word “That” be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 

 

“This Assembly recommends to the Government that all possible economies in government 

expenditures be explored and that all unnecessary expenditures be dispensed with in order to provide 

necessary revenues for the provision of needed services.” 

 

I had not proposed this amendment to the House because at the time there was some doubt as to whether 

the amendment was in order. This doubt has been confirmed because on careful reading of the 

amendment I cannot find that it opposes the principle of the Bill, and according to Beauchesne, 4th 

Edition, Citation 393 (1) such amendments must oppose the principle of the Bill. Indeed, it is quite 

possible that the House could agree to the proposition contained in the amendment, and to the motion of 

second reading of the Bill. I therefore rule that while this amendment might be in order as a substantive 

motion, it is out of order as an amendment to the motion currently before the House. 

 

The current debate will thus proceed on the motion which has been before us. 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville):  Mr. Speaker, in continuing my address with the Bill, and with regard 

to the comments made by the Minister in presenting the Bill to this House I think that in presenting his 

remarks he did state that various tax fields and various methods of fining revenues to carry out the 

purposes of the medical insurance plan had been investigated, and it was found necessary to increase the 

education and hospital tax for this purpose; also to put on an added individual tax and to increase the 

income and corporation tax fields. 

 

I am quite certain, Mr. Speaker, had the government taken the proper care in the investigation, they 

could have found sources of revenue other than those that have been suggested by the government, one 

of which includes the increase suggested by the government, one of which includes the increase in 

education and hospital tax. I am quite certain that in this House during the past number of years, there 

have been an untold number of ways given to the government in which they could have found the 

revenue in order to carryout any medical insurance plan which they might have considered putting into 

effect. 

 

I have with me today one or two suggested ways in 



 

November 16, 1961 

 

 

5 

which revenues could be found, rather than the increase in the education and hospital tax. One would 

include (of course the government has never agreed to a Court House in Melville, so that I couldn’t say 

that would be one of the ways in which they could save money or not), but I would suggest to you, Mr. 

Speaker, that in the last session of the legislature, indication was given by the then Provincial Treasurer, 

and before that session, that the government was considering economies in order to provide it for further 

funds and revenues in order to carry on necessary services, and also to make it possible in the future to 

possibly again balance the budget. 

 

I am going to point out to the Provincial Treasurer that government has not been very successful in this 

way, in finding the revenues that could have been found in order to prevent the increase in taxation at 

this time. 

 

I find in an answer to a return requested in this session, the Public Service Commission Report which 

indicates that the size of the public service in this province is continuing to increase from year to year in 

spite of statements made by the Provincial Treasurer, that economies are going to be made in 

government services in the provinces. Taking the total figure from August 31st, 1960 we find on that 

date there was 7,030 civil servants in the province. At the same date in 1961 7,067 — an increase of 

some 37 in the public service of the province during the year which the former Provincial Treasurer had 

stated he was going to try to bring about economies in government in this province. 

 

We also have another example from a question that was put today, of the type of expenditures that are 

made by this government which are not necessary. When Mr. Shoyama feels himself that he would be 

dispensable for at least six months (that is one of the statements he has made in the press) and the 

government could allow him leave of absence for that period of time without, I would take it, in his own 

mind, any harm to the government service of the province, I am quite certain that his services could then 

be dispensed with for the rest of the time, which would mean a savings of at least $10,000 to $15,000 to 

the taxpayers of this province. 

 

I am quite certain that many of the appointments which have been made — the higher paid appointments 

in this province which are not civil service appointments, but are appointments made by the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council, and have not the same protection under the Civil Service Act, 



 

November 16, 1961 

 

 

6 

which regular civil servants have, that many of these individuals have, as is indicated in the position of 

Mr. Shoyama, been appointed for purely political reasons, and there is no need for the people of this 

province to be paying money out for salaries for individuals to carry on political work in this province. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, that in this one instance alone we have an example of unnecessary expenditures 

of taxpayers’ money in this province. When you multiply it probably a hundredfold at the present time, 

then individuals that are receiving salaries of the type of Mr. Shoyama, you can find out just where some 

of the money could be saved by this government, in order to provide needed services such as we are 

considering in this House at the present time. 

 

I have brought to the attention of the government before that I feel, and I think the people of the 

province feel, at the present time at least 10 per cent of the cost of administration could be cut off 

without any loss of efficiency as far as the public service of the province is concerned. Of course that 

alone would use up a lot of the monies we are finding it necessary to increase the education and hospital 

tax, to provide necessary services at the present time. 

 

We could also, as has been suggested by previous speakers, not only save in that manner but all the 

auxiliary services would bring about a savings as well. Of course we find that in the last few years the 

government, because of the increases — the civil service have had to build many public buildings, not 

only in this city but in other centres, at great cost to the people of the province, in order to make 

available facilities for the increased public service in the province. Here again of course thousands, 

possibly millions of dollars could have been saved in order to provide the services which are being 

suggested at the present time. 

 

I am quite certain the Premier and government as well could find, in every department of government at 

the present time, services that possibly could have been set aside for the present year in order to provide 

the medical insurance scheme without increased taxes. I make one reference to the department of the 

Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Kuziak). I am one that is quite in favour, if we have lots of money to 

throw away, to spend a great deal of money in building recreational centres in this province, but I also 

feel that as far as the provisions of medical services, that is much more important than the spending of 

hundreds of thousands of dollars in order to build up new recreational centres in this province, 



 

November 16, 1961 

 

 

7 

such as is taking place under the department of the Minister of Natural Resources at the present time. 

 

As well, I happen to find it necessary to travel the road east of Regina, and last night was the first time I 

have had the opportunity of driving on it since they opened all these lanes. I think a lot of the people of 

this province will have to be Philadelphia lawyers to find out how to get over the road without getting 

lost. Then at least for the next few months — and it is not going to be a saving and danger to the drivers 

of the province, but it is going to be an increase in the dangerous driving on that particular road for 

sometime, until everybody is able to work out all the turns and ways they are supposed to use to get off 

and on that particular highway. 

 

We have been told this is going to be needed in 20 years — they are looking ahead 20 years. Well, 

surely to goodness, if they are looking ahead 20 years it would not have done any harm to have withheld 

these expenditures until such time as the money was available for these expenditures, and use that at this 

time for the provision of what this government tells us in the legislature today is definitely a needed 

service in the way of prepaid medical insurance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker:  Progress is always hard for some people to take! 

 

Mr. Gardiner:  Well, it might be progress, but I am quite sure this road is going to be worn out in 20 

years, and if the traffic isn’t going to be available to use it, we’ll probably have to rebuild it before the 

20 years are up. So in the meantime it is a waste of expenditure and monies of the people of 

Saskatchewan. There are much more necessary services, as has been indicated by the government, that 

the money could have been expended on in this present year. 

 

I think for that reason, Mr. Speaker, that any hon. member in this House at this time, in voting on a 

measure to increase taxes must take these matters into account. I know that the Premier and the 

Provincial Treasurer, the Minister of Health also, will say again that we are being irresponsible because 

of the fact that on second reading we supported the medical care plan, and now we are not prepared to 

vote increased taxes. But I am going to say to him and the other speakers that there is no mention in this 

Bill of prepaid medical services, so that any one that can stand up and state that these increased taxes are 

for this purpose, are quite wrong because there is no statement in this Act that states these monies are 

going to pay for the cost of a medical insurance plan. It is only statements by the Ministers of the 

government offices that we 



 

November 16, 1961 

 

 

8 

have to accept, in order to understand that these monies will go for that purpose. 

 

So I say for the ministers to contend that by voting against tax increases we are voting against prepaid 

medical services is one of the most ridiculous statements that could possibly be made, because there is 

nothing to prevent this Government from taking any of the revenues that they have at present and 

making use of those revenues for the purpose of providing prepaid medical services for the people of 

this province — absolutely nothing that can prevent them from using any of the revenue in the general 

revenues of the province for this purpose. 

 

I say that, in voting against the Education and Hospitalization Tax there is only one thing that members 

are voting against, and that is strictly an increase in taxes at the present time. They are not voting on any 

other issue, when they cast their vote either for or against the increase in the education and hospital tax. 

That is strictly what they are voting against — an increase in the tax burden for the people of this 

province. I think at the present time that all members of this legislature are in a position of 

responsibility, to see to it that further burdens are not placed on the taxpayers of this province, in a year 

of very difficult circumstances economically, particularly in the rural areas of our province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I think I have made it plain that I am prepared at this time to vote against the 

act to provide increases in education and hospitalisation taxes. 

 

The question being put, if was agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS  31 
 

Lloyd  Meakes 

Dewhurst Thurston Thiessen 

Williams Erb Stevens 

McIntosh Nicholson Kluzak 

Blakeney Turnbull Dahlman 

Brockelbank Stone Michayluk 

Walker Whelan Semchuk 

Nollet Berezowsky Perkins 

Kuziak Kramer Peterson 

Cooper (Mrs.) Johnson Broten 

Strum (Mrs.) 

Davies 

  

 



 

November 16, 1961 

 

 

9 

NAYS  14 
 

Thatcher Gardiner Horsman 

Batten (Mrs.) Foley Coderre 

Barrie Guy MacDougall 

Danielson Boldt Gallagher 

Cameron Klein  

 

The Assembly then resolved itself into a Commission of the Whole. 

 

SECOND READING 

 

Bill No. 5 — An Act respecting Allowances to Members of the Legislative Assembly, and to Certain 

Other Persons, for the Second Session of 1961. 

 

Premier Lloyd:  This is, of course, the Bill which determines the indemnity for members of the 

legislature during this session. It also establishes some rates of remuneration for certain officials who 

attend the legislature. The Bill was drawn and introduced earlier, when it was felt there was some 

possibility of a session much shorter than the present one, and I may say that I have intention tomorrow 

in committee of introducing House amendments which would double the amounts as referred to in the 

Bill. It is a little difficult to know just what basis should be used to arrive at this particular figures. I have 

gone back over the other special sessions insofar as they may form a precedent, and in the special 

session of 1955, the legislature sat for 17 days and the indemnity at that time was $400. On the other 

hand, in 1952 the session was $225. 

 

Obviously the same principle was not applied to arriving at the indemnities of these two. The figure 

which I have referred to, Mr. Speaker, I understand is generally acceptable, but there may be and 

probably will be some difference of opinion with regard to it. 

 

I would suggest that the figure itself could be discussed when we have a bit more time in Commission of 

the Whole tomorrow, and I would at this time move second reading of this Bill. 

 

(Agreed) 

 

The House then adjourned at 10:00 o’clock p.m. 


