




















































Hansard: February 10, 1961


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

FIRST SESSION — FOURTEENTH LEGISLATURE 

2nd Day 

 

Friday, February 10, 1961. 

 

The House met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

TRIBUTES TO DECEASED FORMER MEMBERS 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, it has become traditional in this Assembly on the first day after the 

Official Opening to pause and pay tribute to former Members of the Legislative Assembly, who have 

passed away since last we met. This is a good time to remind ourselves that time like an ever rolling 

stream bears all its sons away. Every year that we meet here we have to record a number of men or 

women who have sat in this Legislative Assembly, and who have ended their early career. It seems to 

me most appropriate first that we should pay tribute to the contribution which they made to the province 

and to the constituencies which they represented, and secondly that we should remind ourselves, as well 

as the people whom we represent, of the great debt which we owe, not only to those who sat in this 

Legislature but to all the pioneers who helped to build Saskatchewan and make it what it is today. 

 

It seems to me that, particularly in a young country and in an even younger province, it is most fitting 

that we should constantly be reminding our people of the rock from whence they were hewn, and should 

constantly give to our people a sense of history. No people are just what they are today without having 

received the benefits of their inheritance. We owe much to the men and women who have gone before 

us who have shaped the culture, social and economic life of our province. It is most fitting that today we 

should pay this tribute to these particular men, and in doing so pay tribute to all who have gone before 

us, and all who have served our province and our people. 

 

There are six former Members of the Legislature whose deaths have been recorded since last we met. 

Some 



 

February 10, 1961 

 

 

2 

of them will be known to some of the older Members of the Legislature, there may be some whom none 

of us was personally acquainted with. 

 

There was Mr. William George Baker who was a former Member for the City of Moose Jaw, who sat in 

the Legislative Assembly from 1921-1929 and from 1938-1944. He was prominent in railway circles, 

and was an active Member in the Legislature. I know that some of the Members who sat here during 

those periods will remember Mr. Baker and may want to join in paying tribute to him. 

 

There was also J.W. Burton who almost all of us here will remember. He sat in the Legislature from 

1938-1943, and in the Federal Parliament from 1943-1949, and then sat in this Legislature again during 

the 1952-1956 session. During this latter period he was a Member of the Cabinet. Joe Burton, as he was 

known to all of us who knew him, had been a prominent worker in the Farmer‟s Movement and in the 

political party to which he belonged. He was an active member of The Knights of Columbus. He was 

one of the real sons of the soil, and everyone who met him, I am sure, was impressed with his integrity 

and his solid honesty and with his deep grasp of the problems which confronted the people of this 

province, particularly in the rural areas. Joe Burton‟s passing last year was a real loss to his friends. 

Although it didn‟t come suddenly because he had been ill for a long time, all of us mourn deeply at his 

passing. 

 

Some of the older Members will remember Harvie James Dorrance M.C., M.M. who sat in the 

Legislature from 1934 to 1938 representing the constituency of Tisdale. A man who was decorated twice 

in the first World War, and who was very active in Veteran‟s Affairs and acted as a member of the 

Soldier‟s Settlement Board. 

 

Some of the older Members may remember the Member Albert Hermanson who was a Member from 

Canora from 1917 to 1925 who passed away during the past year. 

 

Then many of the Members will remember J.M. Parker. Mr. Parker represented the constituency of 

Touchwood from 1917-1938, and then from 1934 until 1938 he occupied the position of Speaker, the 

position which you now hold, sir. Following leaving the Legislature in 1938 he became Clerk of the 

Legislative Assembly until 1949. I didn‟t have the privilege of knowing Mr. Parker while 



 

February 10, 1961 

 

 

3 

he was in the House, either as Speaker or as a Member, but I did work with him during the period that he 

was Clerk of the Assembly, and no one could wish for a more courteous, a more helpful or a more 

cheerful Clerk of the Assembly than was Mr. Parker. He retired to Ontario and periodically when he 

came back to visit Saskatchewan he always came in to see us. As a matter of fact I had just heard of his 

last illness and had written him just two days before I received word of his death. He always kept a 

lively interest in the Province and was one of the men who could tell you where nearly all the former 

Members were. He kept a little list of where they were and what they were doing and was a constant 

source of information because of his great interest in the Members who had sat in this House over the 

years. 

 

Then there was Mr. Vincent Reynolds Smith, who was the Member for Yorkton from 1934 to 1938, and 

later became a District Court Judge from 1944 on. He recently died in Vancouver. 

 

I am sure Mr. Speaker that the Members of the Assembly would like to pay tribute to these Members 

and that we would like to put on the record our recognition of the service which they have rendered. We 

would like to state to the public and to their families our deep sympathy in their time of bereavement. I 

would therefore like to move sir, seconded by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Thatcher: 

 

“That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret, the passing since the last Session of six former 

Members of this Assembly, and express its grateful appreciation of the contributions each made to his 

community, his constituency, and to this Province: 

 

William George Baker, former Member for Moose Jaw City in the Saskatchewan Legislature from 

1921 until 1929, and again from 1938 until 1944. He was a railwayman active in the affairs of the 

Brotherhood of Railway Trainmen, civic and provincial associations, and the Masonic Lodge; 

 

Joseph William Burton, a pioneer of the Humboldt district, who died at Humboldt on July 31, 1960. 

Mr. Burton was born in Kansas, U.S.A., later moving with his family to the Humboldt district. He was 

active in community, agricultural, political and fraternal organizations. Mr. Burton represented the 

Humboldt Constituency in the Saskatchewan Legislature from 1938 until 1943, when he resigned to 

contest a Federal seat. Having sat in the House of Commons from 1943 until 1949, he returned to sit 

again as the Member for Humboldt in the Twelfth Legislature of Saskatchewan from 1953 to 1956, 

during which time he served as Provincial 



 

February 10, 1961 

 

 

4 

Secretary; 

 

Harvie James Dorrance, M.C., M.M., who was born at Seaforth, Ontario, farmed in Saskatchewan, 

served in both World War I and World War II, and died in Victoria, British Columbia, on November 

15, 1960. Mr. Dorrance served in the Canadian Expeditionary Force during the First World War, 

winning both the Military Medal and the Military Cross. He sat in this House as Member for the 

Constituency of Tisdale from 1934 until 1938, serving later on the Solider Settlement Board and 

Manager of the Estates of the Mentally Incompetent. During World War II he was attached to Number 

120 Training Centre at Regina; 

 

Albert Hermanson, Member for the Constituency of Canora from 1917 until 1925, who died at his 

home in Dunnville, Ontario, on December 2, 1960. Mr. Hermanson was born in Sweden, came to 

Canada in 1903, and engaged in farming activities in Saskatchewan. He served as Secretary-Treasurer 

of the Rural Municipality of Buchanan, and later as the Swedish Consul in Winnipeg; 

 

John Mason Parker, who died at Watford, Ontario, on December 20, 1960. Mr. Parker was a farmer 

actively interested in farm, municipal, and provincial affairs having been President of the Canadian 

Co-operative Company, Limited, President of the Kelliher Agricultural Society, Councillor and Reeve 

of the Rural Municipality of Kellross, and Member of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

representing the Constituency of Touchwood from 1917 until 1938. He was elected Speaker at the 

First Session of the Eighth Legislature, and occupied the Chair of the Assembly from 1934 until 1938. 

From 1939 to 1949 he served as Clerk of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Vincent Reynolds Smith, Q.C., a Member of this Legislature for the Yorkton Constituency from 1934 

to 1938 and a District Court Judge since 1944, he died in Vancouver on May 3, 1960. Judge Smith 

was born in Nova Scotia, educated at St. Francis Xavier and Dalhousie Universities, and practised law 

in Saskatchewan before being elevated to the Bench. He was active at various times in executive 

positions on the Yorkton Board of Trade, the Canadian Red Cross Association, the Knights of 

Columbus, and as Vice-President of the Yorkton Victoria Hospital. 



 

February 10, 1961 

 

 

5 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere 

sympathies with the members of the bereaved families. 

 

Mr. Ross Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I should certainly like to associate 

myself and my colleagues with the remarks just made by the Premier. Unfortunately, I was not 

personally acquainted with many of these deceased Members. However, the Hon. Member from Arm 

River knew many of them intimately, and we have suggested that he should say a few words at this time 

on behalf of the official opposition. 

 

Mr. G. Herman Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, during the last few Sessions as the Premier 

has stated it has been a yearly occurrence in this House to pay tribute to former Members of this 

Legislature, and as time goes on there are less and less of these old timers who remain. I shall not 

venture too deeply into the activities and work of these Members because the Premier has already done 

so. I only want to say this: I had the opportunity of sitting in this House from 1934 until 1938 with Mr. 

Baker. Mr. Baker was a labour man and he took the decisions of the Members of this House very 

seriously. His experience let him present the problems of labour to this House very ably and clearly, and 

at all times he served with distinction. There was more about labour and labour legislation in this House 

at that time than there is now because it was during the war and there was a lot of legislation not only 

here but in the Dominion Government which affected the welfare of the nation. He had a good 

knowledge of all these problems and he was of invaluable service to the Legislature as a whole. He 

applied his talents to the discretion of the Legislature, and along these lines he made a very valuable 

contribution to the work of the House. 

 

I remember very well Mr. Dorrance. He was a veteran of both the first and the second World Wars. He 

was a very retiring sort of chap. He was not very prominent shall I say, but he had a wonderful record 

during the war. He was decorated during the first war and he served in the Legislature for four years. I 

don‟t think there was anyone in the House at that time who was more listened to or any Private Member 

of the House, who exhibited a better knowledge and a more sane and practical knowledge about the 

problems of that time in general. 

 

He gave the fullest measure of service to his community and his country. He served his country and his 

province with distinction and he should so be remembered. 



 

February 10, 1961 

 

 

6 

Then we had a stranger, so far as I was concerned, the gentleman by the name of Mr. Hermanson. The 

closest I ever was to him was when I was sitting in the gallery once when he was sitting on the floor of 

the House during one of the Sessions. I heard quite a bit about him from the then Speaker of the House 

who was a Member for Arm River. He gave me quite a bit of information about him. He was appointed 

as Swedish Consul in the city of Winnipeg, and he also acted as agent for the British American 

Steamship Lines in the city of Winnipeg for some time. 

 

Then the one that I know probably better than anyone else and had more opportunity to associate with 

him was Mr. Parker. Mr. Parker served as a Member in this House for 21 years. He came into this House 

with a wide background of municipal work, and so had a practical knowledge of experience in both 

municipal and provincial matters. He gave of this experience freely. In 1934 he was elected as Speaker 

of this House. Without throwing any reflections on anyone who has occupied that honourable position in 

the years that I have been here, Mr. Speaker, I think he was the more suited, both mentally and every 

other way, for holding that position than anyone who has ever been in this House. He was cool and 

collected; he was fair; he had the ability to straighten things out and pacify everyone; and he kept things 

very orderly during the proceedings of the House. He had served his country, not only as Speaker but as 

a Member of this House, for 21 years. I am sure the province has benefited to a great extent by the 

service, not only of Mr. Parker, but of all these other persons which I have mentioned. 

 

I was in this House when Mr. Burton was a Member. I knew him before he came into this House. He 

was very much interested in co-operative work, the Wheat Pool, and municipal work, and he served for 

some time here when he was elected to the Federal House. I think Mr. Burton was one of the most 

sincere and honest gentlemen I ever met. He felt very strongly about his opinions at times. I can assure 

you that I wish to associate myself with other Members of this House in extending sympathy to his 

family. 

 

Then I also sat in this House with Mr. Smith from Yorkton. As you all know, Mr. Smith was a legal man 

and he was later appointed a District Court Judge after serving in this House. He did not take a very 

active part in the House; he was here for only four years, but of course, being a legal man he always had 

the knowledge and the ability to discourse on legislation before this House with a mind which was clear, 

and he could express his point on some of the weaknesses and on some of the things that came up in the 

House. He was later appointed to the Bench and I think so far as everyone knows I never heard anything 

except that he carried on that great responsibility with honour and distinction to his legal profession. 



 

February 10, 1961 

 

 

7 

Mr. Speaker, this is a bout all I have to add. As I said before, I wish to associate myself with the other 

Members on this side of the House, with the sentiments expressed by the Premier and others in this 

House. 

 

Hon. W.G. Davies (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, I am very glad to associate myself 

with the resolution now before the House and to join in the expressions that have already been stated by 

the Hon. Premier and the Hon. Member from Arm River, Mr. Danielson. 

 

I would particularly like to pay a word of tribute to the memory of George Baker, who has already been 

mentioned, was a Member for 14 years of this Legislature. I did not have the pleasure of knowing Mr. 

Baker intimately, but I had the pleasure of his acquaintance and on numerous occasions I did discuss 

with him a number of questions relating to the field of organized labour. I knew a great number of 

people who did now Mr. Baker, however, and I know of none who did not speak of him except in terms 

of deep respect. He was known for an independent outlook. He did very good work as a labour 

representative, and as a grievance man for his own lodge, and other lodges within the railway 

movement. I think that generally speaking Mr. Baker could be summed up under one word, and that is 

the word „integrity‟. 

 

Notwithstanding his considerable association in the field of organized labour, he didn‟t limit his 

activities to this. He was very active in other Moose Jaw organizations, and as already noted, in civic 

affairs and generally speaking in all matters related to the welfare of the Moose Jaw community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in these brief words may I join in what has been said and also repeat that Mr. Baker will be 

well remembered in Moose Jaw and in the circle of trade unionists in this province, particularly the 

railroads, for his good works. I think in the final analysis that this is the best monument of all. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to voice my 

support of this motion and say a few words about some of the deceased Members. In regard to George 

Baker, I would like to say I sat in the House with him for a term and that he was certainly a good 

Member of the Legislature, and even we farmers got along with this labour man pretty well. 

 

“Joe” Burton of Humboldt was a particular friend of mine, whom I worked with for a good many years 

and 



 

February 10, 1961 

 

 

8 

as a matter of fact he shared quarters with me for a number of years during the Session. It is a real 

sorrow to lose such men as “Joe” Burton. 

 

Harvie Dorrance was my predecessor as Member for Tisdale constituency and he had a very fine 

reputation in that area. The battle that we had was nothing personal at all, but purely a political battle. 

He did command the respect of people in that community. I might mention that right after the First 

World War when this new area north of Carragana and Porcupine Plain was opened up for soldier 

settlers, Harvie Dorrance and his wife were two of the earlier settlers in that area. Mrs. Dorrance also 

served in the Forces as a nurse and was of course entitled to privileges under The Soldier Settlement 

Act. They took up land together in that area. 

 

I didn‟t have the pleasure of knowing either Mr. Hermanson or Mr. Smith, but Mr. Parker I did know 

very well as Clerk of this Legislature from 1938 until he retired from that position in 1949. He was 

certainly one of the most kindly and friendly gentlemen that I have ever known. It is certainly with 

regret that we heard of the passing of these men, and we do want to recognize the contribution they have 

made to the public life of our province. 

 

Mr. Frank Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to say a few words in addition to 

what has been said about Mr. Parker. Mr. Parker is one of my earliest memories. I remember him very 

well coming to visit my father on the farm, and I remember once I had the job of guiding him out to the 

field. I want to say how much Mr. Parker was respected and how well he is remembered in the district 

where he farmed for so many years. He was a kindly man. Everybody that lived in that community will 

tell you that. He was a good neighbour and a good citizen. He has one brother still living in the village 

of Kelliher. I too would like to add my words of sympathy to his family on the occasion of his passing. 

 

Mr. Bernard D. Gallagher (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, in tribute to the late Judge Smith; I had known 

Mr. Smith since my early childhood. He represented the Yorkton constituency between the period 1934 

and 1938 and was highly regarded as a man of great honesty and sincerity, and of high ideals and strong 

convictions. These high ideals he lived by in his practice of law earned him his elevation to the Bench. 

His convictions brought him into this Legislature as a Member of which he devoted a full measure of his 

time and talent to the service of the people he represented, 



 

February 10, 1961 

 

 

9 

and all the people of this province and country. His life was an inspiration for all with whom he came in 

contact, and especially a fine example for me to have succeeded him in representing the Yorkton area. 

 

In these few words, Mr. Speaker, may I convey my feelings of tribute to the Members of this Assembly. 

 

Mr. H. Ray Dahlman (Bengough): — Mr. Speaker, being a new Member of this Legislature, and not 

having known any of these men except two, Mr. Parker and Mr. Burton by sight — still I feel that those 

of us who have come into public life ought to pay recognition to those people who have served in this 

capacity before us. I don‟t think anyone who ever sat in this Legislature or any Legislature in the 

Dominion of Canada, ever sat there with the idea or the thought or the hope of getting rich. In my 

opinion, it was self-sacrifice. They were men who were determined to do something on behalf of their 

fellow men. 

 

I think all these men took on the public responsibility because they wanted to see progress take place. 

These men were leaning posts — that is, animated leaning posts. If it is true that one in every eighteen of 

our people has to assume some sort of public responsibility, then it follows that many people must be 

willing to make sacrifices on behalf of society. These people who have the courage to stand up and take 

the responsibility of seeing that social justice is done and social progress is made, earn a great deal of 

respect and admiration from all of us. It has been said “Greater love hath no man than he who would 

give his life for another.” These men have not given their lives for others, but at least we can say they 

gave part of their lives to others. 

 

With these few words, Mr. Speaker, I would like to add my words of appreciation for the work and the 

loyalty with which these men have served. 

 

Hon. E.I. Wood (Speaker): — While it is not the usual custom for the Speaker to take part in debates, 

as present Speaker of the Legislature I feel I would like to add my words of condolence to the relatives 

of Mr. John Mason Parker, a gentleman who has served this province both as Speaker of this Assembly 

and as Clerk. 



 

February 10, 1961 

 

 

10 

The question being put, it was agreed to unanimously by silent, standing vote. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by Mr. Thatcher: 

 

“That the Resolution just passed, together with transcripts or oral tributes to the memory of deceased 

former Members, be communicated to the bereaved families, on behalf of this Assembly, by Mr. 

Speaker.” 

 

The question being put, it was agreed to unanimously. 

 

TRIBUTE TO MELVILLE CITY 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, I think following the statement made in regard to the 

passing of former Members of the Legislature, that we should for a moment express a thought with 

regard to the newest city in the province of Saskatchewan, the City of Melville. I am quite certain I can 

express with a great deal of pride the fact that I have on this occasion the opportunity of representing the 

people of the City of Melville, and to express on behalf of the Members of this Legislature our best 

wishes to that community and to the people of Melville on becoming a city during the past year. 

 

I am taking the opportunity of presenting to the Members of the Legislature a brochure on the City of 

Melville, along with the latest edition of „The Melville Advance‟ which has become during the past few 

years one of the best known news periodicals that we have in the province of Saskatchewan. As well, 

during the past year, one of the producers of cheese in the province of Saskatchewan and throughout 

Canada, the Crescent Dairies, have seen fit to make Melville the site of their newest plant in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and although not yet producing cheese in the City of Melville, they have seen 

fit to present to the Members of the Legislature a sample of their product which they hope in the very 

near future they will be producing and making it a new industry in the City of Melville. 

 

Melville has, in the way of years, a short history, but it has a history of which it can well be proud. It has 

a history of difficult periods and difficult trials, but the people of the community fought their way 

through and they have now come to the point where they have decided to establish themselves as one of 

Saskatchewan‟s cities. 



 

February 10, 1961 

 

 

11 

I would like at this time, because of the fact that in the tributes that were paid a few moments ago, 

reference was made to Mr. Joe Burton who served in this Legislature, to state that I am quite sure he 

would be quite proud of the fact that his son John had a great deal to do with formation and the 

production of the brochure which you have on your desk. 

 

I am quite certain as well that he would be proud of the fact that on the first page of the edition of „The 

Melville Advance‟ the picture of some of the businessmen of that community appears, and in that 

picture is found a picture of his son. So I think it is very fitting that on this occasion the City of Melville 

should be assisted in the celebration of its city status by the son of one of the men to whom we have paid 

tribute here today, for his work and interest in behalf of the people of the province. 

 

I might say too, Melville has added to the community life and welfare of this province in a way in which 

we can be proud of. Today they show the place they hold and the esteem not only of the people of this 

province, the people of their own area, but the people of the Dominion of Canada as a whole, because of 

the fact that three citizens of the City of Melville today hold high places in organizations to which they 

belong in the Dominion of Canada. One is Mr. Rhys Williams, who is President of the Canadian 

Shorthorn Breeders‟ Association; Mr. Gordon Jukes, editor of „The Melville Advance‟, and Secretary 

Manager of the Canadian Amateur Hockey Association; and Mr. Leo McCabe who is President of the 

Canadian Hatcheries Association. In these three associations you can well see the variety of life within 

the Melville community. Everyone has heard of the feats in the past of the famous Melville Millionaires 

and we all know well that sports and athletics have played a great part in the development of the 

community. 

 

As well, in relation to the Canadian Shorthorn Breeders‟ Association and the Canadian Hatcheries 

Association, it brings to notice the fact that today Melville is fast becoming one of the leaders in the 

field of dairy and poultry industries, and today Melville has the highest processed poultry shipments of 

any point in the Dominion of Canada. I believe that with a past such as this, and with a future that 

appears to be staring the new city in the fact, that Melville should have a great future, and should take its 

place as one of the great cities of our province. 

 

So I deem it an honour this afternoon to have the privilege of extending on behalf of the Members, to 

Mayor Bailey and the people of his community, our hope that the City of Melville will have many 

successful years in the 



 

February 10, 1961 

 

 

12 

future and we hope that success will bless the activities of the people of the community and those that 

represent them in their Council and in the everyday life of our province, that they might continue to play 

the important part that they have in the past. 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, as a former resident of the City of Melville 

I too would like to say a few words, following the remarks made by the Member for that constituency. 

He mentioned the Melville Millionaires hockey team, and I think that was the first time I ever heard of 

the town, back around the time of the first World War when they achieved such fame in winning the 

Allen Cup. I believe there was some dispute about it later, but I think we should give Melville the 

benefit of the doubt. 

 

It was sometime in the early part of 1917 when I had my first glimpse of the town, as it was known then, 

having gone through there on a troop train. After the War I was located there for periods in two or three 

years of the early „20‟s, and found the people there quite friendly and an up-and-coming group. Many of 

them are still there and many of them are still active at the present time. It was, of course, a prairie 

railway town and it had a very large railway pay-roll. Unfortunately in the last few years that has 

declined, but that of course is due to technological changes. As the hon. Member for Melville (Mr. 

Gardiner) referred to His Worship Mayor Bailey a few moments ago, I do recall that he started his 

railway career in that town when he was a late „teenager‟; he started in as call-boy, so Rae has got along 

very well in the world. 

 

I hope you‟ll pardon my reminiscing here for a moment or two. The first election campaign I ever 

attended or at least the first meetings I ever attended were in the town hall there during the campaign of 

1921. Some of us may remember that the Progressive Party made quite serious inroads into the 

government of that day. 

 

Being a mixed farming district there was a tremendous amount of butter shipped out of the town of 

Melville, and I don‟t know yet whether or not the argument has ever ended as to which is the turkey 

centre of Canada, Yorkton or Melville. 

 

I have been back from time to time and have been greatly impressed by the advances made by the town. 

It is now modern — it had power of a kind at that time, a local plant; now it has power from the Power 

Corporation, gas, running water, something unheard of in the days I speak of. So there is a great deal of 

credit coming to the people who have lived there over the years. 



 

February 10, 1961 

 

 

13 

I had the honour, Mr. Speaker, to represent the Government when Melville was made a City in 

September of last year. The hon. Member was there on that occasion, and I believe we were both at our 

flowery best during the evening‟s proceedings, and I can think of nothing better than just to repeat what 

I did say when I ended my talk on that occasion. Here is what I said: 

 

“In the early years Melville district was populated by sturdy men and women from not only eastern 

Canada and the British Isles, but from many countries and south and central Europe. Their children 

and grandchildren have intermarried to produce a strong and virile people. May I here pay tribute to 

those early pioneers who came to this area before or at the time of the railway. Their self-sacrifice, 

their energy and their vision made it easier for those who came later. Situated in a splendid farming 

district, Melville has forged ahead and today we find it the eleventh Saskatchewan City.” 

 

I take great pleasure, Mr. Speaker, in concurring with the remarks just made by the hon. Member for 

Melville. 

 

Premier Douglas: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that I speak for all Members, not only on this side of the 

House but on the other side of the House, in extending congratulations to the people of Melville on the 

new high status which they have achieved. We are all delighted to see Melville become a city. We are 

convinced that the progress which they have made in the past is only indicative of the much greater 

progress which they will make in the future. I am sure that Members from all parts of the House and the 

people whom they represent will like to have extended to the citizens of Melville, our heartiest 

congratulations on this important milestone in their civic development, and our best wishes for their 

future. 

 

Secondly may I extend to the Member for Melville (Mr. Gardiner) our thanks for putting on our desks 

the paper and the brochure, and the sample of cheese. I am not a connoisseur of cheese, although I like 

cheese, but the people who are connoisseurs of cheese speak very highly of the cheese which is made in 

that area, and all of us are looking forward to the development of the cheese industry in Melville. I think 

we all appreciate the trouble which the hon. Member has taken. I hope he will accept our thanks. 

 

The Assembly then adjourned at 3:30 o‟clock p.m. 


