



















































Hansard: April 02, 1962


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

27th Day 

 

Monday, April 2, 1962. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT: TRANSPORTATION OF FEED AND FODDER 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are proceeded 

with I would like to announce to the House that the transportation assistance policy on the movement of 

feed and fodder has been extended to April 30th and the assistance for the movement of seed oats has 

been extended to May 31st. 

 

I would also like to announce to the House that I have now received word from the federal government 

that they are prepared to share the transportation assistance on the movement of seed oats. 

 

QUESTION: NEGOTIATIONS WITH COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS AND SURGEONS 

 

Mr. W. Ross Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are 

called, I should like to direct a question to the Minister of Public Health. 

 

Has he any report to give the House at this time on the negotiations which took place yesterday between 

the government and the College of Physicians and Surgeons on the medical plan? 

 

Hon. W.G. Davies (Minister of Public Health): — I think, Mr. Speaker, that the only statement I can 

make at this time would be as follows; that a meeting was held all day Sunday and heard and reviewed 

presentations of both the government and the College of Physicians and Surgeons. It was a agreed that 

the parties would separately consider the subjects that had been discussed and of course this would have 

to be done in meetings of the two parties. I might say in this connection that the college 



 

April 2, 1962 

 

 

2 

will need some time before they can arrange their meeting for various meetings. 

 

It was further agreed that another meeting could be arranged if there appeared to be a measure of a 

agreement on principles and this is how the matter stands today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Could I ask a further question of the Minister of Health? In view of the apparent 

breakdown in negotiations between the government and the college . . .  

 

Premier Lloyd: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that this question is definitely 

leading into the area of debate and I submit than this is a period which is not set aside for debate, nor is it 

a period set aside for making of statements of the kind which the Leader of the Opposition has just 

made. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I will proceed as follows then, Mr. Speaker. Would the Minister of Health state 

whether it is still the intention of this government to introduce its health scheme July 1st without the 

co-operation of the doctors? 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — Mr. Speaker, I think it is the intention of the government to proceed with the 

health scheme on July 1st. We hope at that time for the co-operation of the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I have one final question to direct to the Minister of Health. Does the 

government propose to bring in an amendment to the medical bill at the current session of the 

legislature? 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — Mr. Speaker, I have no amendments at this time to propose or to put before the 

legislature. 

 

CONGRATULATIONS TO MOOSE JAW JUNIOR CANUCKS 

 

Mr. Gordon T. Snyder (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are proceeded 

with I am sure that all hon. members will want to join with me in congratulating the Moose Jaw Junior 

Canucks in their victory in capturing the South Saskatchewan title. This was done of course, Mr. 

Speaker, at the expense of another fine hockey club stemming from the 



 

April 2, 1962 

 

 

3 

Queen City of Regina, and I am sure that they also would like to join with us in extending the wish that 

they will proceed, and wish them every success in their future engagements. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

WELCOME TO LAKESHORE HOMEMAKERS CLUB 

 

Mr. Hans A. Broten (Watrous): — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the hon. member for Last Mountain 

and on his behalf, I would like to bring to the attention of the members a fine group of citizens from the 

Govan area, the Lakeshore Homemakers Club, who organized a family outing, and Sir, they have told 

me that they even allowed their husbands to come along. They are headed by their president, Mrs. Ernie 

Aldren and Mrs. Clarence Landstrom, convener of the legislative committee. I am sure that we wish 

them an enjoyable and profitable afternoon and a safe return home. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 44 — AN ACT RESPECTING SAVINGS AND CREDIT UNIONS 

 

Hon. O.A. Turnbull (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to 

speak on this matter which relates to an act respecting savings and credit unions. The bill itself doesn‟t 

have any amendments in it that have not been recommended or discussed by the legislative committee of 

the Credit Union League, and it may be said therefore that all the amendments to The Credit Union Act 

do have the league‟s approval. 

 

I would like to mention to the House for those who may have forgotten, or may not be as well acquainted 

with the credit unions as other members are, that the credit union movement in Saskatchewan did start in 

1937 and the name of the first credit union as I recall it was the Hebrew Savings and Credit Union of 

Saskatchewan, which started off with a very modest sum of loan capital of some $200. The first credit 

union legislation was passed, as I seem to recall, around August and this particular association came into 

being in November, and by the end of the year had loaned out some $120. 

 

That was a very modest beginning Mr. Speaker, but since that time credit unions here have taken their 

place in the scheme of things as they have in other countries. It should be remembered first of all that the 

credit unions were designed as an instrument to fill some of the credit 



 

April 2, 1962 

 

 

4 

gaps that did exist, and were not designed and still are not designed to specifically compete with banking 

as we know it. They are designed primarily as a thrift promoting and saving agency and if they are in 

competition with any of the credit arms in our economy I would suggest that they would be more in 

competition with the small loans type of organization. I think in some provinces they have done, perhaps 

in some respects, a little better job than we have in Saskatchewan but the credit unions in Saskatchewan 

have done a first class job, and I think all members here in the legislature would like to compliment them 

on the type of work they have done. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: — Since that modest beginning in 1937 the total assets of credit unions now stand 

at $112 million. This represents a sharp increase of 26 per cent over the year before and the total number 

of loans that have been made since that original block of loans of $120 in 1937 now add up to $309 

million. To get some impression of the amount of support credit unions have, about 16 per cent of the 

population of Saskatchewan now have membership in credit unions. 

 

It can be said also, Mr. Speaker, that credit unions have never been involved in any type of a transaction 

that can be classed as improper handling of funds or in the nature of an embezzlement. It is true that 

some credit unions at times have gotten into difficulty but the credit unions themselves provided a 

mutual aid fund by which they could assist themselves and with the Credit Union League they are able to 

supply themselves with the type of coordination and management advice that the credit unions have had 

to have, in order to move forward. 

 

The government of the province of course took a very definite stand in the formation and promotion of 

credit unions and that is why the Department of Co-operatives and Co-operative Development was 

formed. We have in the past, not so much now, been instrumental in assisting communities understand 

what a credit union can and cannot do, and this the field service offered by the management advisory 

staff of the department has been able to do in the past. Now that the Credit Union League is growing in a 

strength and stature I would anticipate that it would require progressively less of our time as a 

department. 

 

I think the House would be interested in knowing that when we have offered to withdraw totally from 

this area the Credit Union League and the credit unions themselves ask us to say, as they still do rely on 

certain technical advice that our people can provide them, and of course 



 

April 2, 1962 

 

 

5 

due to the nature of the credit unions, the department must always be there for inspection and 

certification. 

 

The only amendments have to do with the nature of the mutual aid fund and there is some change of a 

modest nature in this. There are some amendments also in the functioning of the credit committee which 

changes the rule from a unanimous agreement to a majority agreement. I think as you go through the bill, 

and as we will go through the bill, members will appreciate that what we have done is bring the act up to 

date to celebrate the anniversary of the co-operative development which is 25 years this year, as a 

gesture more than a prime legislative requirement. We wanted to do two things; to provide those 

amendments the credit unions themselves thought were necessary, and at this time because it is the 25th 

anniversary, we thought this would serve to bring to the attention of the community generally by 

reviewing the whole of The Credit Union Act and bring it up to date. 

 

There has been a great deal said about credit unions and a good deal written. I draw attention to members 

of the House of one particular group of articles that were written by Pierre Burton, a well-known 

columnist, that are quoted in a bulletin from the Canadian Federation of Agriculture. Mr. Burton, in his 

easy-going and fluent style is able to give you the picture of how credit unions have helped individuals in 

their particular propositions and their particular financial transactions. He also draws some interesting 

comparisons between what an individual could have done if he had financed his transaction through a 

credit union rather than through a credit arm of a department store, or a small loan company. They are 

easy to read, they are hard-hitting, and they are informative. They are entitled, „The High Cost of 

Money‟. Any member who would like to get this from the Federation of Agriculture, I am sure, could 

have it for the writing. I am sure you would find it most interesting and enjoyable to read. 

 

I predict, Mr. Speaker, that credit unions are going to grow and in fact, in spite of the rather spectacular 

leap they took last year of 26.6 per cent, I think we can look for a continued rate of growth in 

Saskatchewan. The time will be coming I feel, when people who have a co-operative bent of mind will 

look forward to using other devices and perhaps developing other devices so that the money that is 

available in the co-operative field could be used to the ultimate effectiveness of the people that are 

interested in this particular type of economic development. I think it is a demonstration also of how 

people can assist themselves. 



 

April 2, 1962 

 

 

6 

I have seen, members here have seen I am sure, how a credit union has started in a community, and 

while it had taken some time to accumulate the assets, we have seen how individual members were able 

to purchase land, buildings; they may have used the money to develop community projects, and it is an 

interesting thing to see how some communities have used this money, where they have had sufficient 

flexibility in the types of loans that they were administering, to develop not only community curling 

rinks, but some of them have actually assisted in the buying of debentures for such things as sewer and 

water in the community, and it is an interesting type of thing and I think a healthy thing in demonstrating 

the will and ability of a community to self-help. I would like to see the credit unions continue not only to 

grow as they now have developed themselves, but to look forward, seriously, to developing new types of 

arrangements and I know that they are looking at these things and I know that we can be assured that 

they have both the wisdom and the courage to carry them out. 

 

With these few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading. 

 

Mr. G. Herman Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I am not going to make any speech on the 

second reading of this bill. I want to draw the attention of the House to the fact that the minister has a 

bill here, an old bill with numerous amendments and additions covering about 58 pages, and he never 

mentioned one word about what is in the bill. 

 

Are there any changes of principle, any extension of power, are there any penalties for infraction that are 

not in the old bill? Not a word about what is in this bill. After he devoted at least fifteen minutes to 

expounding about the philosophy and principles of credit union operations, I think this is a new method 

of political propaganda brought into this House. 

 

On second reading it is the duty of the minister, Mr. Speaker, to point out to the House what changes 

there are in the bill, not in detail but in a general way and he has absolutely failed to do that. He never 

said one word about this 58 pages of old bill and new bill, because it is both — numerous amendments 

and extensions in this bill — and I for one protest against being absolutely ignored so far as the minister 

is concerned about informing the House and pointing out these things which we should look for when 

we get into committee, and even before we get into committee. These things should be pointed out by 

the minister and members of this House could sit down in their leisure and check and scrutinize and see 

what the meaning of it really is. 



 

April 2, 1962 

 

 

7 

Mr. Robert Perkins (Nipawin): — I would like at this time, Mr. Speaker, to be allowed to say a word 

or two about this Bill No. 44: An Act Respecting Savings and Credit Unions — and also to make 

reference to the 25 years which credit unions have operated under the existing act. This act is essentially 

the same with amendments and changes to keep pace with changing conditions as the first Credit Union 

Act brought in in this province during the 1937 session of the provincial legislature. On September 28, 

1936 a brief was prepared and presented to Premier W.J. Patterson recommending the enactment of 

credit union legislation. This brief was prepared by a committee which had been set up by the conference 

of trading co-operatives at that time, this conference was headed by Mr. H.L. Fowler, then manager of 

Consumer Co-operative Refinery Limited. The legislation was passed the following session and 

proclaimed on June 30, 1937. 

 

The objects of the 1962 act are the same as those of 1937. They read as follows: — “The promotion of 

thrift among its members and the creation of a source of credit at legitimate rates of interest for 

provident and productive purposes.” 

 

The passing of this Credit Union Act in 1937 was preceded by many important meetings across this 

province attended by people who saw a need for the extension of credit facilities that were not available 

from the existing lending institutions of that time. 

 

In 1933 at the annual meeting of the Co-operative Union of Canada, held here in Regina, a resolution 

was passed urging the provincial government to set up or enact necessary legislation for the formation of 

credit unions, that is in 1933. At successive meetings of the Co-operative Trading Associations, which 

was later to become the Co-operative Union of Saskatchewan, much publicity was given to the need for 

credit union legislation and a great deal of information was assembled and study made as to the 

possibilities of the formation of credit unions. 

 

Such names as Mr. George Keen, then secretary of the Co-operative Union of Canada, Dr. Father Coady, 

a great leader of the co-operative union in Nova Scotia, Mr. W.E. Bohen, active at that time in the 

co-operative movement in the United States, and then our own Harry Fowler, James McKay, Bob 

McKay and hundreds of others (to name a few is to slight the rest). These names were prominent at the 

time of the formation and passing of the first Credit Union Act 27 years ago. It seems to me that because 

the 



 

April 2, 1962 

 

 

8 

legislation has required so little amendment up to this time and the fact that the spread and growth of 

credit unions has been so consistent is a living tribute to the vision and industry displayed by these 

leaders at that time. 

 

In the past 25 years credit unions have grown until approximately 16 per cent of the entire population of 

Saskatchewan are now members of credit unions. These organizations are filling a real need in their 

respective communities and I think I should say especially in the rural areas of this province. I know of 

several cases of people who have been assisted by loans from their local credit union when their credit 

rating was nil in other lending institutions. I could tell of a man who first got a relatively small loan of 

$50 from a local credit union when he was unable to get credit anywhere else and that loan, together 

with several others made since, were the means of him being able to get on his feet at the time, and he is 

now in a position where his credit is good anywhere. This man still thanks his local credit union for the 

extension of assistance and credit at that time when he could get it nowhere else. Examples such as this, 

I am sure, could be told by members of credit unions wherever a union has been formed. They are one of 

the principal reasons, I think, for the great popularity of credit unions at the present time in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that the operation of credit unions like other co-operatives 

brings out the best in the individual. Nowhere, it seems to me, can the principle of individual enterprises 

be practiced to the full extend without damage to society as in the co-operative framework. 

 

While in the strictly individualistic — sometimes called capitalistic private ownership, free enterprise — 

whatever you want to call it, freedom can very easily turn to license, ambition becomes geed, growing 

success becomes control, with monopolies and cartels and all their attendant evils, but in co-operative 

operations there are none of these dangers. In the co-operative field the harder one works, the more one 

earns, the more one spends within the co-operative, the more one benefits his fellow members. Let his 

fellow member be white, yellow or black, let him belong to any „ism, creed, or denomination, as long as 

a member of a co-operative, be it producer or consumer or credit union, so long as he markets his 

produce through a co-operative channel and so long as he buys his needs through co-operative facilities 

he is contributing to the welfare of every fellow member. 

 

Co-operative operation in trade or finance, I repeat, brings out the best in the individual It develops 

business ability by assisting an individual in assuming responsibility and conducting the affairs of his 

own 



 

April 2, 1962 

 

 

9 

organization and encourages active participation in his own co-operative enterprise, knowing all the time 

that in furthering his own best interests, he is also benefiting everyone of his fellow members. I maintain 

that in the field of co-operative endeavour we incorporate the best elements of both public and private 

ownership and control. Nowhere is the adage contributed to Kipling, „The strength of the wolf is the 

pack and the strength of the pack is the wolf‟ more clearly exemplified than in the operation of 

co-operative enterprise. 

 

A tribute to the anniversary of the co-operative act of 25 years ago would be incomplete without mention 

of one who has so recently passed from our midst, one who spent his life in dedicated service to the 

co-operative movement — the late Hon. L.F. McIntosh. He was the first Minister of Co-operatives and 

Co-operative Development in this province. He was the first man to hold such office in Canada. One of 

his late duties was assisting in the final preparation of this bill and one of his final interests to see it 

successfully through this legislature. May his devotion to service serve as an inspiration to those of us 

who are responsible for carrying out the provisions of this bill and of carrying forward the credit union 

movement. 

 

I would conclude, Mr. Speaker, with the hope that this bill may be passed unanimously in this legislature 

and that it may continue to serve as an instrument to serve the credit needs of the people of this province 

and also as an agency of self-help from the practiced saving of credit union members. 

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina City): — Mr. Speaker, the introduction of this bill in the Saskatchewan 

legislature today marks the most progressive step the credit union movement in Canada has taken to 

date. Credit union principles, practice and administration as set out in this bill establish a milestone in a 

continuous steady march by credit union members since the first legislation was introduced in this House 

25 years ago. In 25 years, Mr. Speaker, eighteen of them under this present administration, credit union 

assets, credit union membership and credit union services have increased by leaps and bounds. 

 

Starting with a few thousand dollars, the credit union movement in this province now has millions in 

assets and savings and many thousands of members. Consideration of this bill at second reading and, I 

hope, unanimous adoption of the principles involved would be accepted by thrifty, industrious, 

democratically-minded credit union members as 



 

April 2, 1962 

 

 

10 

a go-ahead signal in their advance toward control of their economic destiny through the credit union 

movement. 

 

The day before Lachie McIntosh passed away he asked me to speak on this bill; we all regret that this 

man, whose humble and sincere co-operative approach has helped this great movement is not here to 

introduce his bill on this 25th anniversary date. This would have been a proud moment; this would have 

been an achievement he would have treasured. Those who have worked in the credit union movement 

and those who understand and appreciate the contribution that Lachie made understand the high value he 

placed on his close association with his fellow credit union members. His contribution will always be 

remembered and appreciated by them. 

 

Where did the credit union idea come from, Mr. Speaker? Did the idea originate with wealthy, 

profit-bent individuals? Did it come from a handful of people bent on controlling financial resources for 

themselves? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the record of history tells us that it originated with a conscientious son of Germany, that it 

was brought to Canada by a son of the province of Quebec and was introduced to the United States by a 

Jewish descendant and resident of the New England states. Along with those that have already been 

mentioned by the hon. member for Nipawin (Mr. Perkins), it was promoted in Saskatchewan by a citizen 

of Icelandic origin who received valuable assistance form a Scotch-Canadian, an Irish-Canadian and a 

former citizen of Prince Edward Island. 

 

The first credit union in Saskatchewan was organized by the Jewish people of my constituency. The 

Saskatchewan credit union pioneers were Dr. Barney Arneson, who is Deputy Minister of Co-operatives, 

Dan Rankin, a co-op leader and Regina plains farmer, Tom Molloy, a former deputy minister of the 

government of Saskatchewan, and H.L. Fowler who is now the president of Federated Co-operatives. 

 

After the organization of the first credit union others followed rapidly and, Mr. Speaker, I call members‟ 

attention to the fact that the same principles that were practised then, the same idea of democratic control 

of credit at cost, the same theory of a fixed return of interest on shares, and rates of refund according to 

patronage, all these ideas that are continued in the present day, were the practices and the principles that 

encouraged and developed the credit unions of Saskatchewan. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 



 

April 2, 1962 

 

 

11 

Mr. Whelan: — They are continued, they are brought up to date in this bill. In my introductory remarks, 

Mr. Speaker, if I have digressed from the principle of the bill, it was only to remind the members of this 

house of the leaders whose imagination and foresight, whose courage and persistence have helped build 

a great credit and savings institution for the people of Saskatchewan. Looking at the bill itself, Mr. 

Speaker, I should like to mention three general characteristics and to trace and evaluate them under these 

headings. First, the aspect of democratic control; second, the service provided; third, government 

responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a credit union is an organization of people democratically controlled. Why do I say this? 

Why do I make this statement? Because, as have so many other members of this assembly, I have 

experienced the democratic function and operation of the credit union. You will find that the bill in its 

clauses provides that the directors be elected at a regularly called annual meeting, the legislation 

provides for election on a delegate basis or election from the membership at annual meetings. 

 

The credit committee, Mr. Speaker, is named by the board of directors. The supervisory committee, 

which controls the activity of the board and management of the credit union, is in effect the watch-dog, 

is also elected in part by the members at the annual meeting. The auditor, Mr. Speaker, is chosen by the 

general meeting each year. Why is this? Why is this provided in the bill? These people who are handling 

the funds of members, who are joined together with them to provide credit facilities, have to report and 

have to submit their stewardship at regular intervals. Compare this if you will with the directors of the 

local finance company who are thousands of miles away perhaps, controlling the policy, isolated from 

the circumstances, reporting only to the shareholders regarding financial return. 

 

In the credit union, Mr. Speaker, whether it is in association of co-operators or church groups, or group 

of employees, Leader-Post employees for instance, ethnic groups, they know their members and make 

loans to them according to their character, carefully investigating the security held in the manner set out 

in this bill. In respect to services, what kind of services does the credit union operation set out in this bill 

provide to members? One, it provides credit at cost. Two, it provides cheque-cashing facilities, 

re-invests their savings in loans to fellow members. It insures the loans and savings to provide members 

with a form of security in the event of death. 



 

April 2, 1962 

 

 

12 

Mr. Speaker, the credit union that I know best buys homes for young people, provides the funds to take 

people through university, purchases household appliances, used farm machinery, seed oats, grain bins, 

livestock, yes, Mr. Speaker, it purchases new fur coats for members, sports cars, bicycles, seed oats, 

grain bins, livestock. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, our credit union, I am sure the same policy applies to every credit union in this 

province, has placed its trust in the rank and file citizens. The members have never let them down. 

 

The third point I want to raise, and I want the members of this Assembly to remember, is that we as 

legislators have a responsibility that is set out in this bill. As legislators we have to hire a registrar, we 

have to give guidance in the establishing of by-laws, in the organization of a loaning policy, in the 

functioning of a supervisory committee and the operation of a credit committee, and the collection of 

loans and the interpretation of by-laws and careful analysis of the over-all operation of the credit union. 

Those who would question the services and misplace the responsibility established throughout this bill 

have a limited knowledge and no appreciation of the genuine need for guidance from a government 

department in the handling of $130 million of credit union funds. 

 

It might be said, Mr. Speaker, that a credit union like Sherwood Credit Union, which I had the privilege 

of directing along with my colleague from Regina City, the hon. Provincial Treasurer, would not need 

supervision because of its size, it now has approximately $9 million in assets. Let me tell the Assembly 

this, once a year the members with share savings in our credit union can be sure the by-laws are checked, 

the supervisory and credit committees‟ reports are read one at a time and a careful report made on each 

delinquent loan to the board of directors by qualified, experienced, conscientious and competent 

government supervisors. This credit union has a good staff and management, but let me tell the House 

this, as a board of directors we readily accepted the credit union inspectors recommendations for we 

know that — and everyone of us agree I am sure, that they too are interested in the welfare of credit 

union members. 

 

As an officer and a credit union member for a number of years, I can honestly say to this Assembly that I 

have never seen, nor do I think I will ever see, a more dedicated group of public servants than the credit 

union staff of the Department of Co-operatives, who will have a great deal to, I suggest, with 

establishing in a practical way on a day-to-day basis, in co-operation with directors and management, the 

principles contained in this bill. 



 

April 2, 1962 

 

 

13 

Mr. Speaker, first I have tried to point out to the Assembly how these financial institutions are 

democratically owned and controlled, Second, in a few concise statements I have tried to list, Mr. 

Speaker, for hon. members, the services the credit union can provide in the average community. Third, 

Mr. Speaker, I have quoted the need for supervision of these great credit and savings institutions. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, who has asked for this bill? Who has written its clauses and who has drafted 

the standard by-laws? Mr. Speaker, the credit union people through their chapters, through the Credit 

Union League, Credit Society, and the co-operators who work with them worked this out in close 

coordination with the Department of Co-operation. Mr. Speaker, who sponsors and endorses and 

recommends the organization of credit unions and the assistance in supervision by government? Mr. 

Speaker, credit unions and their supervision are recommended by churches, by all religious groups, 

Catholic, Anglican, United Church, Jewish people, Mr. Speaker, they are endorsed by occupational 

groups, by teachers, by machinists, steel workers, by auto workers, mine workers, brewery workers, 

electrical workers, packing house workers. Mr. Speaker, they are endorsed by ethnic groups, labour 

unions, school children, home and school groups. The common objective of them all is democratic 

control of financial resources at cost. 

 

This objective has been realized in part by the natives of Tanganyika, by the working people of the 

United States, by the residents of the Fiji Islands, by the citizens of Jamaica, by the fishermen of Nova 

Scotia, by the people of India, the school children of British Columbia, the community groups of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

On the final assessment of this bill, Mr. Speaker, I insist that the genius of man has not devised a better 

way of thwarting the money changers, of elevating the common man, of opening the door to economic 

security. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the principle of this bill, of co-operating democratically, of bringing all of these services to 

all of the citizens of this province, is the philosophy of the credit union movement and was the 

philosophy and the life of Lachie McIntosh. I will support second reading of the bill. 

 

Mrs. Gladys Strum (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, before this bill goes out of second reading I 

would like to add just a few words that have not been spoken in support of credit unions. I merely wish 

to 



 

April 2, 1962 

 

 

14 

say that credit unions are the necessary support for the co-operative movement. When the co-operative 

movement decided to separate credit from merchandising they made a great forward step in 

strengthening their co-operative stores. To me the credit union movement and the co-operative 

movement are very, very important far and above the dollar value of the saving. We have many values in 

our society on which there is no price tag, and the co-operative movement is one of them. The 

co-operative movement is an economic device with social implications and today we are faced with the 

necessity of bringing in to full citizenship our native people, the Eskimos, the Indians, and I know of no 

training school that is as appropriate or as valuable and effective as the co-operative movement. It has an 

honour system which develops the best aspect of citizenship and responsibility and it has an 

all-Canadian practice behind it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have campaigned in nine out of ten provinces and the one thing that you can always find 

when you go across Canada is the co-operative movement; and you meet all kinds of people that may 

differ from you in every other aspect of life but you probably are both members of a co-operative. I know 

of nothing that has delivered the people of Nova Scotia out of the hands of the fish merchants like the 

co-operative movement. I had the honour of being a guest at St. Francis Xavier at Antigonish and there I 

found that that great university of the people is the mouth piece of the co-operative movement and it has 

done more to raise the level of education and culture and understanding of business than any other single 

thing. When you travel in Europe everywhere you go you find the co-operative movement and the credit 

union which is strengthening it. 

 

I think it is appropriate that on this occasion, the 25th anniversary of the founding of this institution in 

our province, and as a memorial to our late minister, that we should pass this bill, that we should review 

every aspect of it and that we should consolidate it under a new act. I am glad that the previous speakers 

have covered all these aspects and this was the only thing that I wished to add, that as a tool for 

citizenship, as a promotion for those better instincts that are present in all men, I know of no better tools 

than the co-operative movement and its arm, the credit union. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the bill. 

 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I didn‟t expect that on a bill brought in for second 

reading it would be an occasion to pay tribute to a credit union on their 25th anniversary. 



 

April 2, 1962 

 

 

15 

I treated this as any bill coming for second reading. I am rather surprised that on this important occasion 

you didn‟t see fit to bring in a resolution appropriately drawn up to pay tribute to the credit unions 

themselves. 

 

I have taken an interest in credit unions for a good many years. I have served on boards of directors and 

as treasurer and have helped to organize credit unions. I have sitting with me, my co-partner here, a man 

who has spent 40 years in the co-operative movement and a man who has during his time in this 

legislature assisted in piloting through eighteen bills dealing with co-operatives. This man sat here when 

the credit union bill was first brought into the House in 1937. It is a tribute to those pioneers and to the 

thinking of those people in those days to hear speakers stand here now, 25 years later, and to say that the 

principles of this bill are in keeping with the principles set out in 1937 when the first credit union was 

set up. I would like to have the occasion to pay tribute to the founders of the credit union movement in 

the province of Saskatchewan and for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I feel I am not qualified to do that today. 

 

I would like to move leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

The debate was, on motion of Mr. Cameron, adjourned. 

 

The Assembly recessed at 5:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly resumed at 7:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

THIRD READING 

 

The Hon. E.I. Wood (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — moved  

 

“THAT, Bill No. 48 — An Act to amend the Saskatchewan Municipal Advisory Commission Act be 

now read the third time and passed under its title.” 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the House to adopt the motion? 

 

Mr. James E. Snedker (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, I am about to speak on the third reading of this bill. 

Have you any objections. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If you wish to speak. 



 

April 2, 1962 

 

 

16 

Mr. Snedker: — That is exactly what I wish to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — But don‟t sit on your desk, please stand up. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — If the member would rise in his place and address the Speaker, he would probably be 

given the right to speak. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He did. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — I have never risen to speak in this House yet but someone has tried to stop me, and you 

have never stopped me yet. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — If you want order, stand up and I will sit down. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If you are not careful I will have to name the member. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — What am I supposed to do now? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You are supposed to speak to the third reading of the bill if you wish. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Do I have your permission to speak to the third reading of the bill? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You have. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Mr. Speaker, I am going to oppose the third reading of this bill. I have listened to the 

explanations given by the Minister of Municipal Affairs. The bill as it stands at the present time puts a 

ceiling of five members on the Municipal Advisory Committee. The Minister of Municipal Affairs says 

that he would like to have the number raised from five to seven or possibly eight. I have no objection to 

the number of members on the Municipal Advisory Committee being raised from five to possibly seven 

or eight, but I have every objection in the world to it being left wide open as it is at the present time so 

that any number whatsoever may be added. As this amendment stands if it passes the House the 

government may add any number they choose to the Municipal 



 

April 2, 1962 

 

 

17 

Advisory Committee, there is no limit on the number whatsoever, it is strictly a blue-sky deal. 

 

I said at the time that it was going into committee that I thought a ceiling should be placed on it and the 

minister said or indicated that a ceiling of ten should be placed on it, I would possibly agree to that, but 

to pass this bill at this time with no ceiling on it whatsoever so that the government can at any time add 

any number of people to this Municipal Advisory Committee that they see fit, I don‟t consider is right or 

proper or good government. 

 

Similarly in connection with the personnel on the advisory committee, it has been said that there is some 

representation of farm people on the advisory committee. I mentioned when the bill was in committee 

that it would be possible for the government to swamp any farm members that are on this committee by 

the simple expedient of adding more members from the city or from some other walk of life and that is 

quite true. 

 

On those grounds, Mr. Speaker, I am opposed to the third reading of this bill, and that is why I am going 

to vote against it. 

 

The question being put it was agreed to and the bill was accordingly read the third time and passed. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o‟clock p.m. 

 


