



















































Hansard: March 13, 1962


1 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

Thirds Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

14th day 

 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

ON ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

QUESTION: CATTLE DISEASE 

 

Mr. Ross McCarthy (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are proceeded with I 

would like to direct a question to the Minister of Agriculture. I would like to ask him if he knows if there 

is a rather serious disease breaking out among our cattle? It has baffled most of the local vets and the 

senior government vets. They are not too sure what it is. I was home over the weekend and it is quite 

serious. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Ask your question. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — I wanted to explain what the situation was. I wanted to ask the minister if he knows 

if any action has been taken by his department to investigate this particular disease. Dr. Bell was on TV 

on Sunday and he said he wasn‟t sure what it was. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, we realize that with the general fodder situation what it was, that 

people would be using of necessity for fodder — farmers have been advised to use a supplement to 

overcome any nutritional deficiencies that might exist. I don‟t think that the situation is as serious as 

indicated in the press. This is a condition that we usually have when we have a bad feed situation, and 

any diseases that are reported, either to the Federal Health of Animals Branch, or our own veterinary 

divisions are being looked into. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are 

proceeded with I would like to call the attention of 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

2 

hon. members to a group of students who are in the speaker‟s gallery. This group is from Martin 

Collegiate. They are a prevocational group, Grade IX students and they are here under the leadership of 

their teacher Mr. Mike Trenker. I am sure all of us would bid them welcome and express the hope that 

their stay this afternoon will be interesting and instructional. 

 

Mr. Ed Whelan (Regina City): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day I am sure that all members 

will join with me in welcoming to this assembly a large group of Grade VIII students from Kitchener 

school. There are approximately 60 of them in attendance. They have their vice-principal Harold Lamers 

with them, as well as their teacher Mrs. Cora Divine. We are pleased that they have taken time out to 

visit us and we hope that their stay will be informative and a valuable part of their educational 

instruction this year. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Blakeney: 

 

That Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair (the house to go into Committee of Supply). 

 

Hon. C.G. Willis (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, when I spoke yesterday in this budget 

debate I took exception to the many statements of the Liberal opposition here in the house, and out of 

this house, that there was no development in Saskatchewan under the CCF. I described conditions 

regarding industrial development which existed prior to 1944 and compared them with conditions 

existing today. I especially deplored the lack of an industrial climate in Saskatchewan in 1944. I quoted 

from the submission by the province of Saskatchewan presented to the special committee of the House 

of Commons on reconstruction and re-establishment, April 19, 1944 to show that the Liberal 

government of the day admitted that from the point of view of industrial development in Saskatchewan, 

that Saskatchewan was in a poorer position than any other province in the Dominion of Canada, with the 

possible exception of the province of Prince Edward Island. I showed further that the primary aim of the 

CCF upon achieving office was to rectify this deficiency in Saskatchewan‟s 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

3 

industrial climate and to set about to improve physical conditions in order that industry would be 

attracted, so that the base of our economy would be broadened. 

 

Mr. Douglas‟ statement that there was need in Saskatchewan for public, co-operative, and private 

enterprise was noted by me, as was his invitation to private enterprise to come to Saskatchewan, and his 

promise of fair treatment to such industry establishing here. I made mention of the many difficulties 

which had to be overcome in our efforts to diversify our economy, such as lack of roads, power, and 

water required. I claimed that the greatest obstacle to the achieving of this diversification was the 

sabotaging efforts of the Liberal opposition. I showed that this had been especially true in regard to the 

present Leader of the Opposition, who in season and out of season, in the province and out of the 

province has been doing everything possible to destroy the economy of this province. 

 

I noted that an attempt was and is still being made to sabotage our developing oil industry and that 

private capital was being warned of the dangers of investing in a province where, to quote the Leader of 

the Opposition, “economic stagnation was rampant.” I noted that the attempt was and still is being made 

to see that industry does not come to Saskatchewan. I stated that such statements as I attributed to the 

Leader of the Opposition yesterday, being made within Saskatchewan were bad enough — though now 

in the light of the apparent development in the province they are not taken seriously by our own people. 

But that when efforts to smear development in the province were made in other parts of Canada, and 

even in Europe, this was indeed another matter. 

 

I noted that the Star Phoenix of December 1959 thought so too, when it declared that the Leader of the 

Opposition had gone too far in a speech in Ontario in which he stated, Saskatchewan is reeling on the 

edge of economic ruin. This was in 1959 Mr. Speaker. Again when the editorial stated that the Liberal 

provincial leader had said that Saskatchewan was in danger of becoming a chronic depressed area under 

the CCF was for him to shoot wild. I would be tempted to use another expression than „shoot wild‟. I 

showed too, where the editor of the same paper declared that statements made by the opposition leader 

that there would be no potash development in Saskatchewan under the CCF were nonsense. Statements 

quoted by me show that the derogatory remarks by the opposition members and their leader were indeed 

nonsense. I label them as malicious nonsense designed to 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

4 

destroy the Saskatchewan economy so that the personal ambition of the opposition leader could be 

realized. I said in conclusion yesterday that actions of this nature were unworthy of a man who had 

ambitions to become Premier of this province. 

 

In disposing of this subject I must say that the actions of the Leader of the Opposition remind me of the 

plaque of the three monkeys one sees in novelty shops. You may recall Mr. Speaker, the three monkeys 

— one with his hands over his ears, one with his hands over his eyes, and one with his hands over his 

mouth. This, it seems to me, represents the Leader of the Opposition who, in regard to Saskatchewan, 

sees no good, hears no good, and speaks no good. 

 

Opposition Member: — You remind me of a monkey. 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis: — When recalling old sayings, Mr. Speaker, I am reminded of one in the September 

1958 Saskatchewan development supplement of the Leader-Post which I mentioned yesterday — an 

article in the paper which began with the quote “The impossible we can do at once, but the miracles take 

a little longer.” This article says and I quote “There is an old saying, that the impossible we can do at 

once, but the miracles take a little longer. This sums up the mineral development situation in 

Saskatchewan today.” This Mr. Speaker was in 1958. The article goes on — “During the past few years 

this province has accomplished near to the impossible.” 

 

The article mentions and it goes on to list what has been done in oil development, uranium development 

and other gains in the mineral field. Then it says further on: 

 

“Some people might say that Saskatchewan has already had its miracle, but those in the know do not 

think so. There is a feeling of expectancy of urgency underlying day to day events which permeate the 

entire province.” 

 

This, in the Star-Phoenix of 1958. 

 

In terms of 1944, the mineral developments achieved in this province in 1958 were, without doubt, next 

to the impossible. Since 1958 we have made even more spectacular gains in the fields mentioned. Yet I 

would agree that the miracle regarding mineral development 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

5 

in Saskatchewan did not happen prior to 1958, nor has it happened yet, for miracles do take a little 

longer than the impossible. 

 

But Mr. Speaker, today however we are on the brink of the miracle. In my opinion it will take place 

early this summer in southeastern Saskatchewan close to a little town named Esterhazy. For early this 

summer the production of potash from Saskatchewan‟s fabulous deposits will begin in earnest. 

 

I visited Esterhazy this winter, toured the development taking place and listened to patient explanations 

of what was happening. At the conclusion of my visit I was presented with this glass ornament as a 

souvenir of my visit. Embedded in the glass, as one can see, are three small pieces of potash ore, the ore 

which is about to bring into being the miracle in mineral development in Saskatchewan. 

 

While at Esterhazy I saw the preparations which were being made to refine the ore. I saw one of the 

huge boring machines which can produce up to two hundred tons of ore an hour. I was told too that five 

such huge machines would be in use at 32,000 feet below the surface of the ground to make possible the 

production of up to 1.2 million tons of potash a year. I was informed, Mr. Speaker, that from four to five 

hundred men would be employed at the mine site. I was informed further that investment in the mine 

and mill will be about $40 million before production begins. 

 

Mr. Speaker, potash will be mined in Saskatchewan under a CCF government — mined by people with 

faith in the future of the industry here in Saskatchewan and faith in the integrity of this government. Our 

potash development indeed has the makings of a miracle. If the members of the opposition do not 

believe me, they can ask the residents of Esterhazy. Their answer would be a resounding “yes”. 

 

Indeed the Leader of the Opposition knows of the importance of this development and this is the reason 

he has tried so desperately to sabotage potash development in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to refer, at this time, to another miracle which has taken place in Saskatchewan. I 

am certain, if someone in 1944 had predicted that within a period of eighteen years a Saskatchewan 

Minister of Highways would be announcing a budget which provided 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

6 

for a total program of paving and oiling amounting to 502.7 miles of highway, he would not have been 

believe, that doubters would say that a miracle would have to happen before such a program would 

come to pass. Mr. Speaker, this miracle has happened — today I am announcing such a program. 

 

I am happy to report, Mr. Speaker, that our highways budget for 1962-63 has increased slightly over that 

of the present year. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Have you got a map? 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis: — Mr. Speaker, some of the members of the opposition need a map to know where 

they are going. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — I have to have one . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis: — Our 1962 budget totals $21,976,000 compared to the $21,885,000 of 1962, or 

$91,000 greater. Our ordinary budget which takes care of the costs of various branches of our 

department and the expenditures on our highway maintenance is down from $8,635,000 to $8,363,000 

or $272,000 less. However, our capital budget which provides for improvements in our highway system 

increased from $13,250,000 to $13,613,000 or by $363,000. This year again we are concentrating on 

bituminous surfacing and oiling programs. It is our intention to do 179.4 miles of bituminous surface 

and 323.3 miles of oiling. This totals more than 500 miles of oiling and paving, but I must point out that 

this does not mean an overall increase of 500 miles in our dust-free mileage, because in some cases we 

are replacing oiled highways or sub-standard pavement with new black-top. However, our net gain will 

be 424 miles of dust-free surface. 

 

In Saskatchewan in 1951, ten years ago there were 722 miles of dust-free surface on our highway 

system. By 1961 last year, this was increased to 2,766 miles. In just ten years we added more than 2,000 

miles of dust-free surface to our highway system, or an average of 200 miles per year. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis: — The net increase of 424 miles of dust-free highway in the 1962 program will bring 

our total dust-free surface 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

7 

to 3,190 miles. This means that about three out of every eight miles on our provincial highway system 

will have a dust-free surface upon the completion of this program. 

 

I would point out that we are making progress in black-topping the gravel gaps on some of our main 

highways. For instance, after this year one will be able to travel on No. 6 highway from the US border 

through to Melfort, a distance of 281 miles, on a dust-free surface. I would urge all the members of the 

legislature, Mr. Speaker, to make such a trip. I am sure they will be surprised at what they find at the 

other end of No. 6 highway. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — No they won‟t, not if it is around Melfort they won‟t. 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis: — And with the completion of the surfacing of No. 5 highway from No. 2 through 

Humboldt to No. 6, an important link in our highway system will be blacktopped. Similarly, the oiling 

of No. 9 highway from Carlyle north to No. 1 highway will complete a gap in the southeast part of the 

province. The oiling of the gap from Foam Lake to No. 10 highway will benefit those people wishing to 

trade in Yorkton. Besides this aspect of our program the relocation, grading and bituminous surfacing of 

important sections in our system, such as No. 39 highway from North Portal to Estevan, No. 7 highway 

from Saskatoon to Vanscoy and No. 11 south of Saskatoon, will improve travelling conditions in these 

areas. 

 

Our four-lane highways east of Regina on No. 1 and northwest of Regina on No. 11, will be completed 

this year. These two highways have been in use this winter and many favourable comments have been 

made personally to me by those who have travelled over them. These four-lane highways will be even 

more appreciated during the heavy volume of travel next summer. 

 

In our programs during recent years, emphasis has been placed on improving our north-south highways 

so as to facilitate travel to our fabulous recreational areas in the north. I might add to this that No. 2 

highway, referred to by those who live along it as the Main Street of Saskatchewan, now has a complete 

dust-free surface from Assiniboia to Waskesiu in the Prince Albert National Park. This important tourist 

road has been extended north to the Churchill River. 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

8 

Mr. Speaker, in regard to this Uranium City road, I want to protest in the strongest possible language the 

newspaper report of March 8th last, of a speech made by the Liberal member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy). 

Here is a man with the barest of information and scant regard for facts levels a serious charge against 

employees of the Department of Highways. Here a man hides behind the immunity granted to members 

of the legislature when elected . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! You cannot refer to a speech made in a previous debate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis: — Mr. Speaker, I am referring to a newspaper report. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — A newspaper report has not the sanctity of the legislature. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis: — Mr. Speaker, I took the opportunity to refer to this in the public accounts 

committee last week. Unfortunately the member for Athabasca absented himself from the public 

accounts committee. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Get back on the blacktop highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis: — Going on then, Mr. Speaker, regarding the Uranium City road — work on the last 

twenty miles of the Churchill was completed by the Department of Highways crew in 1961. This 

highway was constructed through Pre-Cambrian rock country — constructed to the standard of the roads 

to resources program. In this regard I might mention that the first 21 miles were constructed to access 

development standards of the Department of Natural Resources — when I say constructed Mr. Speaker, 

I don‟t mean that the road was finished by DNR. The Department of Natural Resources began this road 

and before they had it finished the roads to resources program was signed and the Department of 

Highways took over. We finished the clay capping and did the gravelling on this stretch of road. We 

spent $62 thousand extra to what the Department of Natural Resources did in building this road. 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

9 

The department would have liked to have relocated the road because the road that the Department of 

Natural Resources built was via the easiest possible terrain — they skirted around rock hills — they 

didn‟t want to undertake the expensive blasting, but in doing so they constructed very sharp turns as 

anybody knows who has been over that road — even the member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy). The road 

should have been relocated and built to a higher standard. Unfortunately we didn‟t do it at the time. 

Sometime in the near future when the travel on this road has increased, we will have to go in and 

improve this road making it safer for the traffic that wants to go up to the Churchill River and north. 

This will add to the cost of this road. Now the part of the road north from the Nemeiben River which the 

Department of Highways constructed cost approximately $40 thousand a mile. Mr. Speaker, this is not 

out of line with the conditions which existed on this road. We had our troubles with rock and troubles 

with muskeg. It if hadn‟t been for the efficiency of our engineers, the devotion to duty of our crews, the 

cost would have been much greater than $40 thousand a mile. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to extend to all those responsible for the fine job that was done on this Uranium 

City road my personal thanks for a good job well done. 

 

In our budget for this year, there is shown a nominal sum which may be used to survey the location of 

the road past the Churchill, but there is no provision for construction north of the Churchill in this 

budget. At present we are negotiating with the federal government as to the route this road will take, and 

until this is finally settled we are unable to plan further work. 

 

With this budget I wish to announce an extension of our urban assistance program to cover the oiling of 

gravel portions of highways passing through smaller urban communities. From the requests which I 

have already received from towns and villages for such assistance, this will be a popular measure. The 

assistance extended will be up to 50 per cent of the cost of oiling through the built up area of the 

community, with the department assuming maintenance costs. 

 

The regulations put into effect in the past season regarding allowable truck dimensions and maximum 

truck weights have had a substantial effect on the trucking industry here in Saskatchewan. Under these 

regulations, trucks up to 60 feet long, 13.5 feet high, 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

10 

and with maximum weights up to 72 thousand pounds may operate on any part of our highway system. 

While these regulations have been beneficial to our truckers, the full effect of them will not be felt until 

such time as Manitoba and Alberta adopt similar regulations on all their highway systems. 

 

Last fall Mr. Speaker, at the Canadian Good Roads Association convention, a signal honour came to 

Saskatchewan when the department was awarded a trophy presented by the Canadian Good Roads 

Association for distinguished contribution to the cause of good roads. This trophy, known as the 

Canadian Good Roads Association “Oscar”, is presented on the basis of a publicity program based upon 

the work being done by the department. In the past the trophy has been won by the Ontario Department 

of Highways, the Shell Oil Company, the Ontario Safety League, the Caterpillar Tractor Company, and 

the BC Department of Highways. This is a signal honour indeed for Saskatchewan and for the 

Saskatchewan Department of Highways. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis: — In paying tribute to Mr. H. Lamberton, our public relations officer whose publicity 

efforts were primarily responsible for the award, I want to express my all out appreciation to all the 

officials and other members of the Department of Highways whose combined efforts contributed to an 

outstanding year of progress which made possible the final act of winning the Canadian Good Roads 

Association “Oscar”. 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, I would announce the details of the department‟s 1962-63 construction program. 

Beginning with Highway No. 1 Mr. Speaker, four miles east of junction No. 35 highway to McLean on 

Highway No. 1 we‟ll be doing a structural recap. We will complete the overpass ramps at the junction of 

Highways No. 1 and 2 with bituminous surface. We will put a structural recap on No. 1 highway four 

miles east of Parkbeg to 2.2 miles east of Val Jean. 

 

No. 2 highway, Assiniboia south — oil treated. Moose Jaw north — completion of bituminous 

surfacing. Buffalo Pound Causeway — grading and bituminous surfacing. 

 

No. 3 highway — Smoking Tent to Manitoba boundary — grading and gravelling. Tisdale to north 

junction No. 23 highway — oil treated. Deer Creek to junction No. 17 highway — grading and 

gravelling. 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

11 

I might mention Mr. Speaker, as the completion projects open up to the Manitoba border and the Alberta 

border — No. 3 highway will be completely graded across the province from one of our neighbouring 

provinces to the other. 

 

No. 4 highway, Cadillac to Frenchman River — grading and gravelling. Kyle to Elrose — grading and 

gravelling. Mr. Speaker, probably this is the time I should ask all the members to refrain from 

applauding until after the complete program is announced when you can let go whatever degree you 

wish. No. 4 highway, I mentioned Kyle to Elrose — grading and gravelling. Biggar to Sonningdale road 

— oil treatment. North Saskatchewan River to junction No. 5 highway — grading and bituminous 

surfacing. Sixteen miles north of Glaslyn to No. 55 highway — oil treatment. 

 

No. 5 highway from east side of Watson to the junction of No. 2 highway — grading and bituminous 

surfacing. Sutherland bypass — grading. Battleford to Bresayler — bituminous surfacing. 

 

No. 6 highway, Dafoe to Watson — bituminous surfacing. The south junction No. 14 highway to north 

junction No. 14 highway — grading and gravelling. 

 

No. 7 highway — Saskatoon to Vanscoy — bituminous surfacing. Kindersley to the Alberta border — 

grading and gravelling. 

 

No. 8 highway — Moosomin to Rocanville — grading and gravelling. Kamsack to Pelly — grading and 

gravelling. 

 

No. 9 highway from five miles north of junction No. 13 highway to junction No. 1 highway — oil 

treatment. Yorkton to junction No. 15 highway — grading and gravelling. Junction No. 49 highway to 

Endeavour — grading and gravelling. 

 

No. 10 highway — Wroxton to Manitoba boundary — oil treatment. 

 

No. 11 highway — junction No. 6 highway to Lumsden — completion of bituminous surfacing. 

Dundurn to Saskatoon — completion of grading and bituminous surfacing. 

 

No. 12 highway — Petrofka Bridge to No. 11 highway — grading and gravelling. I might mention 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

12 

Mr. Speaker, that this is a new highway connecting No. 40 at Blaine Lake over the Petrofka Bridge to 

No. 11 near Edmonton. The bridge itself will be open sometime in August and the traffic will be able to 

flow freely on the northwest side of the river to Saskatoon. 

 

No. 13 Highway — Melaval to Kincaid — grading and gravelling. 

 

No. 14 highway — junction No. 10 highway to Foam Lake — oil treated. Wolverine to junction No. 2 

highway — oil treated. 

 

No. 15 highway — Ituna to Fenwood — grading and gravelling. Broderick to east junction No. 42 

highway — oil treated. 

 

No. 18 highway — Carnduff to Manitoba boundary — grading and gravelling. 

 

No. 20 highway, junction No. 11 highway to Bulyea — oil treated. 

 

No. 22 highway — Esterhazy to junction No. 8 highway — grading and gravelling. No. 6 highway to 

3½ miles east of No. 20 highway — grading and gravelling. 

 

No. 23 highway — junction No. 3 highway to south of Arborfield — grading and gravelling. 

 

No. 26 highway — Goodsoil south — Subgrade improvements and gravelling. 

 

No. 33 highway — Kronau to junction No. 1 highway — bituminous surfacing. 

 

No. 35 highway — Creighton to Denare Beach — surface and minor alignment improvement. Phantom 

Lake road — oil treated. Fort San to junction No. 22 highway — oil treated. Junction No. 14 highway to 

Wadena — grading and gravelling. 

 

No. 37 highway — six miles north of Climax to fourteen miles north of Climax — grading and 

gravelling. 

 

No. 39 highway — North Portal to Estevan — completion of grading and bituminous surfacing. Pasqua 

to junction No. 1 highway — grading and oil treated. 

 

No. 40 highway — Hafford to Krydor — grading and gravelling. Junction No. 5 highway — east — oil 

treated. Battleford to junction No. 29 highway — grading and bituminous surfacing. 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

13 

No. 52 highway — junction No. 10 highway to junction No. 15 highway — completion of grading and 

gravelling. 

 

No. 55 highway — Meath Park to junction No. 2 highway — oil treated. 

 

No. 57 highway — Manitoba boundary to junction No. 5 — oil treated. A total program Mr. Speaker — 

bituminous surfacing — 179.4 miles. Total grading and gravelling — 398.8 miles. Total oil treatment — 

323.3 miles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to announce the construction of access roads to provincial parks. Connecting 

highway No. 1 we are constructing access roads to Moosomin Trans-Canada site; access road to 

Broadview Trans-Canada site; access to McLean Trans-Canada site. These last two will have surface 

treatment as well as grade improvements. Access to Besant Trans-Canada site — grading and surface 

treatment; access to Gull Lake Trans-Canada site — grading and surface treatment; access to Maple 

Creek Trans-Canada site — grading and surface treatment. Connecting No. 2 highway a road to Buffalo 

Pound Lake Park — grading and gravelling. From No. 10 to Echo-Pasqua Park connecting to No. 35 

highway — grading and gravelling. No. 10 again, from the Fish Hatchery to Echo-Pasqua Park — 

subgrade improvement and surface treatment. 

 

Connecting No. 20 highway to Rowan‟s Ravine Provincial Park — grading and gravelling. No. 26 

highway at Goodsoil connecting with the Meadow Lake Provincial Park — grading and gravelling. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are five items that I wish to announce as part of our bridge construction program. 

These are the five major items on this program. The completion of Petrofka Bridge, which will be 

finished in August of this year. The Buffalo Pound Lake Bridge on No. 2 highway over Buffalo Pound 

Lake will be completed. The railway overpass on No. 11 highway to Saskatoon south. The railway 

overpass on No. 39 highway at Estevan. A bridge for No. 40 highway over the Battle River at 

Battleford. 

 

Then Mr. Speaker, as has been our custom I would like to announce a number of possible fall tendering 

items which will be completed — the work will be done in the year 1963. I wish to announce at this time 

we may call 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

14 

tenders on No. 3 highway — grading from Shell River to Shellbrook. Another possible fall tendering — 

No. 4 highway — surfacing between Kyle and Elrose. 

 

No. 5 highway — shoulder widening from Lashburn to Lloydminster. 

 

No. 23 highway — grading from south of Arborfield to Carrot River. 

 

No. 36 highway — grading between Willowbunch and No. 13 highway. 

 

No. 47 highway — grading between the Qu‟Appelle Valley and Melville. 

 

No. 58 highway — grading from Gravelbourg to Lafleche. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to announce the items that are on our 1962-63 program. 

I can assure you I will support this budget. 

 

Mr. Arthur Kluzak (Shaunavon): — Mr. Speaker, this is the first opportunity I have had to 

congratulate you on your elevation to the high office of Speaker of this house. The many years of 

legislative experience and your integrity I am sure you will continue to conduct meetings in this house in 

a very honourable manner. Sometimes I feel that a tender of sympathy would be quite in order for you. I 

would also like to congratulate the Provincial Treasurer on the very able manner in which he presented 

Saskatchewan‟s excellent budget. I would also like to join the other members on this side of the house in 

congratulating the new member from Weyburn (Mr. Staveley). The records show that during the past 

twenty years that Liberal members elected in the by-election have never been returned, I trust that his 

short stay will be pleasant. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Kluzak: — I must admit that in the short time that I have been a member of this legislature that I 

have learned a great deal of the functions of the different departments, and this I am sure will assist me 

in serving the people of my constituency in a more able manner. It is very gratifying to be a member of a 

government that implements progressive legislation that is so beneficial to meet the needs of the people 

of the province. 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

15 

I regret that I have to report an unsuccessful crop year in my constituency of Shaunavon. We have 

probably had the poorest crop we have experienced since 1937. This will no doubt have some effect on 

many of the farmers and the small business men. However, there is one bright spot in our economy and 

that is that many of our farmers have diversified their operations to mixed farming and are able to 

maintain their basic herds of cattle. This is unlike the situation we had under a Liberal government under 

similar circumstances when we were forced to sell our basic herds at one cent a pound. 

 

I would like to congratulate the Minister of Agriculture and his department for the assistance they have 

given farmers to avail themselves of supplies of feed and also for the dugouts, water pumping programs 

which have played such an important part for cattlemen. I particularly like to thank you Sir, for making 

this equipment available in the Govenlock area of my constituency. 

 

I must again at this time express the appreciation of the irrigation projects in my constituency which 

were sponsored under the conservation and development branch of your department, and I speak of the 

projects at Ponteix, Vidora and Consul. Last year these three projects produced over 8300 tons of 

fodder, plus thousands of bushels of seed grain. Results of projects such as these should give the 

members of this house and the people of Saskatchewan some idea of the important part the 

Saskatchewan River dam project, will have on the economy of this province. 

 

The building of better highways is rapidly speeding up the development of our province. I am very 

pleased at the progress that has been made in my constituency in this respect. The oiling of highway No. 

21 from Cypress Park to Maple Creek, part of which is in the Maple Creek constituency, will be of great 

benefit to the people in the western part of my constituency who use Maple Creek as their shopping 

centre, and also the heavy traffic from the north to Cypress Park. The oiling of ten miles of No. 37 south 

of Shaunavon has also been greatly appreciated. I am pleased that the minister in announcing his 1962 

building program today has included eight miles of No. 37 between Climax and Shaunavon and 

approximately thirty miles of No. 4 south of Cadillac. I would like to express my sincere appreciation to 

him for putting this on the program. However, I have a note of caution to him and I will still be camping 

on his doorstep asking for more highway improvement for my constituency. 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

16 

I am pleased to report that fifteen new producing oil wells were brought into production in my 

constituency in 1961. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Kluzak: — And since January 1st we have brought in three more. This makes a total of 88 wells, 

producing wells, in my constituency. Since the election of 1960 over 800 producing oil wells have been 

drilled and brought into production in Saskatchewan. This is very gratifying in view of the statements 

that were made at that time by Liberal candidates, and particularly the Leader of the Opposition, that the 

oil rigs have all left Saskatchewan. This is another proof of the tactics they will resort to to try and 

discredit this government. From time to time statements have been made by some of the members 

opposite which have appeared in the press that this government always forces the people to do things. I 

regret that some of the people of the Weyburn area are now being forced to accept oil royalties because 

of the oil development that was promoted by this government. 

 

Reference is continually made by the hon. Leader of the Opposition of the good old days when this 

province was under the rule of a Liberal government. Due to these continued references, Mr. Speaker, I 

feel obligated to go back and give this house and the people of Saskatchewan a review of some facts of 

these good old days. I was a member of a Saskatchewan farm delegation of 419 delegates who presented 

a petition to the Liberal government of the late Prime Minister MacKenzie King, signed by 185 

thousand Saskatchewan residents. This delegation was represented by farmers, labour, cities, business 

and professional people, and municipal men. I believe that the only other member in this house that was 

in that delegation is the hon. Minister of Labour — the present Minister of Labour. So you see, Mr. 

Speaker, even in those days that the farmer and labour worked together for the same just cause. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Kluzak: — I want to make it clear that those were the days when we had a Liberal government in 

both Saskatchewan and Canada and it was during the second world war. The price of wheat, the growing 

of which was our basic and only industry in Saskatchewan, had been pegged for the 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

17 

last three years of which the highest price was 70¢ a bushel at the lakehead, which meant about 50¢ a 

bushel to the farmer. The Dominion Bureau of Statistics showed that $1.42 a bushel at the lakehead 

would be a parity price in accordance with the farmers cost of production. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Liberal party that professes to be such a good friend of the farmer was quite willing to 

let the farmer subsidize the war effort, while they gave industry billions of dollars worth of war contracts 

on a cost plus basis and none of them came to Saskatchewan. 

 

When members of our delegation asked the late hon. C.D. Howe what profit was involved in the cost-

plus basis, we were told that it was a war secret and he could not disclose the figure. However, we do 

know that several millionaires emerged from this group after the war, while the farmers ended up in a 

state of bankruptcy. This survey was working togetherness Mr. Speaker, but the farmer again was left 

out as the Liberals have always done. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Kluzak: — I am going to quote from this booklet, “Saskatchewan farm delegation submissions to 

the dominion government and meetings of the recent committee of the cabinet, dated February 2nd and 

3rd, 1942.” This is a presentation that was made on behalf of the rural municipalities of Saskatchewan 

by Mr. S.N. Horner, reeve of the R.M. of Fillmore, who has been a member of that council for 26 years 

and at one time had been a member of this legislature. He was speaking on behalf of the rural 

municipalities. He made some reference to conditions in his own municipality and I quote: 

 

“Over the last ten years, owing to a low price for our product and climatic conditions it has been 

impossible to collect these taxes, with the result that the municipalities find themselves hopelessly in 

debt. We have been almost forced into bankruptcy. We have in Fillmore a municipal doctor. We 

recently gave him a note for over $6 thousand arrears of salary. This amount would have been much 

larger had it not been that the government has been paying him in lieu of salary he was not receiving 

from us. Grants enabled him to carry on his work.” 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

18 

Mr. Speaker, here is the hitch and I quote: 

 

“These grants have been discontinued and our problem is how to pay his salary as well as his arrears. 

These problems are in my opinion entirely incapable of solution unless we can be assured of a price for 

our products that will leave a reasonable margin over the cost of production. We owe our schools large 

sums of money. They in turn have not been able to pay the teachers with the result that large numbers 

have been leaving the profession. Many of our schools are closed because of the want of a teacher. The 

school in my district is now closed and without a teacher.” 

 

Then he continued and went on to say that the condition of many of the main roads were such that it was 

impossible to haul a load of wheat over them. Then he spoke of the changeover from ownership to 

tenanting due to foreclosures by mortgage companies is assuming alarming proportions and he 

illustrated by quoting one of the divisions of his municipality of 54 square miles that had only three land 

owners left. Again I quote: 

 

“Our farm boys are leaving the farms and accepting more lucrative employment positions in city 

positions in industry. Great numbers of them have joined His Majesty‟s Forces to fight for freedom 

and democracy. Many of these boys have left home under conditions of discouragement and 

frustration.” 

 

There you have a part of the conditions as they were. I am gong to continue to quote from this book, and 

I would like to quote from the representation made by Father Maurice Boudoux from Prud‟homme, who 

was also a member of this delegation and was speaking on behalf of the parish, and I quote: 

 

“I speak here from first hand knowledge and not from a book. Boys and girls of my own age, who 

should and certainly would have married are now hopeless bachelors. I speak of those who want to 

marry. Why have they not married? Simply because year after year they have waited for that next crop, 

not necessarily a bigger crop, 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

19 

“but a crop that would bring them fair returns. Because they were denied fair prices they could not 

afford to use their natural divine right to establish a home of their own and bring up children. As a 

result of this I have blessed an average of only one marriage each year since 1931, and shall soon be 

confronted with the sad duty of presiding over more funerals and performing fewer baptisms. Besides 

this, others and many others have come to the cities in the east and on the Pacific coast, where liveable 

wages have justified their legitimate ambition of founding a home. Now the 575 souls which I took 

over from my predecessor have decreased to less than 400 instead of increasing to 800. May I close 

with a verse from the Holy Scripture which has been so often misquoted. It deals with poverty. Christ 

did not say „Blessed are the poor‟, but „Blessed are the poor in spirit‟.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this should give the members of this house and the people of Saskatchewan a good 

reminder of the good old days under Liberal administration. These are the good old days the Leader of 

the Opposition and the members opposite would like to go back to. 

 

I have here a document which shows what happens when governments have that type of an 

administration. I have here a „Commonwealth‟ dated June 21, 1944, with headlines „CCF wins 46 seats‟. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Kluzak: — No wonder the Liberals became extinct in 1944. With a record like this Mr. Speaker, I 

am sure they will never again form a government in this province or in Canada. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Kluzak: — It will be the New Democratic Party that will be forming the government. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

20 

Mr. Kluzak: — I am very pleased that the provincial medical care plan will be coming into operation 

on July 1st. Through the assistance of this government, by way of organization and finance, and the co-

operation of the majority of the people of the area, we in the southwest were able to form the first 

comprehensive compulsory medical care plan on the North American continent. I am speaking of the 

Swift Current health region. It was put into operation on July 1, 1946, and has provided excellent health 

care for all the residents of that area, regardless of their age, physical condition or their ability to pay. 

We have full access to any of the 44 doctors within the region. However, as medical treatment is 

becoming more specialized the doctors are finding it necessary to send a number of their patients to 

specialists outside of the region. This trend is creating some hardship on these patients financially, as the 

plan now pays the doctors outside of the area, excepting Medicine Hat, only one-half of the region‟s 

schedule of fees. 

 

This is the reason that the people of the Shaunavon constituency want a provincial plan. On several 

occasions the member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) has disputed the schedule of payments as I have 

stated and claimed that outside doctors were paid on the same basis as those in the region. Mr. Speaker, 

by doing so he is just distorting the facts. The people of my constituency will be most happy when this 

plan goes into affect because they know the value of a comprehensive medical care plan, available to all 

with no strings attached. 

 

We had some opposition from members of the Liberal party when we organized this region, as we have 

now from members opposite on the present medical plan. They came right out dressed in their wolf 

clothes — that is those that weren‟t still too dazed from the 1944 election. Now the member from Maple 

Creek has put on his sheepskin and stated that „I helped organize this region.‟ Mr. Speaker, I suggest 

that there could be nothing further from the truth. If he had helped to set up this region it wouldn‟t have 

been necessary for him to distribute on the 11th hour before the last election, this political propaganda 

sheet declaring himself as a supporter of a compulsory medical care program. The people would have 

known this — they would have known this for sixteen years and such action wouldn‟t have been 

necessary. 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

21 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Kluzak: — Now that he has declared himself as a supporter of a compulsory medical plan I suggest 

that he is going to get into serious trouble with his leader and some of the members of his party. I hope 

that the Leader of the Opposition doesn‟t expel him from their ranks because he is now in favour of a 

compulsory medical care plan. 

 

We had some problems at that time to get the doctors to accept this plan, but it wasn‟t in operation very 

long before they were very happy and the doctors had increased in the region from 19 to 46 with the 

appreciable gain in population in the area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest that the same pattern will take place in the rest of this province after the 

provincial plan goes into operation. I will support the motion. 

 

Mr. Dick W. Michayluk (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to add my congratulations to 

you on your election to the high office of Speaker in this legislature. In this capacity you will, as your 

predecessors have, discharge your responsibilities in the usual tradition of impartiality and justice to all 

hon. members of this house. In so doing you will enhance the established tradition. 

 

May I take this opportunity to extend my congratulations to the hon Premier on his assuming the 

leadership of the government and on his choice of the cabinet. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — I expect that some hon. members here may be at variance with some of my remarks. 

The Premier has demonstrated his ability as a capable administrator during the sixteen years when he 

headed the Department of Education, and as Provincial Treasurer after the 1960 provincial election, and 

up until he was chosen as Premier. 

 

The people of this province Mr. Speaker, and those of us who have been closely associated with him 

know him for his sympathetic approach to all problems and his sensitivity to the needs of the people. 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

22 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — The hon. members are aware, Mr. Speaker, that since 1950 the Premier was 

minister responsible for the public service. Upon his appointment to succeed the Hon. T.C. Douglas the 

official publication of the Saskatchewan Civil Service Association „The Dome‟ in the January and 

February editions for 1962, under the title „Congratulations to Mr. Lloyd‟ had this to say. Incidentally, 

before I quote, since the payments to the Saskatchewan Civil Service for services rendered has a direct 

bearing on the provincial expenditures I trust that my references at this point will be in order. 

 

Allow me at this time to put into the records of this house some of the opinions expressed by the Civil 

Service Association and I quote one listener who has heard Mr. Lloyd on many occasions and on many 

topics put this characteristic nicely when he said: 

 

“I never hear Mr. Lloyd but come away enriched with some fresh new knowledge and insight. He 

illuminates the subject with the light of careful preparation and the gift of expression.” 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Do other political leaders of other political parties in this province impress people 

likewise Sir? I wonder? To quote further: 

 

“In May of 1961 for example when speaking at our convention he said, I say without hesitation on the 

part of the government that we would not want to operate a public service in the province of 

Saskatchewan on any other basis than that of dealing with employees organized into a union.” 

 

With your kind permission, Sir, before I proceed, I would just mention briefly the one paragraph on page 

six of “The Dome” in a speech made by a representative of the Public Service Association during a 

presentation to the Hon. T.C. Douglas before he took over the national leadership. Mr. Speaker, in view 

of the fact that the Premier was then minister in charge, and as this has a 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

23 

direct bearing on the question — it brings out some past history with respect to the Saskatchewan civil 

service. I quote: 

 

“By giving collective bargaining rights to the Saskatchewan government employees, you lifted them 

up and out of the slough of despond wherein they had languished for several decades. You gave 

government employees and their organizations the priceless gift of dignity.” 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Mr. Speaker, it was this CCF government that gave the public service of this 

province the right of collective bargaining. And these are the words on their behalf. May I quote again: 

 

“You lifted them up and out of the slough of despond wherein they had languished for several 

decades.” 

 

I humbly submit Mr. Speaker, that this period of despondency on the part of the public service of 

Saskatchewan must have been during the time when the party that my hon. friends opposite represent 

were the government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Since this is the first opportunity that I have had to speak in this house since the 

Weyburn by-election, Mr. Speaker, may I add my congratulations to the hon. member for Weyburn. I 

trust that his contribution to the proceedings of this house will be valuable, and his experience a pleasant 

one. 

 

I would also like to congratulate our Provincial Treasurer, the hon. member for Regina, for the manner 

in which he brought down the budget. He has ably demonstrated his competence both as to ability of 

presentation, and the understanding of the finances of the province. 

 

The school units of Saskatchewan and other educational institutes of learning will welcome the increase 

of some $3 million for this purpose. The allocation of an additional $26,715,000 to the Department of 

Public Health — the largest single increase to any department of government — will insure to the 

people of Saskatchewan adequate medical services, now long overdue. 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

24 

Mr. Speaker, the hon. members opposite, out of this house and in this house have gone all out to bring to 

the attention of the people of Saskatchewan the fact that the taxes have gone up some 3½ times since 

1944. What they have failed to mention is that since 1944 a similar rise has taken place in the 

neighbouring provinces. Of course, Mr. Speaker, we are aware that these increases were made necessary 

by increases in the cost of services and secondly our local governments have given in to demands for 

new services. If the opposition is both against land taxes, which are levied wholly by local government, 

and the education and health tax levied by the province to pay for education, hospitalization and medical 

care, it is only reasonable to expect that they propose some alternative, or suggest some practical way to 

lower the cost of services. This, the hon. Leader of the Opposition and his friends opposite have failed to 

do. What he and his free enterprise friends are trying, with no avail, to impress on the people of 

Saskatchewan is that if they were the government they would provide the necessary services and reduce 

taxes. It is possible that the hon. Leader of the Opposition has some magic formula or that he is 

expecting a Midas to be sitting in their midst at some future date. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us see if this government, as the opposition maintains has done anything or nothing to 

lower land taxes. At the 1960 session, I gave the hon. members of this house figures in regard to 

assistance received by the school units and the municipalities in my constituency. May I at this time put 

this into simpler terms so that my friends opposite will be able to understand. As an example, Sir, I want 

to use two farmers, assessed at $5 thousand for the year 1960 only: One — living in the rural 

municipality of Blaine Lake No. 434 and also in the Blaine Lake school unit No. 57, and the other 

farmer in the rural municipality of Round Hill No. 467 and in the Medstead larger school unit. In each 

instance I want to show how much more in taxes each farmer would have to pay if it were not for the 

assistance given to the school units and the municipalities by this government. Let us take the first one. 

The assessment of the rural municipality of Blaine Lake No. 434 in 1960 was some $2,216,671. Grants 

received for 1960 amounted to $23,448. This represents an assistance equivalent to ten mills, thus the 

saving to the farmer for building roads amounts to $50. The Blaine Lake school unit, assessed at some 

$7,348,000; grants received by the school unit in 1960 amounted to $318,584; mill rate of assistance to 

this farmer — 43 mills; assistance to this farmer $215. 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

25 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — The removal of the two mill public revenue makes an additional $10. The three put 

together, the municipal grants, the school grants, and the two mill public revenue makes a saving of 

$275 for this farmer alone because of the assistance received from this government in the year 1960. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Now, let us take the second farmer living in the rural municipality of Round Hill 

No. 467 and the Medstead school unit, assessed at $5 thousand. For school purposes at 53 mills — this 

represents a saving to this farmer of $265. For municipal purposes at 34 mills — $170; two mills in 

public revenue levy of $10; a total of $445 on a $5 thousand assessment for this farmer in the year 1960. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — I trust that this will be proof sufficient that this government has been assisting local 

government thus helping the land taxes from going higher than they are today. Speaking in terms of 

assistance, it appears to me that no one is better qualified to do so than the hon. members to your left. 

With your permission, may I refer to the accusations levied at this government both in and out of this 

house with regard to the meagre or skimpy assistance given to our local government. I want to go back a 

number of years to the period of 1934-44, what my friends opposite call, and we all call the hungry 

thirties, before the election of the CCF government, and bring to the attention of the hon. members 

opposite, some of the assistance received by our municipalities from a free enterprise Liberal 

government. For purposes of comparison I want to use the seven municipalities which are wholly or in 

part within my constituency. Mr. Speaker, this too was the period when the two mill public revenue levy 

was paid by the municipality to the provincial government. From the seven municipalities in 1934 — a 

Liberal government took in $29,087. Total assistance given these municipalities in 1934 — very 

generous — nothing. 

 

In 1935 — $29,498 was paid to the government, assistance in turn given to the seven municipalities, 

$149 to one municipality, six other municipalities — nothing. 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

26 

Then in the fall of 1936 and 1937 amounts taken in by a two mill public revenue levy were $60,127. 

Grants paid to the seven municipalities — nothing. 

 

In 1938 the municipalities received $845 and this incidentally was the election year. 

 

In 1939 satisfied at being re-elected they got generous, six of the seven municipalities received grants 

totalling some $1,553. 

 

The following year, 1940, after what I presume the basis of need was taken into account, the seven 

municipalities received in the form of assistance from the Liberal government, nothing. 

 

In 1941 need was recognized for R.M. No. 466, they were given assistance to the tune of $30. One other 

municipality, the R.M. of Parkdale No. 465, received $206, the balance of the municipalities — nothing. 

 

However, when an election was rolling around, five of the seven municipalities in 1943 received a total 

of $2,332. 

 

I submit Sir, that here was a checkered Liberal political pattern, the basis on which assistance was given 

to the municipalities in my constituency prior to 1944. To illustrate further, a total of some $318,875 

was taken in over the ten year period by the two mill public revenue levy, and only $7,465 was paid to 

these municipalities in the form of assistance. In other words, almost one-third of a million dollars of 

direct levy paid by the taxpayers of the seven municipalities was withheld from the local governments in 

the period 1934-44 by a Liberal government, in the area I now have the honour to represent. 

 

The hon. members on this side of the house Mr. Speaker, and the people of Saskatchewan are aware that 

the hon. members opposite would like to have the people of my constituency believe and probably the 

rest of Saskatchewan, that this government has hordes of municipal assessors running around the 

province from day to day for the sole purpose of jacking up and increasing the assessments in the rural 

municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that the department has a policy in regard to municipal reassessment. This may 

have changed the assessments in certain areas, and in certain respects, but the very fact that the 

assessment 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

27 

has been made within the municipalities of my constituency I would with your permission, Sir, put into 

the records of this house, how my area was affected. 

 

Government Members: — Let them have it. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — I would also suggest all hon. members in this house make a similar survey in each 

of their constituencies. I have taken the trouble to obtain statistics in respect to reassessment in the seven 

rural municipalities within my constituency, and what this reassessment has meant to the taxpayers. I 

obtained from the Department of Municipal Affairs and not from a hat, the assessment as it was under 

the Liberal government in 1943 for the municipalities that are wholly or in part within the Redberry 

constituency. The R.M. of Blaine Lake No. 434, in 1943, under a Liberal government, was assessed at 

$3,026,207; in 1961 some eighteen years later, after the hordes of assessors had gone through it was 

assessed at $2,216,000. In other words, Mr. Speaker, the assessment had gone down by some $809,536. 

Over three-quarters of a million dollars. The R.M. of Redberry No. 435 had in 1943 an assessment of 

$2,540,359; in 1961 Mr. Speaker, the assessment was $1,839,520 or an assessment of some $700,839 

less than in 1943 under the Liberal government. The R.M. of Leask No. 464, in 1943 was assessed at 

$2,062,276. To this municipality, was added in 1950 one-half of the R.M. of Royal No. 465 which was 

disorganized. The total assessment of both the Leask municipality and the added half of the Royal 

municipality in 1961 was $2,077,000 or almost the assessment for the R.M. of Leask alone in 1943. Mr. 

speaker, I do not want to bore the hon. members with statistics, however, the R.M. of Round Hill No. 

467 had its assessment reduced by some $294,552. The R.M. of Meota No. 468 had its assessment 

lowered by $369,366 in this period, and finally, the municipality of Parkdale which is partially in my 

constituency had a reduction in its assessment from 1943 to 1961 by some $660,162. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if these hordes of land assessors have done anything in the intervening years between 1944 

and 1961, to the seven municipalities which are wholly or in part within my constituency it is only 

through the efforts of the Department of Municipal Affairs and the people so employed that the 

taxpayers were relieved of paying taxes on some $2,834,425 for which they had been paying taxes to 

local governments in 1943, and a two mill public revenue to a Liberal government. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

28 

Mr. Michayluk: — Municipal reassessment in the municipalities in my constituency, and this is a true 

picture Mr. Speaker, have since 1944, in every instance been lowered and this is contrary to what some 

Liberal politicians, for political reasons, would have the people in my area and other parts of the 

province believe. Mr. Speaker, it is evident that local governments strike their mill levy on assessment to 

raise money which they require regardless of assessment, but I maintain that the only reason that the 

assessments of rural municipalities were high prior to 1944 was the fact that the Liberal government was 

keeping the assessment high to derive more from the two mill public revenue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberal party has over the last four provincial elections established a pattern of 

throwing out election bait to unsuspecting voters. In 1944 under the Tucker or Tyranny regime they 

were willing to sacrifice some of the main sources of revenue and here is what the Liberal party pledged 

to reduce at that time or increase. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Careful you are going to have to live under the Liberals again. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Don‟t worry my friend I lived under a Liberal government for some twelve years as 

a school teacher. Well Sir, $2 million school grant increase in order to lower land taxes was one of the 

Liberal promises made in 1948, after they had taken a licking in 1944. 

 

Well Sir, what has happened since this government was elected in 1944. School grants have increased 

not by $2 million, but from $3 million in 1944 to some $31 million in the 1962-63 fiscal year. Another 

Liberal pledge in 1948 was that the education tax or what we now call the education and hospital tax 

was to be abolished. Since 1948 Mr. Speaker, because of financial needs seven other provinces out of 

the ten provinces in Canada have put on this tax at varying rates. 

 

Pledge number three, trucking fees were to be reduced and I presume to the rate of our neighbouring 

province. 

 

Number four, compulsory automobile insurance was to be replaced by a fairer plan to the farmers. I 

presume at the Alberta and Manitoba rates. 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

29 

Then in two succeeding elections Sir, they wanted to capitalize on the refund of the farmers‟ share of the 

power installations. For eight years they kept some of the farmers, without service of power, thinking 

the Liberals would be elected and they would get power free. However, at a Liberal convention in 1960 

held on November 21 and 22nd, and reported in the Star-Phoenix under the title “Grits Defeat 

Resolution on Platform”, here is the stand which the Liberals took with regard to the eight year old 

promise, and I quote: 

 

“A resolution that the provincial government refund to the farmers the amount they had paid for power 

line construction was tabled by the agricultural panel of the Saskatchewan Liberal Association 

convention here Monday though it was a plank in the Grit platform in the recent provincial election. 

Almost one third of the panel members were opposed to the tabling motion and it could resurrect when 

the general meeting gets the resolution Tuesday. The resolution was listed as originating in the 

Yorkton constituency but Bernard Gallagher, the member elect, said it had not been passed at the last 

executive meeting and he moved the tabling motion. 

 

“Mr. Gallagher said the Liberals had lost two provincial elections, while having this refund as a part of 

the platform. He thought, they should drop it and just tell the farmers that was the price they had to 

pay, an average of $500 for electing a CCF government.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this however was not the main or logical reason as far as I can see, to the Liberal party, 

their main concern was and I quote again Sir, 

 

“The main objection seemed to be a conviction that the Liberals would form the next provincial 

government, and the members by passing this resolution would get them into difficulty by saddling 

them with a refund of over $25 million to the farmers.” 

 

Again a promise withdrawn because if elected my hon. friends opposite would be saddled with refunds. 

 

Mr. E. Kramer: — When did they ever keep a promise? 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

30 

Mr. Michayluk: — Mr. Speaker, it is time my hon. friends opposite realized that gone are the days 

when the people of this province can be misled on issues that have a direct bearing on their welfare . . . 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — . . . be it in the field of education, health, agriculture, municipal affairs, or other 

services, that this government has provided to the people over the years. 

 

My constituents Mr. Speaker, both the farmers and the business people have been as adversely affected 

last year due to poor crops as have other areas of the province, however, I would like to thank the 

Minister of Agriculture for the prompt action taken by his department to assist the farmers in regard to 

feed for livestock and giving assistance for bringing the feed in from other areas. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — This has enabled the farmers to retain most of their basic herds, but the farmers who 

have had to dispose of some of their cattle were able to do so at a fair and reasonable price. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time I have some kind words to offer to the Minister of Highways. I want to thank 

him on behalf of my constituents for the oiling of highway No. 26, from the junction of highway No. 4 

to the Village of Meota in 1961. I know that the minister is aware that highway No. 26 does not end 

there. I hope that the Petrofka bridge and highway No. 12 east of the bridge to highway No. 11 is 

completed this fall and already the minister has made this announcement. 

 

The completion of this bridge concerns the hon. member from Shellbrook and his people and also those 

people living in what is commonly known as the hub of Blaine Lake. For this too, I want to express 

thanks to the Minister of Highways. I was delighted to hear the announcement just made by the hon. 

minister in regard to the regrading and regravelling of highway No. 40 from Krydor to Hafford, and that 

some twenty miles will be oiled on this highway east of the city of North Battleford. 

 

I would also Mr. Speaker, like to take this opportunity to thank the Hon. Minister of Natural Resources 

for the completion to an entrance road into the Battleford Provincial Park. 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

31 

I too, would like to thank the Minister of Municipal Affairs and the Treasury Department for the 

assistance given to the town of Blaine Lake for the installation of sewer and water by purchasing some 

$30 thousand worth of debentures. I trust that in the near future more urban centres in my constituency 

will be in a position where they can avail themselves of like services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, being a school teacher I would like to equate some of the operating grants that are received 

within some of the units in my constituency and how they relate to the total salaries of teachers. The 

Blaine Lake School Unit No. 57 in 1960 received a total of $318,584, total paid to teachers in the unit in 

1960 was $317 thousand. In other words Mr. Speaker, the amount received in grants by the Blaine Lake 

School Unit was sufficient to pay the salaries of the entire teaching staff within the unit. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — In the Medstead School Unit for the same year the total amount received in grants 

was $299,221, the total paid out to the teachers was $251,300. In the Turtleford unit grants amounted to 

$412,204, salaries to teachers in 1960 amounted to $300,191. In each instance Mr. Speaker, grants 

received from the Department of Education by the larger school units in my area have been sufficient 

and adequate to pay all the salaries of all their teaching staffs. 

 

I want to make a few remarks about political leaders. The late Mr. J.S. Woodsworth has been referred to 

in recent school broadcasts, and these hon. members who are in the teaching profession know, as the 

Conscience of Parliament. Mr. M.J. Coldwell was only recently honoured by a testimonial luncheon 

given him in recognition of his work for the CCF party. About one hundred friends and admirers, drawn 

from all political parties, of all shades of political opinion, ranging from T.C. Douglas, national leader of 

the New Democratic Party, to Mr. M.J. MacNamell, elderly statesman of the Conservatives. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Foley: — On a point of privilege . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — What is your point of privilege? 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

32 

Mr. Foley: — The member has stated that Mr. Woodsworth‟s name was used on a recent school 

broadcast. Could I have the date? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That is not a point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — You can check the Saskatchewan school broadcast series pamphlet, or if you prefer 

I could get that information for you. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It is not a point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Foley: — When was the broadcast made? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — This was at the intermediate level for Grades VI to IX in social studies. Not only 

was J.S. Woodsworth‟s name used, but Sir Wilfrid Laurier and other federal political leaders and prime 

ministers used on different broadcasts. This information could be obtained from the Department of 

Education, Saskatchewan school broadcasts. Mr. Woodsworth was referred to as Conscience of 

Parliament. Mr. Douglas, as reported by Jack Scott, of the Vancouver Sun has been referred to as the 

man who has made some people proud to be Canadians. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — However, a respected correspondent of the London Times, John Stevenson, writing 

on politicians and promises, in the Canadian Commentator, gave a very clear impression of what he 

thinks of the new political leader of the Saskatchewan Liberal party. 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — What is the point of order? 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — This man has been reading his speech from start to finish. 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

33 

Mr. Michayluk: — I am referring to extensive notes, what is more I can do this without notes if you 

want. 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — I would appreciate it — this is the rule of parliamentary procedure. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — I am going to quote so I have to read, may I quote in part Sir? 

 

“Mr. Thatcher left behind him in Ottawa the impression that he was an ambitious self-seeking 

opportunist with a serene contempt for principles and an essentially shallow mind, an imperfect 

understanding of national problems, but apparently the fervor which renegades always impart to their 

denunciation of parties and causes which they have foresaken and the belief that when he stood as a 

Liberal candidate in 1958, he had worsted Premier Douglas in a famous oratorical duel, convinced the 

majority of the Liberal delegates at their recent provincial convention that he was the Moses who 

would lead them into the land of Caanan and so they chose him as their leader. But both in character 

and ability he is in comparison with Premier Douglas, as moonlight is to sunlight, and apparently there 

was some grave misgivings among prominent Liberals in Saskatchewan about the wisdom of 

entrusting the guidance of their party‟s fortune to an opportunist like Mr. Thatcher.” 

 

Having said all this Mr. Speaker, it is evident to you and to the hon. members of the house that I will 

support the budget. 

 

Mr. Karl F. Klein (Notukeu Willowbunch): — In taking part in this debate I will as other members 

have done congratulate you on your election as Speaker of this house. I don‟t know if you have taken 

count of how many times you have been congratulated, but because it has been done often, doesn‟t mean 

to say that our sincerity is lessening. I personally wish you well and I realize the difficult task you must 

shoulder. 

 

Then too I should also like to congratulate the member from Weyburn (Mr. Staveley). I think he will 

make a substantial contribution in his life in this legislature, which is going to be a long and happy one. 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

34 

I would also like to join with those who have congratulated the Richardsons in having won the Canadian 

championship. In this regard I respectfully submit that in past years we have honoured the lady curling 

championships in this legislature, we have honoured the Richardsons, and as yet we have failed to 

honour the high school champs in this legislature, and I think if anything is going to be done to honour 

the Richardson, perhaps if we could do something for the high school boys on the same plain and level 

that they would show their appreciation and it would certainly do a lot of good as far as encouraging 

curling in this province. 

 

While I am in this congratulatory mood I would like to congratulate the financial critic for the 

opposition, the member from Moosomin (Mr. McDonald), he did an excellent job and the government 

members who have constantly complained that we have never given them anything constructive 

certainly if they studied that which was given by the financial critic they will find a lot of constructive 

suggestions in there, and I would recommend it to their attention. 

 

Before I adjourn the debate this afternoon I would like to take some time out to mention the things that 

were said this afternoon. The Minister of Highways, I too feel grateful to him for having made the 

announcement that No. 13 highway from Melaval to Kincaid would be constructed. I have been waiting 

for that a long time, but in announcing that particular piece of road he destroyed one of my stories I had 

in reserve in case he didn‟t announce it, and after he announced it my story may have to go by the 

wayside. But this is what it was and I will tell it anyway. 

 

While he was announcing oil treatment for all the other roads had he not announced No. 13 road, I 

would have said that all he is giving us is just the treatment and not the oil. However, I am grateful that 

we didn‟t get the treatment again this year as we have done in the past. 

 

I was a little bit amazed at the member for Shaunavon (Mr. Kluzak) that he would at this time bring a 

question into the house about which in my mind, the CCF party ought to hang their heads in shame, and 

that is, the efforts that were put on during the war years. The major political parties during those years 

and I can‟t speak from experience, I wasn‟t here at the time, but I have been told the two major parties, 

the Liberals and Conservatives, had signed a political truce during the war years, and they both agreed 

that there would be no policies taking place during the war, and that the parties would put their efforts 

together into the major task, which was to win the war. 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

35 

Surprisingly enough the CCf‟ers during that period of time took that opportunity of making hay while 

the sun shone, and undermined in every way, shape and form the war effort put on by Canada. Now that 

to me is something they shouldn‟t be talking about but should rather come in here in shame to admit that 

they ever did such a thing, and to have him bring up all this old war stuff now and be pretty proud of it is 

to me something that I can‟t quite understand. He was talking about 1942 and if you look back at CCF 

speeches at that time here is what they said: 

 

“I don‟t agree that political hatchets ought to be buried for the duration.” 

 

Another CCF member said: 

 

“How was it Hitler rose in Germany — Great Britain, he stated, was the country most guilty in the 

betrayals of the League of Nations.” 

 

Those were some of the things that were said during the war years, while we were trying to win a war in 

1942 and 1943, when dozens of our boys were being sacrificed in the interests of freedom and peace, 

and the last ones to speak of sabotaging efforts, in view of their record in the past years. It seems to me 

in this budget there are many significant factors that need to or are worthy of all our attention. One the 

Provincial Treasurer tried to pull the carpet out from under our feet by mentioning that we are all going 

to speak about taxation, debts and increased burdens on the people, and he was so right, because when 

we look at the picture of the provincial debt and realize that every child at birth is committed to a $500 

debt before he even draws his first breath it is a worthwhile project. We find that child is having a pretty 

rough row to hoe in his future years. 

 

Coupled with this huge debt we have the per capita taxation that is enough to bog down any enterprising 

person. The per capita tax in Saskatchewan as was mentioned is approximately $88 provincial tax, that 

excluded the taxes we pay directly for hospitalization. Municipal taxation per capita is $91.78 for every 

man, woman and child. Now the significant part of the taxation increase is not so much the rise in 

taxation, as when you couple it with another statistic, and that is the loss in population. Now the 

increased taxation revenues ought to 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

36 

be in direct proportion to the increase in our population, and rather than a direct proportion we have an 

inverse proportion in that respect, as our budget is going up our population is decreasing, and we have 

only to go to our vital statistics and we find there in the years 1958-59 and 1960, which are the latest 

figures available, in 1958 our loss in population was 8,360; in 1959, our loss in population was 3,316; in 

1960 our loss in population was 9,220. This seems to be on the increase every year. The overall result of 

this particular inverse proportion is that fewer and fewer people are going to have to pay more and more 

towards services that we are supporting in this province. Then we look again and we find that with this 

medical care program that is somewhere in the offing, we find that 165 thousand people in 

Saskatchewan are paying personal income tax. Now on the personal income tax basis for medical care. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I am afraid we cannot discuss the taxes directly related to medical care — the motion 

that has been discussed by this house as an amendment to the Address-in-Reply included taxes 

specifically for medical care. That has been decided upon. 

 

Mr. Klein: — Are the estimates before the House Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well the motion . . . 

 

Mr. Klein: — Are the items in the estimates? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes, as stated the estimates are in the budget before the house, but I think you will 

understand that we can‟t get in the same argument as we already had. 

 

Mr. Klein: — As long as I can refer to the items in the estimates. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — As long as they deal with the general package but not specifically. 

 

Mr. Klein: — Straight income tax, the individual income tax, by income groups, in Saskatchewan there 

are only today 165 thousand people that do pay income tax. Now when we look at the estimates, it is 

estimated that those 165 thousand are going to contribute $13,464,000 to the 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

37 

budgetary revenues of this province. That shows that if this should continue, this decrease in population 

and increase in taxation, that ultimately it is bound to lead to discouragement and frustration on the part 

of those people that are productive, and that is perhaps one of the major weaknesses of this budget. 

 

Now the Provincial Treasurer is trying to paint a pretty rosy picture and that was a tough job, and he had 

to look back to find any bright spots, because if we look around us and into the future we see nothing but 

doom and more taxation for services, and we find that when you look right and left of you there is 

nothing very rosy in the picture of Saskatchewan as it exists today. 

 

What is the picture in Saskatchewan today? We are faced with a condition of rising unemployment, 

arrears in taxation are going up constantly, and taxation while I am mentioning that topic, in 1961 it was 

found that 187 people were prosecuted for not paying their hospitalization tax. That to me is an 

indication that those people, certainly it isn‟t because they didn‟t want to, it indicates that we have 

reached or gone beyond the saturation point in taxation. The ever-mounting arrears that are experienced 

by school units is another indication that we have gone beyond the saturation point for taxation. Coupled 

with that we have more and more people clamoring to get on social aid. We have more and more people 

on unemployment insurance. There is no hope in the near future at least for any actual major industrial 

development that is going to provide employment for the unemployed today. 

 

What is the picture in the rural area? When we travel the highways and byways of this province, what do 

we see? In our area particularly we find empty houses, houses that at one time housed robust and 

vigorous and sound farm boys and girls who proved to be the salt of the earth, and now those houses are 

housing mice, rats and pigeons. The garden is unkempt, overgrown with weeds. An invading force of 

grass and weeds. The picture in the small towns is every bit as gloomy. Our small towns are pockmarked 

with empty lots overgrown with weeds. Buildings that are still there and were once thriving businesses 

now being boarded up, empty houses with broken windows and the small business merchants struggling 

for survival. That is the rural picture. When we look around we find education is in financial difficulty. 

The minister himself admitted that he didn‟t know where the money is going to come from to finance 

education. 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

38 

Hospital services have to be curtailed — municipalities are throwing up their arms in desperation, and 

almost willing to give up the ghost in coping with the problems they are faced with. 

 

Now these conditions did not all come about overnight. This deterioration set in quite a few years ago, 

and the reason of course that these conditions did take place, according to this government is that they 

were the natural evolution of our technological development and what have you. They are trying to tell 

us that they were coming and in spite of what the government would do, they would continue. Now this 

government since it has taken office has been about the greatest do-nothing government that we have 

ever had in this province. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Klein: — When they first came into office they at least fooled around and attempted some 

socialistic experiments but since then they have brought in and introduced absolutely nothing new. They 

have continued to proceed and develop on a basis and on the foundations that were laid by all previous 

administrations, and whatever development came to this province was in spite of what the government 

did, and if there is any government that will go down in the history of this province as a caretaker 

government and as a do-nothing government, as a government bereft of ideas and policies, it is the one 

that sits on your right Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I wouldn‟t trust myself to form such an opinion because my opinion may be prejudiced and biased 

and therefore in order to form an opinion I thought I should consult some other authority that would be 

more to your liking, about this do-nothing government. I had to find someone who would confirm this 

opinion, whose opinion would not be as biased and prejudiced as mine, and therefore I thought it would 

only be right to go to the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour — your bride in this whole business — 

and in a marriage as short as yours, to have the bride condemn the groom before he even got off the 

ground is a serious situation. Now what does the labour bride have to say about the CCF groom that they 

married? Well they could probably charge them with incompatibility, but they put it in politer terms — 

they said in the opinion of the federation, what is now needed is more of the same, more of the boldness 

that characterized the program of the present government in its earliest years of office, which to some 

extent was explained in the recent election 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

39 

campaign battle over the medical care plan. Already the bride is calling for more action, for more vigor, 

for more vim, for more vitality which you are refusing to show to that poor little bride — demanding 

something be done from the CCF party. 

 

Now in this debate I had not intended to debate medical care, and I wouldn‟t have done so had not the 

Provincial Treasurer taken the opportunity to tell this house once again in his budget speech that the 

opposition were the people who were using obstruction tactics in trying to delay, sabotage the program, 

or whatever word you have to use in that regard. Now you people have very short memories, during the 

last special session we said we were willing, because this medical care program affected the lives of so 

many people in this province, in fact all the people in this province, we were willing to co-operate with 

this government and we brought in earnest recommendations on what ought to have been done. Had 

some of those recommendations been listened to rather than you people trying to gain some political 

prestige by saying we were objecting to your plan and sabotaging it, you may not be in the mess you are 

today. 

 

However, I don‟t want to become involved in the dispute between the government and the doctors, but I 

do want to point out to this government something they are extremely guilty of, and something you 

ought to go to bed and worry about in your consciences if you have any. Premier Douglas, the former 

Premier that is, Tommy Douglas, was so intent that you announce this plan which is going to go into 

effect April 1st. Of course, the reason he was so insistent that this be done is so that he could go into the 

federal campaign and say we in Saskatchewan have been the first to introduce a complete medical care 

program, and that the rest of Canada is going to follow our plan. Notice the timing — April 1st. He was 

afraid they may call a May election so it would have to be in effect on April 1st. 

 

Now let me point out to this house the dangers of using peoples‟ health for political advantages and 

prestige, because you people announced this program and had done nothing about taking into your 

scheme the medical services, or the other private program, many people in this province decided to 

gamble and not pay up their M.S.I. to April 1st, because they said between January and April 1st we will 

take a chance on no illness and not pay our M.S.I. They had the right to do it, but some of them didn‟t 

do it and I know of three cases where 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

40 

during that period, there is one family in particular, the wife became ill, and after long period of illness, 

and a lot of medical care, died and the man is now faced with all the bills that he would have had paid 

for him, because he was a former holder of the M.S.I. protection. 

 

Now that is the evil of mixing politics in with peoples‟ health, for political advantage. For one man in 

this country many people are suffering because you announced this plan would go into effect on April 

1st and of course some of your CCF henchmen in the country believe your slogan “A party that keeps its 

promises.” Some were foolish enough to gamble that they would not have any illness between January 

and April 1st, the time your medical scheme was apparently to come into effect. Now if that doesn‟t 

bother your conscience then certainly you don‟t have any. Had you proceeded in this thing the way you 

ought to have done, first of all before you made any announcement you should have seen how you were 

going to integrate the private plan with the government plan and if anybody should find themselves in 

that unfortunate situation where he didn‟t pay his M.S.I. because he was relying on medical care 

coverage by this government, then you should have had some plan to take care of those people who did 

just that. 

 

I can see where some people didn‟t pay the M.S.I. because it was during the time when you had no 

finances to go down December 31st and dig up 20 some dollars to pay to April 1st, and said well, we 

will just take a chance. Well some people have taken chances for a lot longer time than that, and because 

that is the case I think you ought to do something about those cases when they are referred to this 

government and take over whatever bills these people have, in all fairness to these people who acted, I 

think, in good faith, and because they trust you, and because you are a party that says, “A party that 

keeps its promise”, they dropped the M.S.I. December 31st hoping that you would pay their bills as of 

April 1st. What about the bills that accumulated in that gap period that we warned you about last fall? 

We told you last fall this is what would happen, but you paid no attention to that at all. You bulldozed 

the scheme through in spite of the good advice we gave you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — No one said anything about paying bills before April 1st. 

 

Mr. Klein: — Last fall I asked what are you going to do with these people. There is confusion and 

consternation in their minds. They don‟t know whether to go down the 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

41 

end of December and pay M.S.I. or not, because you are having a plan coming into effect. You did 

nothing about that. You just ignored it completely, and now you have a lot of hardship on your hands 

because you didn‟t do anything about that. Now the net result of the budget thus far is that it has these 

three dire effects. This budget more than any other budget that I can remember is creating fear and 

consternation in the minds of all our people. Secondly, this budget and the policies of the government 

that go with it, is doing more to destroy the initiative and the incentive and the ambition of each of your 

individual citizens than any other budget I know of. Thirdly, this budget is helping to drive out the 

population and it will have a serious effect on Saskatchewan‟s population and we can expect to find that 

ever diminishing loss each year — to a greater extent than it has been experienced in the last three years. 

 

I intend Mr. Speaker, to deal with some of those things tomorrow — namely, the fear and apprehension 

that is existing in the minds of people and why that fear exists, and also how we are destroying initiative 

and incentive of the greatest natural resource we have, that is the productiveness of the individual. 

 

With those words I would like leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MOTION: EXPANSION OF TELEVISION SERVICES 

 

Mr. Arthur Kluzak (Shaunavon) moved: 

 

That, this assembly requests the federal government to urge the proper authorities through the Board of 

Broadcast Governors of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation to expand television services to 

include those outlying and border areas of Saskatchewan presently out of range of existing stations. 

 

Mr. Kluzak: — The reason I have moved this motion is because of the television reception in my 

constituency, and I would think there are other members here who have some of the same problems of 

poor television reception. In my constituency only about 50 per cent of the people get what 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

42 

you might call reasonable viewing. About 20 per cent have fringe area reception and 30 per cent have no 

reception at all. This we feel is a direct result of the Board of Broadcast Governors licensing a television 

transmitting station in our area with a power rating far below that necessary to cover the area that would 

be necessary adjacent to this setting. 

 

In view of the poor reception in a greater part of the area, when some of the people of the no reception 

area asked the station for a satellite they were refused on the basis of the cost. Later on the people of Val 

Marie, Orkney and Bracken have taken up a collection and had contributed some $8,000 to pay for the 

installation and the cost of a satellite. The people of Eastend did likewise, collecting some $9,000 among 

themselves to help install a satellite. These satellites have proved to have a very local coverage and 

consequently many of the people who made contributions towards these satellites have still not received 

any television viewing. I believe more consideration should be given by the Board of Broadcast 

Governors before a license is granted to any television station, to make sure they are financially sound 

and able to cover the areas within their range. 

 

As 90 per cent of the people of Canada now have television viewing and many of them have access to 

two or three channels, it seems that we in Saskatchewan should be entitled to be in this 90 per cent 

group, seeing that we are directly under the microwave transmitting station, and sandwiched in between 

the east and the west, where there are abundant television facilities. One of the duties of this board I 

believe is to see that television services are equally and justly distributed, and that we have a coverage of 

all areas. 

 

The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation spends some $60 million of the taxpayers‟ money to promote 

this service in Canada, and I don‟t think I am asking too much when I ask that we in Saskatchewan 

warrant better coverage with this service. I don‟t think this resolution needs a lot of speaking to, and I 

would hope it would receive the support of all the members of this house, so I move, seconded by Allan 

L. Stevens, Rosetown, the resolution as it appears on the order paper. 

 

Mr. Allan L. Stevens (Rosetown): — Mr. Speaker, the motion that the member from Shaunavon (Mr. 

Kluzak) has proposed, I think is a very worthy one, and in rising to second the resolution, I want to ask 

for not only the support of some of the people of this house, but all of them, and to make it a unanimous 

resolution. 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

43 

There are many areas in Saskatchewan who do not have the opportunity to enjoy television, the 

coverage from C.B.C. and in view of the fact they are already paying their share of the cost of this 

television in two different ways, I think they should have this service and this privilege. The first way 

they pay a share of this cost is through the expenditures of the public funds for the C.B.C. As the 

member from Shaunavon has mentioned, the annual grant to the C.B.C. is something over $60 million, 

but this is not all the expense of the C.B.C. The total cost to the people of Canada is considerably more 

than that. The revenue received from advertisers, to advertise on these programs, has been something 

over $37 million, and the total cost of the programs for C.B.C. is something over $100 million. Now 

these advertisers of course all add this expense to the price they charge for their products and the people 

who do not receive C.B.C. are paying their share of this cost when they buy these products. 

 

I believe money spent on C.B.C. is money well spent, and the purposes for which a national TV network 

have been set up are very worthy ones, and they are as follows: 

 

First it was to be a complete service covering in fair proportion the whole range of programs, bringing 

things of interest, value and entertainment to people of all faith, ages, and interests. And secondly to link 

all parts of the country in two ways, first with inclusion of a wide variety of national and common 

interests, and secondly by using its physical resources to bring the national program service to as many 

Canadians as finances will allow. Whether Canadians live in remote or heavily populated areas the 

national system should serve them as adequately and equitably as possible. Thirdly, to be predominately 

Canadian in content and character. This is the main reason why C.B.C. was formed and I think the 

people in the areas who have not this coverage should have it. 

 

They have many commendable programs on the C.B.C. and I think most of the people should have the 

opportunity to hear them. In my constituency half of the area from No. 4 highway east is very well 

covered by the station C.F.Q.C., but in the area west of No. 4 highway, there is no coverage, and at the 

present time an application has been made to the Board of Broadcast Governors for a satellite station at 

Stranraer, however, this application has been delayed, it has had an injunction served upon it, and a great 

many people in that area who were expecting TV from the satellite station last fall, 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

44 

are not yet receiving TV, and therefore I think that the Board of Broadcast Governors and the C.B.C. 

should make a special effort to see that the construction of the satellite station is proceeded with, so 

therefore I take pleasure in seconding this resolution, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned (Mr. Guy). 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION: VETERINARY COLLEGE 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Snedker. 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, this motion was adjourned by the hon. 

Premier in order to permit me to make any comment that I might wish to make to the house in 

connection with the possibility of establishing a veterinary college in western Canada. 

 

To repeat a bit of history here, in 1958 this proposal was put forth by the Western Veterinary 

Association and the universities looked at it at that time. In that same year, we had our annual 

conference of provincial ministers at Guelph, Ontario, and while attending the conference we had an 

opportunity of visiting the Veterinary College at Guelph, at which time they were adding a wing to the 

college and we were given assurance at that time that in their opinion they could provide ample facilities 

to take care of the needs for western veterinary students. We were informed however, this year when 

attending the agricultural annual conference in Ottawa that the authorities at Guelph had taken another 

look at their situation and we found, a bit to our surprise, that they would not be able to take the number 

of students who are taking their first year veterinary course at the universities in the western provinces, 

that they would be very short of accommodation particularly for second year students and the whole 

field of need was reviewed again with Dr. Kenneth Wells of the federal Health of Animal Services, who 

had seen the need for a western college. Subsequent to our meeting and discussion at Ottawa, the 

provincial ministers met in Edmonton early in January. The minister for Manitoba was unable to attend, 

however, they were represented by the deputy minister. 

 

We discussed the whole problem again, and the thought put forward was that this should be a combined 

effort, a co-operative effort and that each province would participate wherever the college might be 

located. 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

45 

The natural choice seemed to be either Alberta or Saskatchewan. British Columbia indicated a very 

serious interest and of course Alberta and Saskatchewan. I perhaps could say that Manitoba was not 

interested to the same degree although they didn‟t express any opinion to my knowledge on a 

contribution to such a college. Manitoba is quite close to Guelph and they might look with favour on 

continuing to utilize facilities at Guelph. 

 

At any rate at the Edmonton meeting we agreed as far as we are concerned that we would be prepared to 

contribute towards the capital construction costs of such a college, with the understanding that if it were 

decided not to have it in Saskatchewan our students would enter the college on the same basis as the 

students do in the province in which the veterinary college might be located. 

 

We also agreed at this conference that a request would be made to the federal government of financial 

assistance primarily because the federal government had a great interest in additional veterinary 

graduates. They are the largest employer of veterinarians in the federal Health of Animals Services. It 

was rather intimated to us that there was a possibility of another federal animal diseases research 

laboratory being established in western Canada. Their preference for this laboratory seemed to indicate 

the University of Saskatchewan campus, for many reasons, because there is an Animal Diseases 

Research Laboratory at Lethbridge at the present time, as hon. members know. We rather felt that any 

new laboratory might be associated with a veterinary college. 

 

Well the upshot of the meeting in Edmonton was that we could ask the federal government for a 

financial contribution. Mr. Halmrast, the minister for Alberta chaired the meeting and he carried on 

continued correspondence with Ottawa in this regard. I don‟t know what the results have been, I think 

they haven‟t had any response because the federal minister, as we all know has been ill for quite some 

time. 

 

We did agree however, that the university authorities at both Edmonton and Saskatoon would look over 

available facilities and let us know what might be offered or what might be the capital cost of such a 

college and of course the estimate of cost for continuing operation and maintenance of such a college. 

 

I have had a report now in this regard from the University of Saskatchewan and no doubt the report will 

be available from the university authorities in Alberta. 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

46 

The matter of final location will of course have to be determined by the participating provinces. There 

are four of them and if this is to be a combined co-operative effort I would think that the final choice of 

location would be determined to a large extent by the feelings of the other participating provinces, 

particularly British Columbia and the province of Manitoba. Quite naturally, we would very much like 

to see a veterinary college located on the campus of our own university. We have facilities there much 

the same as they have at Edmonton and if there is a possibility of a federal animal disease laboratory 

being established in Saskatoon, if this is decided by the federal authorities, this will again be a further 

argument I would say in favour of such a college in Saskatchewan. 

 

The other thing that we must consider of course is the financing of such a college. A good deal would 

depend on the confirmation from the other provinces as to the actual amount of money they might want 

to put in in capital construction, or as to whether or not they might wish to contribute for operation and 

maintenance. None of these aspects have as yet been determined, the matter is under study, we must 

wait until we have word from Ottawa as to what their attitude might be regarding a financial 

contribution, and of course, the choice of location could then be determined and a preference might then 

be expressed by the participating provinces. 

 

Now this is all I can report up to date, only to say that there is now common agreement that a western 

college is needed and we rather feel that looking into the future that such a college ought to be 

established without too much delay because it will be a matter of six or seven years before we begin to 

receive graduates from a veterinary college. In the meantime, we will of course continue to use the 

facilities at Guelph. Incidentally, I should mention to the house, we have about 43 students attending 

Guelph; we have more students down there excepting Ontario than any other province. Our veterinary 

needs are being taken care of a bit better as the result of the additional interest in students going to 

Guelph, and with this continued interest and the western veterinary college of course our needs should 

be pretty well taken care of. 

 

As everyone knows, we make scholarship grants available to Saskatchewan students, who can earn in 

each of a five year period up to $400 per year. One hundred dollars depending on their marks, but there 

is also a straight 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

47 

three hundred dollar grant each year, which makes it $1500 and they can then earn the additional $100 

in each year if they have marks over 70. At the moment any Saskatchewan student attending the 

veterinary college at Guelph would therefore be eligible for a grant up to $400. 

 

I don‟t think Mr. Speaker, that there is anything else that I wish to add, only to indicate to the house that 

we have been actively interested and the preliminary negotiations and discussions have already taken 

place in this regard and the universities are at present looking at their respective facilities and will no 

doubt be reporting back to a subsequent conference when the material that has been assembled by the 

universities at Edmonton and Saskatoon will be studied, costs will be looked at and then we will get 

down to business on the actual contributions we might expect from other provinces and the contribution, 

if any, we might expect from the federal government . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I would like to ask the minister a question. I read a speech he made a short time ago 

in Alberta and I almost took from the Calgary Albertan that he would be quite happy if it went up to 

Edmonton, now I hope that that isn‟t the case. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — No, they take a lot of our courtesy for granted perhaps, and stretch a point 

sometime. Quite naturally we would like to see it on our university campus here, but we must also fact 

problems of financing, we must also have regard to the wishes of other provinces as well. Now British 

Columbia might prefer Edmonton, Manitoba may also prefer Edmonton — although I don‟t know why 

they would, it would be a bit further away. The establishment of the animal diseases laboratory is 

another factor that enters into it, but quite naturally we would like to see it in our province, if this is 

practical and is agreeable to the other provinces. Rather than not have one in western Canada, as I said 

to the house, we have already indicated that we are prepared to co-operate and I think this is only in the 

proper spirit to say to such a meeting that if it is decided by the meeting and by the ministers of the 

respective governments that the college would be in Edmonton, that we are prepared to give a 

contribution. We are prepared to co-operate rather than not have a college at all. Our preference of 

course would be the university campus at Saskatoon. 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

48 

Mr. D.T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — I would like at this time to congratulate the member 

for Saltcoats (Mr. Snedker) for bringing this matter to the attention of the government and to the 

attention of hon. members on this side and to the attention of the people of Saskatchewan, because I 

believe that the great deal of research that he did in presenting the resolution indicates the importance of 

the livestock industry in the province, and I would hope that the government of this province in the days 

ahead would try by every means possible to persuade these other western provinces to set up the site in 

Saskatchewan, and I hope that in the days ahead that they will build as convincing a case as is possible 

to build in order that we can have this college in our own province. 

 

Today in Saskatchewan, we have a livestock population of, I believe, some 2,090,000 head of cattle and 

if the province is going to diversify, if they are going to build up the economic structure of the province, 

then I would suggest that the livestock industry in years ahead is going to be the major industry in this 

province. There is going to be a great deal of technological changes in agriculture over the years, I am 

convinced, a great deal of land that is at present allocated to the growing of grain will be taken into 

producing livestock. At the present time one of the serious factors that I think we are facing in the 

livestock business is the fact that we haven‟t got enough trained veterinarians to take care of the requests 

for service. 

 

We notice in the press, I notice in my home area and other parts of the province today that there may be 

serious loss of livestock between now and the time the livestock get on the grass this coming spring. I 

know in my own case, and this prevalent all over the province, there just aren‟t enough veterinarians to 

go around and the veterinarians that we have at the present time are working 24 hours of the day, under 

the most difficult circumstances. I don‟t recall at the moment how many we have in Saskatchewan, but I 

think it is rather unfortunate that we can‟t get any more than about 40 students at Guelph to take this 

training. I feel sure that if we had the college in Saskatoon, and because of the fact that farm boys, and 

farm girls too are interested in livestock raising possibly to a greater degree today than they were some 

years ago, then I think that the veterinary profession will appeal to them and I am convinced that if we 

have the college in Saskatchewan, 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

49 

which I am sure is going to be the livestock province of the future, as far as western provinces are 

concerned, then I think we will have every reason to believe that we can get more students enrolled and 

we would be able to provide better services to those people who will be increasing their livestock 

population in the years ahead. 

 

And so with those brief remarks, I wish again at this time to stress to the government that they employ 

every possible means to try and get these other provinces to go along with us and to get up the facilities 

here in Saskatchewan. I think the location, the heart of the west, would be one of the greatest appeals. 

When we consider that it is going to take six or seven years from now before we can complete the 

project and get any veterinarians trained, then I think the ground work must be done now. We can do it, 

the same as other projects that are being contemplated in the province at the present time, envisaging 

completion in 50 to 100 years. I think that if we get in on the ground floor in this project, we can get it 

completed and into operation within the next ten years. I would only hazard a guess, but I would 

imagine that the way conditions are now that ten years from now, our cattle population in this province 

would be at least double of what it is today. In view of that I would suggest to members on the 

government side, that they support the member for Saltcoats (Mr. Snedker) and support members on this 

side of the house and do all we can to see that this service is provided to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — The motion: 

 

That this assembly respectfully requests that the government in consultation with the Board of 

Governors of the University of Saskatchewan immediately to give consideration to the establishment at 

Saskatoon of a Veterinary College and a course leading to a degree. 

 

Now I take it that this request is to the government to take immediate action in consultation with the 

Board of Governors of the university to establish the veterinary college at the university at Saskatoon. I 

don‟t think it merely asks that the minister should just have discussions from time to time with the three 

other agriculture ministers from the western provinces, with a view of eventually getting a veterinary 

college somewhere 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

50 

in western Canada. It is far more definite than that. We have been listening to the report given by the 

Minister of Agriculture, I think he gives it practically each year. Certainly for a goodly number of years 

I have heard of the consultations that go on between the minister of agriculture for the four western 

provinces with this point in mind. I am a little disappointed that the minister today could not set out the 

progress in any concrete form, whether there has been any coordinating committees set up between the 

four western provinces to make a survey of the cost and the location, to get down work as to what 

assistance each province may contribute. He merely says that it is under consideration. We know that. 

They have been consulting one another for the past seven or eight years on this matter. 

 

What this resolution is proposing as I see it is to urge the government of Saskatchewan to get busy, with 

a view in mind to establishing a veterinarian college at the University of Saskatchewan. By every press 

report that I can read the people of Alberta, the stockmen of Alberta and any association dealing with 

livestock together with many farm associations, are putting pressure on the Alberta government. At least 

in the thinking of the people of Alberta, it is almost a foregone conclusion that the veterinary college is 

going to be built at Edmonton. Now, if that is true, I think that the minister should know this. We are 

urging him here to get busy on this matter and see if we can‟t get down to some concrete proposals and 

fact and figures, statistics in regard to this, not just mere consultations. 

 

Now I wanted to point that out Mr. Speaker, because this motion urges the government to give 

immediate consideration to the construction of a veterinary college at the University at Saskatoon, that is 

the motion. That is the motion that I would like to support in that spirit, not some nebulous thinking 

about what may eventually happen somewhere in the four western provinces. What are we going to do 

to meet the crisis? It is a crisis with our cattle population here regarding the lack of veterinarians in the 

province. I think it is time that we get down to concrete business on the matter and give some hard 

business thinking to it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Before, the hon. member sits down I thought I made it very clear that we hadn‟t 

gotten down to business on it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

51 

Mr. E.A. Johnson (Kerrobert-Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, I hadn‟t intended to participate in this 

debate and I had intended to support the motion. I must commend the member for Saltcoats (Mr. 

Snedker) on the very excellent presentation, I thought it was very well done; there wasn‟t very much in 

it that I can disagree with. I have also listened to the words of the Minister of Agriculture and I find 

myself very much in agreement with what he has said, and I think that we should consider this matter 

and ask ourselves this question, “How many veterinary colleges can western Canada reasonably support, 

with a high standard of college?” 

 

I am certainly willing to support this motion, meaning exactly what it says, that we should consider this 

matter and naturally consult a lot of people who are reasonably concerned with it and I don‟t take it to 

mean that it should only insist that such a veterinary college be in Saskatoon, much as I would like to 

have it there. I do not think that this is necessarily the best way we could spend money that we have to 

spend in the matter of education. I think that in order to give our students the best possible training in 

this I think that we should have it under as broad a basis as possible. Certainly the matter of travelling a 

few hundred miles is not an overwhelming difficulty. 

 

I would also like to commend the Minister of Agriculture on the assistance that he has given to 

veterinary students. I think that he has explained very well the situation that has changed somewhat 

regarding their acceptance of Saskatchewan students. As I have said I will support the motion as it is 

written. 

 

Mr. J.E. Snedker (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, just in connection with what has been said here this 

afternoon, I was pleased to hear the Minister of Agriculture agree to the necessity of the establishment of 

a faculty of veterinary science, I did, however, expect that he might have taken a more definite attitude 

with regard to its location at Saskatoon. The motion which we submitted stated that that was the location 

which we considered would be in the best interest, not only of the province of Saskatchewan but also all 

western Canada. 

 

I have here Mr. Speaker, a clipping from the Albertan, Calgary, Thursday, January 111th, and I quote: 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

52 

“High hopes on Alberta veterinary school, stresses need in west. The possibility of a veterinary 

medical college for western Canada located in Edmonton, appeared more likely following a meeting of 

the . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! I think that the mover of a debate in closing cannot bring in new 

material, he can only answer the debates of the other members taking part. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — That is what I am doing Mr. Speaker. I am answering the debate that is taking place. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes, but you are introducing new material, new material cannot be introduced. Other 

members would not have a chance to come back on new materials. Just answer questions that have been 

raised on the debate. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Well, let me say in no uncertain terms that as far as I and the members on this side of 

the house feel in regard to this matter, we have no hesitations in saying that we consider that this faculty 

should be established in Saskatoon. 

 

I had hoped that the members of the house, the others that have spoken on the other side, including the 

Minister of Agriculture would have taken a more definite stand in regard to the location in this province 

than has been done. However, I sincerely hope that the minister will from here on in use his best efforts 

and his best endeavours to see that it is located in Saskatoon. I think I went to some length to state the 

various facilities that are already there and the reasons which I thought were valid for its location at that 

site. 

 

In connection with what has been said in the province of Alberta, I might say that I didn‟t take anything 

that was said by the Minister of Agriculture, for the province of Alberta at entirely face value. Naturally 

he was rooting for his own side. Let me hope most sincerely in closing this debate that the Minister of 

Agriculture for the province of Saskatchewan will root a little harder for our side. 



 

Tuesday, March 13, 1962 

 

 

53 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I would like to ask the hon. member a question. I think we are talking about the 

same thing, we are talking about a western veterinarian college aren‟t we? 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Yes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Good. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:31 o‟clock p.m. 


