




















































Hansard: April 12, 1962


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

35th Day 

 

Thursday, April 12, 1962. 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 a.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

QUESTION: PRIVATE MEDICAL INSURANCE SCHEMES 

 

Mr. Franklin E. Foley (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are proceeded with I 

would like to ask the Premier or the Minister of Health, a question with regard to the status of the private 

medical insurance firms of the province. Under the present government plans will they be allowed to 

operate beyond July 1st, and if not, what action does the government foresee in closing them down? 

 

Hon. W. G. Davies (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think any action has been 

contemplated by any member of my department or myself, with respect to closing the plans down. Some 

of the plans are intending to operate on an enlarged coverage basis, and I understand they are offering to 

members of the general public a sort of an expanded policy. I can’t give you the precise details of these, 

but we have no plan for closing the plans down as the hon. member has put it, and I would think for all 

intents and purposes after the application of the public plan, that these private plans will probably wish 

to operate in the enlarged coverage area. 

 

MESSAGE FROM LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR — FURTHER ESTIMATES 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, I have a message from the 

Lieutenant-Governor. 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

2 

Mr. Speaker: — 

 

FRANK. L. BASTEDO, 

 

Lieutenant-Governor 

 

The Lieutenant-Governor transmits Further Estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 

Province for the twelve months ending March 31, 1963, and Further Supplementary Estimates of 

certain sums required for the service of the Province for the twelve months ending March 31, 1962, 

and recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

REGINA, April 12, 1962. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by the Hon. Mr. Lloyd, that: 

 

“His Honor’s Message, the Further Estimates, and Further Supplementary Estimates be referred to the 

Committee of Supply.” 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It has been moved by the Hon. Mr. Blakeney, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Lloyd. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

BILL NO. 63 — An Act to amend The Public Service Superannuation Act 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, this is an act to amend The Public 

Service Superannuation Act, and the amending bill contains three or four major or relatively major 

changes. 

 

The bill provides firstly for deferred pensions and by this, Mr. Speaker, I mean pensions which are 

payable to an employee of the public service, notwithstanding the fact what he is not in the employ of 

the public service when he reaches retirement age. The way this will work is that if an employee who 

falls within the general 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

3 

qualifications has ten years or more of service with the government, he will earn for himself during that 

time a pension or a superannuation allowance which will be payable when he reaches the age of 65, and 

it will be calculated on the same basis as if he had stayed with the government as an employee for the 

full period, until he is 65. If I might cite an example; if an employee came to the government at age 25, 

and stayed with the government for 15 years, and left the government at age 40, he would earn for 

himself a superannuation allowance which would be payable when he reached the age of 65 years. This 

would be calculated on the basis of his period of service, 15 years x 2% of the average of his salary over 

the highest appropriate number of years, and that, Mr. Speaker, brings me to the second major change in 

the bill. 

 

That is the change in the formula upon which the superannuation allowance is to be calculated. The 

present superannuation allowance is calculated by taking the employee’s salary for the highest 10 years 

averaging it, taking 2% of the average, and multiplying this by the number of years service. If an 

employee had salary over a period of 10 years which averaged $8,000 or $160 then calculate the number 

of years service which he had, if I may suppose it as 20, then you would have 20 x $160, or a pension of 

$3,200 per annum — if my quick mental arithmetic is right. This indicates the manner of calculation, 

and members will realize how important in that formula the number of years over which the average is 

to be calculated, is. This act changes the formula by saying that instead of taking the average of the 

highest 10 years of salary, the average will be calculated over the highest 6 years of salary. It will be 

seen that in any period of relatively sharply increasing salary for public servants (and no one can tell 

when one of these periods will occur, as it did after the war, and as it may at another period of inflation) 

in any period such as this the employee gains a very substantial benefit by any shortening of the number 

of years over which the average salary is to be computed. This then is being shortened from 10 years to 

6 years. 

 

The third major change, Mr. Speaker, is in the provisions for the maximum pension, which is provided 

under the act. The present act provides that notwithstanding what amount of annual superannuation 

allowance an employee may be entitled to upon the basis of the calculation of the formula which I have 

just referred to — notwithstanding this amount, the superannuation allowance shall not be more than 

$4,200 per annum. There is this ceiling of $4,200 per annum. The act proposes that this 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

4 

ceiling be raised, and it proposes that the ceiling be raised to $6,000 per annum, but over a longer period 

of time. Five years I believe. At any rate it will increase the maximum superannuation allowance at the 

rate of $30 a month, commencing on May 1, 1962. Thus the maximum salary will be $4,230 on May 1, 

1962, $4,260 on June 1st and so on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the act also deals with the question of contributions by employees. There are, as you and 

hon. members will be aware, substantial benefits for employees in the changes which have been 

incorporated into the bill, which I have just outlined. I have not indicated all of the changes, but the three 

major changes which I have indicated; the incorporation of the principle of deferred pensions; the 

increasing of the maximum; and the improvement of the formula upon which superannuation allowances 

will be calculated; will be of substantial benefits to large numbers of public servants. 

 

We have had discussions with the unions representing the employees who are covered by this particular 

act, and they have agreed that it would be in order, in view of the substantial benefits for employees, that 

the rate of contribution be increased by 1% of salary. The present rate of contributions are 5%, 6% and 

7%, by which I mean an employee who joins the public service when he is under the age of 30 years, 

presently contributes 5% of his salary for superannuation purposes; if the employee joins the public 

service between the ages of 30 years and 40 years, he contributes 6% of his salary, and if he joins 

between 40 and 45 years, he contributes 7% of his salary. Those are the figures which are in the present 

legislation. 

 

The new bill proposes that these figures be increased form 5%, 6% and 7%, to 6%, 7% and 8%; thus an 

increase of 1% in each case. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that this covers all of the major portions of the bill, and refers to all the major 

principles which are referred to in or incorporated into the bill. 

 

The one or two other minor matters, relatively minor at least, (they may be of some import to a 

particular public servant) the other one or two minor matters I think possibly can be best dealt with in 

committee. 

 

Wit that explanation, Mr. Speaker, I would move the second reading of the bill to amend The Public 

Service Superannuation Act. 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

5 

Mr. B.D. Gallagher (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might ask the minister a question? How 

long has there been superannuation for government employees in this province? When was this program 

started? 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I can’t be sure, but my recollection is 1927 — I think that is right. 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — Is this different than liquor board employees? I notice in the changes in the liquor 

board superannuation it just dates back to 1944. The years before that were served in the liquor board, 

are not credited in the superannuation. Am I not right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — It seems we are getting into a difficult position, but just to answer the question, 

liquor board employees had no superannuation until 1944, but the acts are now essentially the same. 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — If I may ask the hon. member. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think we will be closing the debate. I see the member for Saskatoon . . . 

 

Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, I haven’t too much to say. I am rather disappointed 

that all these bills were brought in in the dying days of the session. There is quite a principle involved 

here, the principle of increased payments. It always appears to me that these pension plans are weighted 

heavily for the high salaried employee. I just wondered just what the low paid salaried employee was 

going to get for the extra 1% that he is going to have to contribute. I have not been able to quite figure it 

out, but I might be able to do that on the third reading. I notice the clause that limits the number of 

services that can be applied, 35 I think it is, which limits the low salaried employees for ever getting 

anywhere near the maximum amount, and I say I am a little disappointed that these come in in the dying 

days of the motions, but possibly I can get more explanation in committee. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that as they have had negotiations with the different unions, they are reasonably 

happy. 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

6 

I don’t think they are happy about it. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

Bill No. 60 — An Act to amend the Saskatchewan Government Telephones Superannuation Act, 

1955 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour & Telephones): — Mr. Speaker, the changes to this bill 

affect the employees of Saskatchewan Government Telephones, and are practically the same as the 

Provincial Treasurer has just outlined in his bill. I might mention one or two things that he did not. 

 

One is that the investment power of the board is extended to purchase bonds for the superannuation fund 

in other ways than they have at the present time. 

 

Another is that an employee of the Saskatchewan Government Telephones can transfer to the Liquor 

Licensing Commission, and take his pension rights and contribution with him, and start in as an 

employee with his rights protected. 

 

One section that is not common to this or any other act will be that where the S.G.T. takes over an 

office, if the employees so wish, they can go with the Saskatchewan Government Telephones and pay 

back up to 10 years of their pension contributions, and become eligible for a pension at the time of 

retirement. That is the only change in this act that is not common to the others. 

 

With that explanation, Mr. Speaker, I would move second reading of Bill No. 60. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

Bill No. 61 — An Act to Amend The Workmen’s Compensation Board Superannuation Act, 1958 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams: — Mr. Speaker, the changes here are just the same as the bills to which I just 

referred, and to which the Provincial Treasurer has referred. With that explanation I would move that 

Bill No. 61 be read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

7 

Bill No. 62 — An Act to amend The Liquor Board Superannuation Act 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, on referring to the remarks made on the previous bills, I could simply 

say “me too” and I would move Bill No. 62 be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

Bill No. 64 — An Act to amend The Community Planning Act, 1957 

 

Hon. E.I. Wood (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, at the present time, as has always 

been in the past, there are certain responsibilities of a local council in regard to taking care of the rights 

of a the citizens in regard to community planning in their locality. There are certain rights that the 

majority of citizens have, and it is entrusted to the council to see that these rights are not infringed upon 

by individuals, and it is in the best interests of the community that the council be empowered to certain 

things in regard to community planning and the use of land. It is my feeling that these same rights and 

privileges accrue to the people of the province, and there are certain places in the province where there 

are rights and privileges of the people of the province that should be safe-guarded and taken care of by 

the government of the province, and this is the principle which is involved in this amendment to 

community planning act, as well as safe-guards in the amendment with regard to the rights of 

individuals and of municipalities. 

 

With this explanation I would like to move second reading of Bill No. 64. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

Bill No. 65 — An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 1960 

 

Hon. E.I. Wood: — Mr. Speaker, this is an act to amend The Rural Municipality Act. I do not feel any 

of the amendments are controversial, in fact many of them are a repetition of what has already been 

passed in regard to the city and villages acts, and I think they were much discussed in committee. 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

8 

I would move that Bill No. 65 be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

Bill No. 66 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act, 1961 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, this is an act to amend The Income Tax 

Act, 1961, the amendments have in all cases been requested by the Federal Income Tax officials, and are 

considered by them to be necessary for the carrying out of the arrangements between the federal and 

provincial governments with respect to the imposition and collection of income taxes. The amendments 

suggested are all highly technical in nature, they contain no new principles, they deal with such matters 

as procedures to be followed in taxing members of the armed forces, procedures with respect to the 

taxing of the estates, so that there will be a certainty they will be taxed as individuals, procedures with 

respect to what happens when an employee from whom taxes have been deducted at source by his 

employer, moves from one province to another. In addition to these matters, the act either repeals or 

suspends Saskatchewan legislation which may affect the imposition of income taxes, such Saskatchewan 

statutes as The Railway Taxation Act, or The Succession Duties Act, The Travelling Shows Act, and 

some other statutes. As I have already indicated, Mr. Speaker, there are no changes in principle. The 

changes suggested are purely for the sake of facilitating the operation of the tax collection arrangements 

which this province was forced to make with the federal government, and which were fully explained at 

the autumn session of the legislature. 

 

With that explanation, Mr. Speaker, I would move the second reading of the Bill No. 66. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

(Adjourned Debate) 

 

On the proposed motion of Hon. Mr. Wood, that: 

 

Bill No. 52 — An Act to provide for the Establishment of Local Government Units to be known 

as Municipal Units or Counties 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

9 

be now read the second time. 

 

Mr. Ross A. McCarthy (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, when I spoke on this bill the other day I 

pointed out that this government had spent about one million dollars of taxpayer’s money, in my opinion 

unnecessarily, in order to try and get these larger units into orbit. I also suggested that they had only 

lately adopted a policy that we, on this side of the House, have been advocating for years — namely that 

there should be no change in municipal boundaries without a vote being taken. 

 

I am glad the government has at last decided to give the local people a vote. I hope this vote will be the 

means of giving all the rural people a meaningful vote. They are all ready to vote, but the way this thing 

is set up by vacant units here and there I am still not satisfied we are going to have a meaningful vote. I 

would like to see more time and thought spent on it, but it seems the government has come down off 

their high horse to a certain extent, and are going to give some sort of a vote. 

 

Now, I asked to adjourn the debate the other day so I could have time to consider the remarks and also 

have a look at the amendments. Well, I have had a look at them, and I think this is greatest example, of 

socialist planning, perhaps I should say a socialist muddling. We were told a couple of weeks ago when 

the municipal convention was on, that this bill wasn’t ready to put before the convention, and now we 

have it back two weeks later with nine pages of amendments. Now this is not an old bill we are 

amending — it is a new bill, and surely you could bring a new bill that wasn’t ready a few weeks ago in 

here without nine pages of amendments. It is a very poor administration. If the session wasn’t near to 

being prorogued I would suggest that you take the bill back and bring it in in some sort of reasonable 

shape. In my experience I have never seen a bill brought into the House in such a manner. I believe it 

was prepared with undue haste — to have a bill presented in such manner, in such an unbusinesslike 

manner, I believe it was prepared with undue haste — it looks like it to me. 

 

This is a very important matter, Mr. Speaker, a very important one — because it is under these 

boundaries that probably our local governments, will be the boundaries for probably a great many years, 

and this matter deserves 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

10 

a great deal of thought. I am not too sure that the government or the advisory committee are prepared 

today to go ahead. They have put a lot of work on it, and they have done some good work in the last six 

months or so. They have been working along the bottom lines, along the lines I think they should have 

worked to begin with, but I still don’t think that if we were really prepared to go ahead with this thing at 

the moment I think if the government would consult their advisory committee they would tell them, that 

they are a long, long way from having defined these boundaries yet, and by the looks of this legislation, 

as far as I can see, I think the department is a long, long way from setting down on paper what they 

should have, in this bill, and what they want in it. 

 

I think it has been handled in a very unbusinesslike manner and with undue haste. After all, we have had 

these boundaries for over 50 years, and while I know the Minister of Mineral Resources thinks they are 

no good and never were, I am of a different opinion. It would be sounder business to still postpone this 

for another year — give your advisory commission the opportunity to really do this job, and I think the 

minister would be the first to admit the boundary delay is still in a very great state of confusion, and I 

think whether he will admit it or not, that this bill has been brought in hastily and leaves a lot to be 

desired. I think when we are writing the thing we should be sure it is sound legislation. It is only just 

lately that you have got down to the place where you should have started at, that is consulting the local 

people as to what they want, and there is no hurry for it. 

 

I have looked over this bill, and after wading through all the legal gibberish and got all the pieces in 

their proper order, I have come to the conclusion that some of these amendments are an improvement. 

There is still a lot to be desired in the bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not going to go into that individually now. I think it can be better done in committee, 

and I will have something more to say at that time. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, I want to add only a few comments on the discussion of this particular 

bill. I think we will agree with the member who has just taken his seat, that it is unfortunate that the bill 

has received the kind of amendment that is before the House at this particular time. 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

11 

I do want to ask him to bear in mind, this is not only an extremely complicated bit of legislation, but that 

it has been subject to a great deal of discussion with representatives of local government organizations. 

Many of the amendments which appear at this time are as a result of the discussions which have taken 

place in recent weeks. 

 

While there were discussions beforehand it was difficult to get down to really definitive sort of study by 

the minister, and that I think is some explanation of the extenuating circumstances of the amendments 

being brought in somewhat late. 

 

I do want to comment with regard to one other aspect, however, that is the suggestion that we are unduly 

hurried in this. This is something different I must admit from the tone of remarks made not long ago in 

the legislature in which we were accused of delaying too long, and urged on every front to get on with 

the business of defining and in regard to the school units adjusting the boundaries. I submit the 

opposition can’t have it both ways. 

 

Mainly I want to make a comment about what the member from Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) suggested 

that there has been spent on this matter of changing boundaries, of changing structures of local 

government, a sum of one million dollars, because of the two commissions which have recommended in 

this way. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Four. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Four — either way you will. I point out this is an over simplification to the extent 

that it ends up with being a gross exaggeration of the actual situation. I think it is a most incorrect 

interpretation. Anybody who has read the report of the Royal Commission on Agriculture and Rural 

Life, will immediately recognize the tremendous amount of study that is given to problems in addition to 

just the one that has been mentioned here. This particular one was indeed a minor part of that study. It 

touched on all phases of the problems facing rural people in the province of Saskatchewan. It was an 

exhaustive and exceedingly worthwhile valuable study and report. The continuing committee did, of 

course, extend the period of discussion, and here again there is much in those reports if anybody wants 

to take the trouble to study them, in addition to just the comments on structure and size of local 

government units. 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

12 

This one million dollars represents much more; I would like to submit it represents this sort of thing; it 

represents the greatest opportunity which people in this province have ever had to have a say about the 

conditions in our communities under which our local governments work. Never before in this province, 

and I submit, never in the history of any other province in Canada have people been given the 

opportunity to take part in making decisions about the future of local governments, as they have, as a 

result of the work of those two commissions in their very exhaustive effort to make it possible for people 

to say what they think and to back up their thinking with reasons based on their own experience. On that 

basis it has been a procedure which we on this side of the house think is useful. I repeat again of course 

that these commissions, particularly the Royal Commission on Agriculture and Rural Life, did much 

more than just study local government size and structure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my main reason for rising, was to place squarely on the records of this house the position 

which this government has taken over a great many years on this matter of reorganization. Some 

members will refer to a journal of the legislative assembly, page 97, Thursday, March 13, 1958. I would 

point out that at that time a resolution had been placed before this house by the opposition suggesting 

that there should be a vote before any reorganization was taken. The position of the government at that 

time was that this legislature and the government should not say at that time that there should be a vote 

or that there should not be a vote, because of the fact that we had sitting a commission investigating this. 

We felt it was our responsibility to wait, without instruction, the determination of the commission and 

then make our decision at that point. This, of course, is clearly pointed out by the amendment which was 

moved and subsequently passed. That amendment said that “consideration should be given to the report 

of the continuing committee on local government, and consultation be held with local government 

organizations regarding the best method of ascertaining the wishes of their ratepayers”. This government 

has consistently held that we would not say there would be a vote, that we would not say there would 

not be a vote, until that report was available; until there has been time for its study; until there had been 

time for its discussion with the representatives of local government organizations of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

13 

Premier Lloyd: — Now in further affirmation of that point of view, I want to read to the legislature a 

series of statements made by my predecessor, the Hon. Mr. Douglas, speaking as the Premier of the 

province of Saskatchewan. In 1956, speaking at the local government conference here in this chamber, 

Premier Douglas said this: 

 

“The government itself believes that some kind of basic reorganization, at least in the rural areas, is an 

essential and inevitable first step in meeting the problems of local government today. I want to make it 

abundantly clear that the government will not embark upon a program of municipal reorganization 

unless this program is assured of the co-operation of the local governing bodies and has the 

widespread support of the general public.” 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, was in 1956. In 1957, speaking before the S.A.R.M. convention, he is quoted in the 

Star Phoenix of March 13th in these words: 

 

“Premier T.C. Douglas stated emphatically his government has no intention of embarking on any plan 

of municipal reorganization without the solid backing of local governing bodies, and the widespread 

support of the general public.” 

 

In that same year, speaking in this legislature, reported in Hansard, volume 26, page 6, 1957. 

 

Premier T.C. Douglas: 

 

“Then assuming that the government, the legislature, and the provincial organizations are all in 

agreement on the proposals, we would then consult with the provincial organizations regarding the 

best method of ascertaining the wishes of their ratepayers. There is a very strong possibility that when 

these discussions are held, a plebiscite or a vote or something of that sort will be what the provincial 

organizations will recommend. How it will be taken, or by what method it will be taken, will be 

something for them to make suggestions to us about.” 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is exactly and precisely what has been 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

14 

going on in this province. The report of the committees, the discussion with local government 

organizations, acting as a result of these discussions. 

 

Premier Douglas again, Leader-Post, March 19, 1958, speaking before the S.A.R.M. convention: 

 

“I want to make it clear, without any shadow of a doubt that the government has no intention of 

forcing change on you if you don’t want it, Premier T.C. Douglas told rural delegates in convention in 

Regina, Tuesday.” 

 

March 4, 1959, Star-Phoenix of Saskatoon reports S.A.R.M. convention: 

 

“The Premier said his government remains convinced that some form of reorganization is essential and 

desirable if local government is to play its proper role in our society. However, he assured delegates of 

the provincial government would accept the wishes of the rural people.” 

 

Premier T.C. Douglas, 1961 — Western Producer, March 23rd, S.A.R.M. convention: 

 

“My plea is study this report, let us talk about it, let us sit down and reason together. If we do that we 

will have kept faith with those who have gone before and those who will follow us.” 

 

May I submit, Mr. Speaker, that anybody who takes recognition of those statements made each year, can 

have no doubt as to the consistency of the government’s approach to this problem, and can have no 

doubts but what our approach in the past is entirely consistent with the procedure proposed in this bill. 

 

Mr. D. Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to make a few comments on what the 

Premier has just said. I think if this assurance was made to the municipal association, why should they 

feel it necessary for them to have a vote of their own. The Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities were not satisfied that they were going to get a vote. As a matter of fact, I think it was a 

year ago last December, when the Premier stated and it was recorded in the press, that a vote at that time 

was foolish. I am quite satisfied in my own mind that if 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

15 

this guarantee had been given to the rural municipal association, they would not have gone out on their 

own and spent this amount of money in holding the election. 

 

Hon. R.A. Walker (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, would the member permit a question? Is he 

suggesting that these statements made by the Premier are false? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — All I was going to say here is that the Premier as late as last December, stated that a vote 

at that time was absolutely foolish, and had no bearing at all. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Where did you get that? 

 

Mr. Boldt: — I have the clipping here on my file, I will get it for you later. I was looking for it but do 

not have the time to dig it up now. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberals have made very clear our policy on reorganization, to the people 

of Saskatchewan. I believe the first grave mistake the government made was the setting up of the staff to 

the Local Government Continuing Committee. This staff to my mind was loaded with socialists 

endeavouring to force government policies down the necks of the Local Government Continuing 

Committee members, and with reasonable success. The second grave mistake the committee and the 

government made was to continuously refuse a vote to the people concerned, and they only changed 

their mind when the municipalities took it upon themselves to have a vote of their own. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — . . . the fact . . . 

 

Mr. G.H Danielson: — That is what broke your back. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Then the third mistake the government made on reorganization was the statement 

contained in the press release of June 5, 1961. This statement of policy, concerning local government, 

was presented on behalf of the government of Saskatchewan, by J.H. Brockelbank, Acting Minister of 

Municipal Affairs. The report goes 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

16 

on to say and I quote: 

 

“When this has been accomplished throughout the province there will be coterminous areas for local 

government and both municipal and school governments will be operating within them. From this date 

forward the electors of any coterminous area will decide by vote if they want a change in form of their 

local government.” 

 

Then he said, and I quote: 

 

“We believe this program which provides for participation of local government representatives for 

careful study of boundaries, for dispensing information and for both as to form and structure of local 

government is practical and very democratic.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the new Minister of Municipal Affairs apparently did not believe this could be very 

democratic, nor did this meet with the approval of the rural municipal association, and I shall quote from 

a press release of January 15, 1962, the new Minister of Municipal Affairs had this to say: 

 

“The Minister recalled that in the press statement made last June 5th, the government proposed that 

the new boundaries would be made effective for school units, however, after further discussion the 

government agreed that the next step would be to select areas in which there is an apparent interest in 

the formation of counties or modified counties. Information would be given in these areas and a vote 

would be taken to decide if a county or modified county is to be organized.” 

 

This is the important part: 

 

“Boundaries of the rural municipalities involved will not be adjusted to conform to the 

newly-proposed boundaries until such time as the vote within the area proposed for a county or 

modified county is carried in the affirmative.” 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

17 

This is the viewpoint of the new minister, and it does not agree with what was stated in the press release 

of June 5th. This statement is in agreement with the rural municipalities and with the Liberal opposition, 

and we congratulate the Minister of Municipal Affairs for the stand he has taken on reorganizations. 

 

Now before I sit down, Mr. Speaker, I do feel I should throw out a warning to the minister in charge and 

the government. In view of the very little enthusiasm for reorganization of the rural municipalities, I 

would caution the government to be very careful and to be sure not to further antagonize the rural 

municipal association. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. I don’t 

know whether the hon. member is reading from some quotation, reading his speech, or saying his own 

words. Are these supposed to be his own words and is he reading from some quotations? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Ask your own members . . . 

 

Mr. Boldt: — I did my own speech, Mr. Minister. I would caution the government to be very careful 

and be sure not to further antagonize the rural municipal association. These are my words. 

 

You should exercise every caution and co-operation in dealing with the matter. There is no doubt in my 

mind that politics have and will be involved in this matter, and here again the government should 

exercised every caution. By this I meant he minister should be very concerned that his deputy stays out 

of the political arena, regardless whether he calls himself a politician or an economist. He has no 

business appearing on public platforms and meetings sponsored by political parties of any kind. His duty 

as a civil servant is to see that neither the government nor the minister under whom he serves is subject 

to embarrassment, and finally I believe that until such a time as the government sees fit to announce 

financial benefits to the rural municipalities, I see no sign of enthusiasm for reorganization. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister I believe has taken into consideration when drafting the bill, the principles and 

views expressed by the rural municipalities, and the Liberal party, and I shall support the bill on second 

reading. 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

18 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, I am not going to say very much on this particular bill, 

but I feel there are one or two comments that can be made with regard to it. 

 

I do want to congratulate the government on one thing, and that is on accepting the recommendations (to 

agree at least) of the opposition that sits to your left, Mr. Speaker, and bringing in legislation which I am 

quite certain, in spite of the remarks and statements made by the Premier this morning, were not the true 

feelings or the true views of the government. The bill that is being presented to us is not the bill that the 

government would have liked to have seen brought into this House. However, because of the opposition 

of the people in the country, because of the opposition of the people of this province, the organizations 

that represent these people, such as our rural municipal association, because of their opposition to the 

actions of the government, and also to the leadership that has been given as well by the opposition to 

demanding that the rights of the people of this province to a choice of the type of municipal 

administration they are going to have. 

 

For these various reasons the government has been forced into the position of bringing in the type of 

legislation which has been suggested on many occasions by members on this side of the House. I believe 

all of us have said, and possibly some of us may oppose for our own areas, changes that have been 

suggested in even the present legislation, but I do not believe there is anyone at any time on this side of 

the House that has ever said there should not be legislation which would permit changes in the 

municipal administrative system in this province, in any area of this province where the people felt that 

change was necessary. And so we say as far as the principle that is involved in this bill, of permitting the 

people of this province to make a choice as to the type of administration they desire for their own affairs, 

there can be no objections to it from either side of this House. The principle of enabling legislation to 

permit the people to have a right of say in their own municipal set-up is perfectly all right, and it is the 

type of legislation that should be brought into this House, but there are sections in this bill which we feel 

neither the people in the country, the rural municipal association particularly, approve of, and which we 

cannot approve of at the present time in the bill. 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

19 

However, I feel we must leave and should leave these objections as to the technical operations of this act 

until committee. I can assure the government that this bill, as to the important problems that are involved 

in the bill itself, particularly relating to the type of vote and the decision that is to be made, or the type of 

petition, as to the decision that is to be made on a petition being presented. There are technical things 

involved in these various decisions that we feel are not correct in the bill as it stands, and if changes are 

not made which will permit a democratic choice of our people in this regard, then of course we will 

withhold our right to support this bill when it comes up for third reading. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to put myself on record as supporting enabling legislation to provide 

the people with the right to have the administrative system of their choice in this province, but at the 

same time, to also reserve my right to oppose various aspects of the bill in committee, and to oppose the 

bill on third reading if certain adjustments are not made. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I am going to take but a few minutes. After the 

Premier’s bold attempt to save the face of the government a few minutes ago, I want to say a few words. 

 

Four years ago speaking in this House, I attacked, and I don’t deny it, I say again that I attacked, the 

composition of this continuing committee, because the majority of that committee were unsuited for the 

work they were called upon to do. Most of them were city people who had no conception and no real 

knowledge of rural conditions, and as such they were picked because they were good party men, 

supporters of the CCF party. 

 

I was strongly denounced on the floor of this House by Tommy Douglas, and he doubled up his little 

rabid fists and he told us what a terrible individual I was to say anything about the choice of that 

committee. I want to point out to you that was just the start of the war, because afterwards the member 

for Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) and the member for Wilkie (Mr. Horsman) got up and supported me to 

the hilt. Other people commenced to ask questions. What are they trying to do to us? 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

20 

There were no rural people on that committee and that was what started the war. It came out in the press 

and people commenced to ask questions. 

 

Then this morning, the Premier has tried, and made a bold attempt, to save the face of the government. 

Let me remind you, Mr. Speaker, that the four ranking cabinet ministers were members of that 

committee, including the Premier and the other ranking cabinet ministers. I was at a meeting in 

Saskatoon when this matter was discussed, and a gentleman that lives close to Weyburn who was a 

member of that committee got up and told the people who listened to him that the government did not 

know anything of what the committee was doing. There were hundreds of people there, and I got up and 

asked him a question, “How many meetings of the committee had been attended by ministers of the 

government?” I got an answer, and I don’t want to tell you what he said. But we came into the House a 

year or two ago and asked that question, and I was surprised to hear in reply to the question that 

practically every meeting, except one or two, had been attended by cabinet ministers. Now I am not 

referring to the sub-committee meeting. Mr. Speaker, I am referring to the regular meetings of that 

committee. 

 

Now then, every committee member or cabinet minister that sits on that committee, what did they do? 

They went up and down the length and breadth of this province, hired parish halls and church basements 

and every place they could get in, they carried a full load of what they call these experts with them, 

including the Deputy Minister of Municipal Affairs. He was the key brain in the whole set-up. This 

whole concept, this whole argument, the whole purpose, was to instill into the minds of the people that 

listened to them, that they should not vote on this thing, and here were four government ministers on that 

committee. You don’t mean to tell us that they didn’t know what was in that committee’s report, this is 

the most ridiculous, the most brazen attempt, of trying to save the face of the government, that I ever 

heard of, or ever expect to hear of. 

 

We have never said that we were opposed to larger municipal units, or reorganization. I have said too 

many times that there was a reason for changing municipal boundaries. I can tell them two or three 

places that I know of that there wouldn’t be any opposition to enlarging the municipalities, it should 

have been done and will be done. 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

21 

I think we should give credit to the new minister for granting the right to the people to vote on this very 

important matter that concerns not only the large majority of the people, but individuals, very much so. 

 

I would say this, as the member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) said, don’t be too much in a rush about this; 

don’t antagonize the people more than they are now; don’t try to ram anything down their throats, 

because they are just in the mood now to turn it down solid, and that would be too bad because I believe, 

and we on this side of the House believe there is place for improvement and place for reorganization of 

the boundaries which might be to the benefit of everybody. 

 

I want to say again, insofar as the Premier is concerned, he is trying to put a face on a bad proposition 

which would be acceptable to the people and save his own face. In 1945 this gentleman that sits right 

over here, I was at the city hall when he spoke to the convention, I think it was the first convention he 

ever attended, and he was Minister of Municipal Affairs at that time, and he told us of the plans he had 

in mind and he said, I know you won’t like this thing, but you are going to get it anyhow. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Oh, no. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Oh you did, and I repeated it on the floor of this House, you never denied it, never, 

and there were hundreds of people there that heard it. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — That is right. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — So there we have the truth of the matter, there we have true dictator, and if I should 

say anything, I would say he has done more during the years gone past for disorganizing and destroying 

the municipal organization of this province than any other man in Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I always enjoy listening to the hon. member for Arm River 

(Mr. Danielson). I am very pleased that he gives credit to the new Minister of Municipal Affairs for the 

work he has done. This is the first time for a 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

22 

long time that the hon. member for Arm River has recognized any good work, and there is still hope for 

his redemption if he tends to recognize some good work that is being done on this side of the House. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — There is no hope for you . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I don’t mind the hon. member for Arm River using me as a whipping boy 

all the way from 1945 to the present time. I have weathered it fairly well and if it is any indication of the 

future, I hope he continues as he has in the past, and that will be just fine. He has said a lot of things 

which certainly I didn’t say, but that is entirely beside the point. I was interested when he said that a 

whole lot of the members of the continuing committed were unsuitable. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I didn’t say so. The biggest number of them . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The biggest number . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — All right. Which would be a majority of the members of the continuing 

committee on local government were unsuitable. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — For that purpose. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — All right, for that purpose. Now I have wondered if the hon. member would 

care to tell who or which of those members were unsuitable. Was it Stan Ferguson of Regina? Was he 

one that was unsuitable? Was it T.W. Garland that was unsuitable? Was it W.J. Irvine, Speers who was 

unsuitable? Was it G.H. Dawson of Neville who was unsuitable? Was it H.J. Maher of North Battleford 

who was unsuitable? 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Yes I think he was . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He has never been outside the city and has ever had any interest in rural problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

23 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — All right, we have the information that the hon. member for Arm River 

considers Mr. Maher of North Battleford unsuitable to sit on this continuing committee. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The chairman was another one. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. John McAskill of Saskatoon; do you suppose he would consider him 

unsuitable? H.J. Partridge of Gull Lake, nobody says anything about that one; H. Greenwood of 

Rosetown, a reeve, a farmer, maybe he is unsuitable? Maybe they consider unsuitable A.B. Douglas of 

McTaggart. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I wouldn’t put him on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — He says he wouldn’t put him on. Mr. Douglas was unsuitable? It is very 

enlightening to find out what the hon. member for Arm River thinks about these people. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — They have know that for a long time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — George J. Hindley, a former councillor, trustee, in the association of 

farmers, one of the old settlers of the province. Maybe he was unsuitable? And of course to the hon. 

member for Arm River Mr. Trew would certainly be unsuitable just because his wife happened to be a 

CCF member of this legislature. That is the kind of a mind he has, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well you remind me about it now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — And then representing the hospital association we have E.S. Bourassa of 

Regina. Is he unsuitable? C.J. Fahlman of Kronau representing the Health Region. 

 

The biggest part of these members were unsuitable for their jobs. The fact of the matter is . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — On a point of privilege. We had Tommy Douglas, Fines, Brockelbank and Lloyd. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

24 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — That is no point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — The people of the province . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I was just going to deal with that. I didn’t mention the members of the 

cabinet who were members of this committee because of course my hon. friend from Arm River (Mr. 

Danielson) has not control over that at all. He has been trying to control that . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You appointed yourself. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — He has been trying but he hasn’t succeeded as yet. I know if the hon. 

member for Arm River had been sitting on this side, he would have one good member on his committee 

anyway, he would have himself on the committee. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I would stay clear of that. It would be my business . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that regardless of what the hon. 

members say about what they are going to do in regard to the second reading on this bill, they are just 

opposed to any progress, and have opposed progress all along the line, and I could go back into history 

and spend an hour or two on showing how they have been against any change when circumstances 

change. And now, the hon. member for Arm River says we shouldn’t be playing politics with this, and I 

want to tell you that if anybody ahs been playing politics with this issue, it is in the Liberal party in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You have been playing politics since 1945. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I wish the hon. member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) would keep quiet. 

He made his speech a little while ago . . . 

 

Mr. Danielson: — You are talking to me, talk to the Speaker. 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

25 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — And they never missed an opportunity in the last few elections, and on any 

occasion, to make as much political hay out of this question as they could. They don’t care about local 

government very much as a matter of fact. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Are you accusing us of playing politics? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Now they say oh, but don’t be in a rush. You know they remind me of the 

kind of people who would never do things by halves if they could do it by quarters. 

 

There is one thing you can say for sure, Mr. Speaker, you can never go too slow as far as they are 

concerned. The slower you go the better. 

 

Now nobody can say we have been in a rush with this work. It has been under discussion for many many 

years, there has been more public discussion, more participation in the discussion by people all over the 

province, than on any other question I know. Nobody can say there has been a rush. Mr. Speaker, I am 

going to support the bill, and it will be very interesting to see what my hon. friends opposite do about 

this. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Well you wait and see. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Mineral Resources has prompted 

me to take part in this debate. When the Minister of Mineral Resources or any other government 

minister says that the Liberal party are against progress, and if he can take an hour or an hour and a half 

to substantiate his statement if need be, but he didn’t substantiate them at all, he didn’t even take a 

minute, or a minute and a half, and I want to assure the Minister of Mineral Resources, that the Liberal 

party have a greater interest in the progress of municipal government, local government, development of 

this province, than any person in this province. 

 

Government Member: — That will take some recording. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, the difference is this, we believe, and have from the very beginning, 

away back in 1945, when the minister who has just taken his seat, was advocating 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

26 

larger municipal units, and destroying local government as we know it, we opposed it at that time, and 

oppose it to this day, unless people concerned have the opportunity to vote on it. It has only been the 

opposition of the Liberal party and of rural people especially, that have brought this government to their 

knees, and now they are going to be given the opportunity of voting. 

 

The minister says we don’t care about local government. Mr. Speaker, how ridiculous can you get. 

There is the man who didn’t care. If he had thought for one moment that he could have brought in larger 

municipal units in 1945, and shoved it down the throats of the people of this province, he would have 

done so. He and his government attempted to do with the school units, what they are now proposing to 

do with counties. They didn’t have the audacity to bring in the type of legislation that is now provided 

for in Bill 42 in regard to larger school units, and I predict that it will only be a matter of a very few 

short years if the people of this province are unfortunate enough to have this government re-elected, 

until such time as we will have similar legislation with regard to counties. 

 

The Liberal party has maintained a position right from the beginning on this question, and that is that 

local people should make these decisions; not the Minister of Mineral Resources or any other group, but 

the people who reside out in the areas that are most affected. 

 

In the words of the Minister of Mineral Resources that the Liberal party would never do anything by 

halves that they could do by quarters. The Minister of Mineral Resources would never do anything by 

halves if he could accomplish his aim in one move. What he and his government would like to do, 

would be to destroy local government without ever consulting the people concerned. We are opposed to 

that. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Now this is permissive legislation as I understand it. There have been a lot of 

amendments brought into the House, and I want to make it abundantly clear that the Liberal party and 

myself have said time and time again that we believe there is some need for change in local government. 

Local government as we know it today, to all intents and purposes was set up away back in 1905. 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

27 

Now the problems that existed in 1905 are not the problems that exist today. The type of government 

that could solve the problems in 1905 or 1912 or 1920 or 1925, is probably not the type of government 

that is necessary to deal with many of these problems today. We have said this but we have also said that 

the people concerned should make the decision not the government, but the local people. 

 

This bill makes provision for local people to make this decision, and I am one of those that hopes that 

when this bill gets into committee, that there will be some changes made. I do not believe the bill is 

perfect by a long shot, but because the bill in essence does what the Liberal party have continuously 

asked to be done, then I will support it on second reading, but I will have many suggestions to make to 

this House in committee of the whole, and I hope for the sake of the people concerned, that is the people 

who live in the rural areas, that there will be amendments made when this bill is in committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is the House ready for the question? I must inform the House that the mover is about 

to close the debate. 

 

Hon. E.I. Wood (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Cannington 

(Mr. McCarthy) in the debate said he had never seen a bill brought into the House in such poor shape, in 

such a manner. I am not prepared to apologize for that, only in regard to my own inexperience as a 

minister. I can maybe apologize in that regard, but never, I don’t think, has a bill been brought into this 

House with so much consultation with local groups or given people such an opportunity to voice their 

opinions in regard to it. It was just two weeks ago tomorrow that, or two weeks ago next Saturday, that 

we met with the local government council, and let them have a look at our bill as it was proposed to 

bring in to the House. I suppose the hon. member for Cannington would have been quite pleased if we 

had brought the bill in in the shape it was, with no House amendments to it. He would have thought it 

looked very good, it would appear we were bringing this bill in in good shape. However, we sat down, 

there was no coercion, we sat down and discussed this matter freely with members of the S.A.R.M., the 

S.U.M.A and the S.S.T.A. We took a good look at the proposed changes that were made, and we have 

incorporated a good many of them in this, and it is because 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

28 

of these things largely that we are making these changes. 

 

If you take our municipal act, our village act, our town act and city act, there are changes made from 

year to year, and these acts have been tried and have been on the statute books for many years, and yet 

there are still changes to be made every year. This is a brand new bill and did he expect to have it perfect 

right from the start, he is asking something that is not reasonable. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Nine pages on a new bill . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Wood: — You cannot have it both ways, if you are going to take these people into 

consultation and ask their opinion on these things and be prepared to make these amendments, then you 

have to have House amendments, and I am not apologizing. It is rather unfortunate, I agree, and it is not 

going to be the easiest thing to handle but I apologizing that we have made these changes, and have 

brought this bill in in this shape. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wood: — Another thing the member for Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) had to say was in 

regard to a million dollars that he alleged had been spent in regard to the commissions that had been set 

up studying local government reorganization in the province. I am not prepared to accept his figures, but 

I am not going to dispute them either. It may be in that area, that we have spent a million dollars. If you 

stop to think about the six or seven million dollars, that are spent in this province each year on grants to 

municipalities for roads and other things, when you stop to think about the millions of dollars that are 

spent on grants to schools, and the money that is spent on social welfare and hospitalization, the 

hundreds of millions of dollars that are handled by local governments, is it only reasonable that over a 

period of years we spend a million dollars to try and see that the local government set-up is the best that 

can possibly be achieved in this province? I think a million dollars is a small amount to be spent for such 

a purpose. This is a big matter that we are dealing with. 

 

I would like to say also that there has been some criticism levelled mostly by the hon. member for 

Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) in regard to the alleged change in the government’s thought in regard to these 

things. 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

29 

I would like to say in the first place that there was a proposal that this legislation, that this change in the 

reorganization in the municipal field, be done without a vote. This proposal came from the continuing 

committee. It never at any time was espoused by the government during the early months after the time 

when the continuing committee went out and made their report to the people and discussed these things 

with the people, during all these months the government was entirely silent in regard to what their policy 

would be. The continuing committee made this proposal and I still feel there is a good deal of merit in 

this proposal. There are many people in the province today that are criticising the government, 

criticising me on the act, that we are going about this thing in this way. There will also be a piecemeal 

effect in the province of Saskatchewan in regard to local government. Instead of simplifying local 

government we will now have two added kinds of local government in the province of Saskatchewan. In 

the province of Alberta they looked at this thing, and decided when they went about it, they were not 

going to have a vote, and they proceeded and changed the boundaries throughout the province without a 

vote. There are a good many arguments that can be advanced in regard to putting these things in without 

a vote. I think the local government continuing committee had a good deal of evidence to support their 

stand in regard to this, but there are other sides to the question. I agree with you. The government in 

consultation with the people of the province and in consultation with the local government bodies, did 

decide that we would give the people of this province a vote, in regard to local areas where they wish to 

make these changes. As I say there are two sides to this question and in my opinion the best final 

solution of these things, is to have the type of government which the people of the area are in favour of. 

I think the government was right in finally coming to this decision that they would give the people of 

this province a vote in regard to this. 

 

I want to make it very clear here that this is not my decision, there were a few bouquets handed around 

this morning, and I would like to take them, but I am afraid I can’t. These decisions have been made in 

full and free consultation with the other members in the cabinet, and received their support just as much 

as my own. 

 

There are some other things that have been said in regard to the deputy of my department. I want to 

make it very plain at this time that I have full confidence in my deputy. Dr. Brownstone, I think . . . 



 

April 12, 1962 

 

 

30 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wood: — . . . is a very valuable man in that department. I feel we are fortunate to have such a 

man. It is true the studies he has made and through the work he has done in the past, his knowledge in 

certain fields have made him in demand as a speaker by certain groups and in different places 

throughout the length and breadth of this dominion. I am proud to let him go and take part in those 

discussions, and I think our department is fortunate to have Dr. Brownstone in that position. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wood: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I think that covers most of my remarks at this time in 

regard to this bill. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Would the minister permit a question? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — No, any question should have been posed before the debate was closed. You had a 

chance to raise your point. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o’clock p.m. 


