




















































Hansard: March 29, 1962


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

25th Day 

 

Thursday, March 29, 1962. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

CURLING CHAMPIONSHIPS 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day I would like to read a statement with 

regard to forthcoming events in the legislature which I just distributed to the press. 

 

“1962 is once again curling championship year for Saskatchewan. The Richardsons of Regina are the 

1962 Dominion Brier Champions. They went on also to win an international championship in 

Scotland. Mike Lukowich’s rink of Speers are the 1962 Canadian High School Curling Champions. It 

might be added that the Saskatchewan Ladies’ rink skipped by Joyce McKee were runners up in the 

Diamond D Curling Championships. The Saskatchewan Legion team also won the Canadian Legion 

Curling Championship. 

 

There has been a tradition for this legislature to pay tribute to the Saskatchewan curling rinks who 

have brought honour to themselves and to this province by winning open Canadian championships. 

The Richardson rink will return from their triumphs tomorrow. Citizens and local curling clubs in 

Regina have made extensive plans to provide a suitable homecoming reception for them. The 

government has been in close touch with the local committee in order to make plans on behalf of the 

legislature for these champions to be honoured in this chamber. 

 

However, it is not possible for the high school champions to come to Regina tomorrow. The day on 

which the Richardsons arrive back in Regina is the same day on which the Lukowich rink is 

committed to play in a bonspiel in 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

2 

Saskatoon. Attempts were made to rearrange their playing schedule but this has been found to be 

impossible. Their appearance in the Saskatoon bonspiel has been arranged for some weeks and their 

desire to fulfill their commitments to this curling community prevents them from being in Regina 

tomorrow. 

 

The government feels it desirable to honour the Richardson rink and the Lukowich rink at one 

ceremony in this chamber. For this reason it is necessary to cancel the original plan as far as the 

legislature is concerned for this event to take place tomorrow. 

 

Representatives of the government will be in communication with the Richardsons, the Lukowich rink 

and curling officials. Plans will be made for an afternoon next week convenient to both champions, to 

be selected, at which time this legislature will bestow honours on behalf of all citizens of the 

province.” 

 

QUESTION: MEDICAL CARE 

 

Mr. W.R. Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are 

called I should like to direct a question to the Minister of Health. Did the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons yesterday again decline to participate in the government medical plan? If so, how does the 

government intend to proceed in implementing their scheme without doctors? 

 

Hon. W.G. Davies (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, discussions took place yesterday 

between the College of Physicians and Surgeons and the government. These talks were, as indicated, of 

an exploratory nature. We will continue this weekend, I believe that is all that is in the public interest 

that I should say at this time. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT: CHAMPIONSHIP BULL 

 

Mr. D.W. Michayluk (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are proceeded with I 

would like to draw to the attention of 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

3 

the hon. members of this House, to the fact that Mr. John Grant of Edam, from the Redberry 

constituency has this week exhibited a supreme champion Aberdeen Angus bull at the Regina Livestock 

Show and Winter Fair. Early Sunset Bandoliermere 12, was named supreme champion of the Seventh 

Annual Aberdeen futurity show in Regina last night. This is the second year that Mr. Grant has won 

honours in this breed. Last year his animal won the grand championship in the Aberdeen Angus division, 

while this year Early Sunset Bandoliermere 12 was named supreme champion. 

 

I am also given to understand that last year Mr. Grant won honours with his exhibit at the Toronto Royal 

Winter Fair. I am sure all hon. members of this House would want to join with me on congratulating Mr. 

Grant on his tremendous achievement. I am certain in the future we will again be hearing of Mr. Grant 

and his exhibits. 

 

QUESTION: BY-ELECTION IN PRINCE ALBERT 

 

Mr. W.R. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Premier before the orders 

of the day. 

 

At the risk of being termed insensitive I would still like to know whether the government has made any 

plans for holding a by-election in Prince Albert? We feel the people of Prince Albert should be 

represented in this House as soon as possible. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, when the government has an announcement to be made it will be 

made, and it is not likely my hon. friend will be the first one to hear about it. 

 

MOTION: RE UTILIZATION OF NATURAL RESOURCES 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Barrie. 

 

Hon. A.G. Kuziak (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in the 

debate on the proposed motion by the hon. member for Pelly (Mr. Barrie) I would like to say that it 

would seem to me anyone sponsoring such a motion must either be 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

4 

absolutely ignorant of the extent of the management policies and utilization of the forest resources of 

this province or such a motion would never have been placed on the order paper. Mr. Speaker, I am, over 

the next few minutes going to point out that it is because or as a result of the Timber Board that greater 

encouragement and utilization of natural resources has been instrumental in northern Saskatchewan over 

the past few years; that it is because of the Timber Board that further additional employment was 

provided. 

 

Mr. W.R. Thatcher: — Oh, Alex. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — And that I believe it is in the best interests not only of the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Spread that in the hustings, never mind it here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — . . . but also of the operators in the north. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s forest resources as everybody else knows, when compared to the forest 

resources of the other provinces of Canada, are fairly limited. 

 

The natural productivity of soft woods in Saskatchewan is only two per cent of the total for the whole of 

Canada, this was given by Professor D.D. Lay in the paper on the Potentiality of the Forest Resources 

given in Montreal this fall to the Resources for Tomorrow conference. 

 

Now again I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that any statement I am going to make, I am going to try and 

substantiate it by referring to authorities and to certain records, but the other day when the hon. member 

for Pelly (Mr. Barrie) debated on this particular motion all he did was make wild unsubstantiated 

statements without any regard for their validity or truth. 

 

If you check further, the Dominion Bureau of Statistics for 1959 or for 1958 you will find that 

Saskatchewan actually produces less than one per cent of the total production of lumber in Canada, and 

the Timber Board’s main operation is lumber. Could you class this as a monopoly when, for example, a 

corporation controls less than one per cent of the production in Canada? 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

5 

Would you say this is a monopoly? If it is, then in glancing over the Dominion Bureau of Statistics I 

found for example, from the year 1946 to 1959, over the past six years, statistics show that the General 

Motors Corporation in Canada produced over 50 per cent of all the automobiles, therefore controlled 50 

per cent of the production of the automobiles in Canada, and yet I have never heard the members to the 

left of you state that General Motors is a monopolistic corporation in the Dominion of Canada. If the 

Timber Board is a monopoly by controlling less than one per cent of the production of lumber resources, 

then General Motors must be fifty times the monopoly that the Timber Board is. 

 

If you check the Ford Motor company controls 33 1/3 per cent of the production of automobiles. I 

glanced at life insurance, and I found out that the Sun Life Assurance Company of Canada in 1959, 

controlled 40 per cent of the life insurance in force in Canada. Are these monopolies? The Liberals never 

classed these companies as monopolies although they control forty, fifty, thirty per cent of the country’s 

product, but the Timber Board which controls approximately one per cent or less than one per cent is in 

some way a monopoly. Therefore I want to say that that statement of monopoly with regard to the 

Timber Board is very foolish; it is absolutely misleading and utter nonsense by the members of the 

opposition. 

 

The hon. member for Pelly (Mr. Barrie) stated, referring again to the Timber Board, their policy has been 

and it is to pay as little as possible to the producer, and to obtain the highest prices for these products 

from the consumer. Well let us check if this is true. If he had taken the time out to check the annual 

reports of the Department of Natural Resources he could have found the following information, and 

when I say check it he would have to check the records of the Department of Natural Resources prior to 

1944, under the Liberal administration, as well as at the present time. He would have found out that as 

far as lumber products were concerned that in 1944 the annual statement shows that the lumber sold for 

an average of $37.48 per thousand board feet, under the previous Liberal administration, when you had 

absolutely unrestricted exploitation of the forest of this province. They were selling it at $37.48. If you 

check the annual statement or the annual report in 1961, this average rose to $65.17 to be exact, or an 

increase of only 75 per cent. 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

6 

Now again I would like to refer the private enterprisers to some other records, by private enterprise. We 

know that the automobiles from 1944 to 1961 rose from approximately $1,200 to $3,600, an increase of 

200 per cent, not 75 per cent. If you check farm machinery, farm implements, and so on, you will find 

too that farm implements over the past 16 or 17 years have risen by 200 per cent, and even better. If you 

check for example drugs, drugs have risen all the way from 200 to 500 per cent over that period of time, 

but as far as the selling price of lumber, it has risen 75 per cent, a very, very small increase. Therefore 

that statement that he made the other day is absolutely false. 

 

Now let us take now an experience I had a number of years ago in the town of Canora. One of the 

lumbermen in Canora and I may say that when I talk of this lumberman, the hon. member for Pelly (Mr. 

Barrie) if he was in the House would know exactly who I am speaking about. This man operated in 

Saskatchewan, but he also operated in Manitoba, and I remember the time when he was very critical of 

the Timber Board yard at Sturgis, Saskatchewan. He told me he was able at that time to wholesale 

lumber high in Manitoba than he could retail the lumber in the town of Canora, because the Sturgis 

Timber Board yard was so close to it, and he had to hold down to the price of lumber that the Timber 

Board held it to at that time at Sturgis. 

 

I want to say that only approximately ten per cent of our lumber from our wholesale yard in the province, 

that is the Timber Board yard is sold at retail, and I want to say that we hold these retail prices fairly low, 

and that is one of the reasons why we can hold these retail prices of timber or lumber in Saskatchewan 

fairly low, the extra cost of retailing out of wholesale years are low, and that is one of the reasons why 

we can hold these retail prices of timber or lumber fairly low. In fact I am going to say that the fact that 

customers come all the way from Estevan, from Weyburn, from Oxbow, from Assiniboia, two hundred 

and two hundred and fifty miles away, come all the way to Sturgis, come down to the Nipawin Timber 

Board planning yard and so on, is only proof that the price of timber must be reasonable. But the bulk of 

our lumber, 90 per cent of it, has got to be sold to wholesale houses in America, in Ontario, in Manitoba, 

in Saskatchewan, to contractors and to industry, and I want to say that the wholesale price of lumber is 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

7 

determined by the main suppliers of Canada and America, and as I said a moment ago we produced 

actually less than one per cent of the lumber production of the Dominion of Canada, surely to goodness 

anybody with common sense knows that we could not hold the prices high. It is impossible to do it when 

you only control one per cent of the production. Therefore, I say again that statement of high prices is 

ridiculous, is untrue. 

 

Mr. F.E. Foley (Turtleford): — What percentage of the production do you control in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — There again it is a very small per cent, some 30 per cent of the production that we 

sell by the Timber Board is sold in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I am pretty sure some of the hon. members will remember what the producers in Saskatchewan used to 

get in the dark and dismal days of Liberalism prior to 1944. 

 

The hon. member for Pelly (Mr. Barrie) was critical that we paid very little to the contractor or the 

operations in the forest. I am sure that he will recall the days prior to 1944 when the producers were 

selling rough lumber at approximately $10.00 per thousand. I remember the time when the employees 

working for these operators for 25 cents an hour and even less, at the end of the season had to either take 

lumber or go without having their wages paid, when the markets were not too good. 

 

Now what does the Timber Board pay the operators today? I want to point out that in 1961 the average 

payment to the timber operators of Saskatchewan, amounted to $41.49 per thousand, lumber delivered to 

the year less timber dues. Since the average price, Mr. Speaker, I quoted a few minutes ago was $65.20, 

or $65.17 to be exact, the Timber Board therefore had $23.71 to pay the following items: $6 to the 

Department of Natural Resources, for dues, pay the planning costs, sorting costs, waxing and grading 

and selling. Mind you I want to say that is not too much left to make a profit on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that in 1961 we again made a study of spruce producers’ prices in Alberta and 

British Columbia and again we found out that the operators 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

8 

in Alberta and British Columbia, in the same kind of lumber strands that we have in the province of 

Saskatchewan, were receiving an average of $6 per thousand less than were the operators in the province 

of Saskatchewan, and I am going to say this is an established fact. I had the opportunity of meeting our 

operators in Saskatchewan over the past few years I gave the operators in Saskatchewan this information 

about how the operators are faring in British Columbia, and I want to say that some of the operators 

agreed, and in fact I had some of the operators tell me that the difference is even greater than that, greater 

than $6. 

 

Now the hon. member in speaking on this motion stated also that timber permits and timber sales would 

be granted if the Liberals got back into power, on a competitive tender basis open to everybody. Well I 

want to assure the opposition, Mr. Speaker, that I had offered this plan to the timber operators over the 

past two years, and I am going to tell you that they don’t want it. They recall the days when they had this 

kind of bidding. They also are aware that this is the way some of the lumber resources in Alberta and 

British Columbia are handled. They know it is going to be the big operator who will be able to put down 

the cash on each one of these tenders, and the big operator will be the only one that will obtain the 

operation. We in the Timber Board down through the years have financed our small operators. They 

know if they went on their own they would then have to be financed by the bank. We know of some of 

the operations a year ago in British Columbia and in Alberta. These operators produced the lumber, then 

the market dropped and they had difficulty in disposing of the lumber, the bank got after the operator to 

pay up the loan in the bank, and they were forced to liquidate their lumber at $25, $30 and $35 a 

thousand, and who picked I up, the big timber operators of British Columbia, and Alberta, who were 

able to finance it. They picked this lumber up and later made profit. 

 

I want to refer again to another statement made by the hon. member for Pelly (Mr. Barrie). he said over 

the years there have been many operators forced out of Manitoba. Mr. Speaker, this is absolute nonsense. 

In fact if the hon. member had taken the time and checked certain records, he could have checked the 

annual reports for the Department of Natural Resources, and he would have found the following 

information. I have taken and 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

9 

checked five years under the Liberals prior to 1944, and I will give you the number of operators that 

were in the forest of Saskatchewan at that time, or the number of sawmills licensed under the last five 

years of Liberal rule in northern Saskatchewan. In 1939 there were 332 mills, in 1940-41 they had 381 

mills, in 1941-42 they had 374 mills, in 1942-43 they had 323 mills and in 1943-44 some 522 mills, or 

an average for the five years of 386.4 mills in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let us look at the last five years of the CCF-New Democratic Party rule — 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — Why not go back to 1944? 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — If I go to 1944, the comparison is still good, but I took the last five years of the 

private enterprise Liberal rule and now I am going to take the last five years under the CCF. I will give 

you 1956-57 we had 435 mills licensed, in 1957-58 563 mills, in 1958-59 537 mills, in 1959-60 495 

mills, and in 1960-61 the annual statement shows 510 mills, an average during the 5 year period of 508 

mills. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we have today 121 sawmills more in Saskatchewan than we had under the 

Liberal administration. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — Now let us have the truth, and give the public of Saskatchewan some truth for a 

change. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — We are not getting it from you though. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — All he talked about was Manitoba — I really had to laugh because the hon. 

member for Pelly (Mr. Barrie) is right on the edge of Manitoba. He knows I could name him a number of 

Manitoba operators, operating in the forest of Saskatchewan, right in the Pelly area, and he knows this 

himself. 

 

I am sure you people will recall, a few years ago here, when The Pas Lumber Company of Manitoba 

made an appeal to myself as the Minister of Natural Resources, to supply lumber from the Carrot River 

Valley to The Pas 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

10 

otherwise The Pas Company would have to close their operation in The Pas. I took the stand that the 

forest resources of Saskatchewan are going to be held for the people of the province of Saskatchewan, 

and we were not prepared to supply lumber to Manitoba people. The Minister of Lands and Mines at that 

time wrote me a letter, in fact I still have it on file, pleading to release some of this lumber for The Pas 

Lumber Company’s operation in The Pas, Manitoba, so that industry could continue. We held the line, 

we didn’t allow them the lumber, and I understand the company closed down because they had no timber 

resources in that portion of Manitoba. They had cut it out under a Liberal government similar to the 

government we had in this province prior to 1944, when they were in the process of hacking out the 

forest resources of this province, and therefore that statement is completely ridiculous, that some of the 

Saskatchewan operators have had to go to Manitoba. It is just the reverse; the operators from Manitoba, 

some of them have been operating in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now going back to the resolution, Mr. Speaker, and the resolution reads, “To encourage the utilization 

of forest resources”, and in his speech the hon. member offered to the farmers of fringe areas, the Indians 

and the Metis of the north and so on, unlimited production of lumber. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, unlimited exploitation of forest resources was carried on prior to 1944, and I am 

going to remind this House of a statement made by the Hon. Mr. Patterson when he was Premier of the 

province of Saskatchewan, who prior to that time was also Minister of Natural Resources, and he knew 

the forest resources of the province. He gave his report to the special committee of the House of 

Commons on reconstruction and re-establishment in Ottawa on April 19, 1944 and here is what the 

Premier of this province had to say about the forest resources of Saskatchewan and I am going to quote 

it: — “Depletion of Saskatchewan forest resources has been rapid, particularly in the last ten years. If 

our present rate of consumption of timber continues, our virgin and mature stands of white spruce and 

fir suitable for lumber will be exhausted in ten years.” 

 

He made the statement that if we Liberals continue to hack out and massacre the forest of Saskatchewan 

as we 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

11 

have done prior to 1944, in the next ten years there wouldn’t be a stick left in the northern areas. They 

were at that time taking out approximately 170 million board feet. The moment we took over the 

government of the province in 1944, and after we had checked and taken inventory and stocks of the 

forest resources of Saskatchewan, we cut the timber production down to a sustained yield base of 

approximately 50 million board feet. In other words it is only approximately 50 million board feet of soft 

timber that we can take out, if we are to guarantee lumber resources to our children and our children’s 

children, or in other words generations to come. I believe this was the right thing to do. This is what we 

did. 

 

I want to point out that today in fact in the last two years, due to the fact that we have a salvage operation 

in the Squaw Rapids area, because the area is going to be flooded in the next year or so, we upped the 

production of soft timber and are producing today approximately 70 million board feet. We are 

producing actually today more than we should be producing, yet the hon. member for Pelly (Mr. Barrie) 

tells his farmers and people of his area, if we ever get back we will throw the forest open to the people of 

Saskatchewan, like we did prior to 1944. Mr. Speaker, those are absolutely irresponsible statements that 

were made by the member for Pelly. 

 

Again I want to point out that we are today producing actually more than we should be producing as far 

as spruce and soft timbers are concerned. 

 

Now the resolution states, “encourage utilization of natural resources”, and I want to point out that the 

Timber Board has been accomplishing exactly this over the last 15 years. The Timber Board has 

promoted the use of pine and poplar lumber. Pine lumber production this year will reach approximately 

7 million board feet, which is twice as high as last season’s cut. Poplar lumber is being produced in 

larger quantities and the Timber Board is establishing markets through Canada and America, and I want 

to point out that poplar lumber is open for production to anybody, any operator can produce lumber out 

of popular. They don’t sell it themselves, they sell it to the Timber Board, and the Timber Board retails it 

throughout the Dominion of Canada, because it is an organized marketing system that is in touch with 

the demand throughout the whole of Canada and the United States of America. 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

12 

Furthermore we are encouraging greater utilization of natural resources; the fence post market for 

example was developed by the Timber Board and encouraged over the past few years. I want to point 

out, Mr. Speaker, the fence post production jumped from an average of 219,000 posts, an average under 

the last five years of Liberal private enterprise selling, post production jumped to 473,000 average, under 

the last five years of Timber Board selling. In other words the production of fence posts has gone up by 

over 100 per cent. The Timber Board I want to say too went all out to produce and sell power and 

telephone poles, another use of the forest resources of Saskatchewan, and may I point out that prior to 

1944, under the old Liberal administration, most of the poles came from Alberta and British Columbia. I 

have checked the annual reports, and in the last five years of Liberal administration prior to 1944, they 

were producing an average of 2,300 telephone poles a year. The Timber Board has developed a market 

in Saskatchewan whereby in the last five years they were producing and marketing an average of 

149,000 power and telephone poles, or an increase in utilization of 6,500 per cent, or 65 times the 

utilization that we had under the previous administration. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — Mr. Speaker, other uses of forest resources by private enterprise has been 

encouraged both by this government and the Timber Board as a crown corporation. I want to point out 

that this crown corporation, the Timber Board, in 1957 commenced setting aside $25 thousand out of the 

profits of the Timber Board to make a study and do research work in the possibility of greater uses of our 

poplar forest of northern Saskatchewan. If you will recall, Mr. Speaker, the Timber Board shipped some 

eight or nine cords of wood to London, England, to go through a particle board press, a particle board 

operation. I want to say they did a considerable amount of investigation and made possible finally a 

particle board industry in Hudson Bay, an industry that has been developed at a cost of approximately $3 

million. I want to say that the Timber Board aided this private industry. I want to say that the Timber 

Board too has been carrying on for some years a pole operating business in the Maple Creek area, but 

recently when a new industry developed in that area, developing a new process of treating posts and 

poles, the Timber Board sold their assets and their operation in Maple Creek to this new industry to help 

them establish themselves economically. 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

13 

Therefore I say that not only is the government interested in encouraging private enterprise to come in 

and utilize our forest resources, but so is the Timber Board interested in encouraging private enterprise 

to come in. 

 

I want to say that the Timber Board has not only encouraged diversification and the utilization of forest 

resources by its own private operators, but also in aiding private industry to come in. Therefore I am 

going to say this, that over the past number of years the Timber Board has brought about the following 

advantages for the good and welfare of the people of Saskatchewan, and the operators working for the 

Timber Board: (1) It has utilized and broadened the utilization of forest resources to a greater degree 

than ever before in the history of the province. (2) Saskatchewan Timber Board has encouraged other 

private industry to make greater use of our forest resources, (and I gave you a couple of examples of 

that). (3) The Saskatchewan Timber Board has made possible and orderly, well managed highly 

standardized lumbering industry in the province. (4) It has encouraged and developed more private 

producers of our forest resources than every before in the history of the province, (and I showed it by 

checking the annual reports in the past five years, and that we actually have 121 more sawmills licensed 

than we had prior to the time we took over). (5) The Timber Board has brought about economic stability 

to the private producer of our forest resource. (6) The Timber Board has always expanded its operations 

in times of unemployment to increase employment although it had to build up a large inventory. 

 

The last two years we actually stepped up production in order to provide more employment for the 

people of Saskatchewan. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, private enterprise would never do this. They didn’t do 

it in Alberta. The moment the lumber prices slumped many of the operators did not produce, but in 

Saskatchewan in the last two years although lumber prices have gone down, we increased production in 

order to provide more employment for the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — (7) The Timber Board has been instrumental in holding retail lumber prices in 

Saskatchewan at a very, very fair level. (8) The Timber Board has in good economic years made a profit. 

This has gone as a dividend to the people of Saskatchewan who actually owned the forest, and I say this 

is far better than having a large private enterprise 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

14 

firm such as The Pas Lumber Company who made profits, and took them over to St. Paul or 

Minneapolis in the United States of America. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am certainly going to oppose the motion. I believe that anyone voting for this motion is 

going to vote against the advantages that the Timber Board has brought about for the betterment of the 

people of Saskatchewan and the operators in the province. 

 

I intend to oppose that motion. 

 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, we have heard again this afternoon the same speech that 

has been given in this House for the last 15 years by the hon. minister trying once again to support the 

Timber Board and the monopoly which they have in the province of Saskatchewan. He stated at the 

beginning that he was going to tell the truth, substantiate his statements by facts and figures. However, 

from his past performance I realize there is some doubt as to that statement, and because I would like to 

have some time to check these figures I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MOTION: RE PURPLE GAS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. McFarlane. 

 

Mr. C.H. Thurston (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t intend to take very much time this afternoon 

on this resolution as I gave most of my reasons a few days ago why I would not support this motion. 

 

I gave as my reasons firstly that the farmers have never asked for special privileges, and they are not 

asking for them today. I gave too, that the amount saved for each farmer would be very little. I gave 

figures showing that the farmer has to drive many miles to use $25 and $20 worth of taxable gas. I stated 

at that time that the municipalities by resolution had turned down resolutions asking for tax-free gas for 

farm trucks, knowing as they do that they couldn’t come to the government on one hand and ask for 

grants, and 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

15 

on the other hand tell the government to cut down its revenue. 

 

I wanted to remind the House that I thought the real saving to the farmers was in what we were doing in 

the license fees and insurance rates. I gave figures to show that taking Alberta with Saskatchewan, a one 

ton truck, if you had one accident in a year, your license plus insurance in Alberta would cost some 

$88.92 and in Saskatchewan $43.00, or a saving of $45.00 and I suggest that would buy a lot a tax-free 

gasoline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think there is much more I want to add to what I said previously, but I am sure that 

the municipal convention was held here since I spoke on it, and I am quite sure that if the municipal men 

had been very anxious to reverse the decision of 1960, a resolution would have been put forward at the 

convention, again asking the government to allow tax-free gasoline. Now, Mr. Speaker, with these words 

I think you will take it that I will not be supporting the resolution. 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, before the question is put on this resolution as seconder 

of the motion I would like to take the opportunity . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order . . . this motion has been put, but I will allow you to speak. I have called for the 

question now and heard no dissenting voices so I am now in the process of taking the vote. As you may 

have misunderstood, I will allow you to speak, but I hope other members will be aware that I am 

extending a liberty at this time, because the motion has been put. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — I want to get a clarification of that ruling because it is a mystery to me. 

Mr. Thurston, the member from Lumsden adjourned the debate, and the resolution was then open for 

debate after him, what was it you said now? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If you will sit down I will explain it again for the members. When this motion was 

moved originally by 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

16 

Mr. McFarlane and seconded by Mr. Gardiner, then as Speaker I put the motion to the House, but instead 

of the vote being taken immediately the member for Lumsden (Mr. Thurston) got up to speak on the 

debate and adjourned the debate. But the motion was already before the House. At this particular time 

after he took his seat I asked if the House was ready for question, so that the House would be aware of 

what question I was putting I once again repeated the question, which was part of the process of taking 

the vote. However, this has been a delayed motion, there may have been some misunderstanding and I 

am prepared to allow the member to speak, but the question was actually being voted at this time. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity that you have given through your ruling to 

say a few words on this motion. The speaker that just took his seat repeated the argument that he 

presented to this House in the address that he made on the day on which he adjourned the debate on this 

present resolution. However, in one of his arguments with regard to the rural municipal association, the 

hon. member doesn’t seem to know that it was only after a threat by a minister of the crown that if this 

tax were taken off it would affect the grid road program in this province. It was only after that, that the 

members of the rural municipalities, with that threat hanging over their heads, refused to pass a 

resolution asking for the tax-free privileges in farm trucks. That was the only reason and I am quite 

certain that members sitting across the way were there, some of them were there and heard that very 

same thing. 

 

And further, I think members across the way have met with the farmers’ union this year. It is a group 

which is represented in their particular government and in the cabinet by the former vice president of 

that organization, and they haven’t withdrawn the request for tax-free gas for farmers’ trucks in this 

province, because I read their submission to the government for this very year, a submission which they 

also presented to the members of the opposition side of the House, in which they again repeated their 

request for this consideration by the government of this province. I would just suggest to the member for 

Lumsden (Mr. Thurston) that when he says the farmers have not asked for special consideration, that he 

must not consider the farmers’ union of this province, as a farm organization representing the views of 

farmers in this province when he makes that statement, because the farmers’ union have asked for this 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

17 

consideration. Every year they have made a submission to this government for some time past now, and 

they did it while the present Minister of Education was their vice president, and he appeared before this 

government and asked for that very same measure himself. 

 

Government Member: — What did they do with it last year? 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — So when the member for Lumsden states in the first place that the rural municipal 

association did not request it at convention two years ago, and they haven’t repeated it since, it was only 

because the government had said that if you ask this we are going to reduce your grid road program, and 

they thought if that was the case there wasn’t much use in having relief on the one hand and having it 

placed back as a burden on the other hand by the government of this province, and of course there 

wouldn’t be any relief if that were going to be the action that was to be taken by this government if they 

permitted the farmer the free use of gasoline in farm trucks in this province. So I think it would be only 

reasonable that the rural municipal association would refuse to pass that motion under the threat that had 

been made by the government of this province, that if that tax was reduced, the revenues reduced, they 

would then have to reduce the grid road program in this province. What would they have to gain? 

 

Of course they were asking not for a reduction in services but they were asking for a consideration which 

I think everyone in this House feels is due the farm people of this province, that they be allowed to see 

gas in their farm trucks without tax, because the farm truck today is considered as much an instrument of 

production as the tractor on the farm, as the combine on the farm, or any other implement the farmer 

uses. 

 

I think therefore it is only fair that we should request, not only because of the fact that the farmers have 

asked for this, but because of the fact that in years past the rural municipal associations have also asked 

for this, until the government told them that if they acceded to the request of the rural municipal 

association and farmers, they would then have to reduce the grid road program in this province, and so I 

say, Mr. Speaker, that I am very pleased today to have the opportunity of taking part in moving this 

resolution, which I agree with the member from Lumsden (Mr. Thurston) is not the entire solution to the 

farmers’ 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

18 

situation. It may not even be a big part of the solution to the problems of the farmers in this province, but 

it is a beginning and it is a point from which we can start to help the farmers in relationship to the 

cost-price squeeze that he is in at the present time. 

 

This government has refused time after time to take any part whatsoever in assisting the farmer in the 

problems he is facing at the present time. What this resolution asks and requests of the government is at 

least a beginning in the consideration of the problems that today faces the rural people of this province, 

and faces the primary producer on the farms in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

That is what this resolution asks. That is what the farmers have asked themselves. That is what their 

organizations have asked for. And we in the opposition side of the House have asked this government 

every session for some time now to give some tax relief to the people of this province, and this is at least 

a beginning and so I suggest that every member of this House who desires to assist, even if it is in a 

small way, the farmer in this province in the tax squeeze he finds himself in at the present time, should 

support this motion. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I haven’t had much to say on this resolution and I 

just want to say a few words. As evidenced by the weak defence that the member from Lumsden (Mr. 

Thurston) put up against this resolution, he has a very weak case. The fact of the matter is this, he refers 

to the license and insurance paid on the farmers’ trucks. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the government 

has never lost any money, either on the license or on the insurance on the farmers’ trucks. That is one 

thing we are absolutely sure of. And that is that if all their licenses and all their insurance had been as 

profitable as this has been this province would be sitting on top of the world as far as finance is 

concerned. Rural people of the province of Saskatchewan have been subject to discrimination in regard 

to payment of truck and car insurance. The excessive rate paid by rural people has been used to pay the 

compensation caused by the reckless damage claims incurred by the city people, particularly the young 

and reckless element. I said that many years ago to the former Provincial Treasurer. He promised to 

prove it to me for three years that that 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

19 

wasn’t the case, and he never did he could not disprove my claim. 

 

Now this government is known for taxation, they have piled every tax on the people and the farmers of 

the province, but particularly the farmers because they are not in a position to speak for themselves as 

the others are, and here is a tax on production. Mr. Speaker, if there ever was a tax on production it is 

right here. A truck on the farm today is just as necessary as the binder, or the drill, or a combine or 

anything else. There is nothing the farmer can do on the farm without the truck. I have seen them use 

trucks for coming to town; you don’t need one if you have a car, but I say this, if you are going to 

complete your farming operation, deliver your products to market, and carry on as a farmer should carry 

on, a truck is an absolute necessity as a farm implement today, and when you place a tax on the farmer’s 

production, then I think the government has gone as far as they possibly can. I don’t think they can go 

any further. 

 

They say they are interested in the welfare of the farmers; they cry tears over the farmers’ economic 

condition wherever they are, wherever they go, but when it comes to anything like this, that has been 

requested, not only by the municipal organization in the province of Saskatchewan, except in the last two 

years, when they were threatened that something else would happen to them if they insisted on getting 

the tax on truck gasoline taken away, but he farmers’ union right in this building two years ago, when we 

of the opposition had an opportunity of meeting them, we had them the other day too, a representation 

from the farmers of Saskatchewan, and what did they do, they kept insisting on the request every year, 

but evidently my friend over there doesn’t consider the farmers’ union as representing the farmers of 

Saskatchewan. They are so dumb, they have done everything they can, and they are going to hang on to 

every sickle they can squeeze out of farmers in spite of this fact that they have sympathized with them 

and cried tears over them, and at the same time they are continuing in the process of squeezing more and 

more dollars out of the farmers’ pockets. 

 

Mr. E.A. Johnson (Kerrobert-Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, on this type of resolution the onus 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

20 

should be on the mover to prove his case, and the onus is not necessarily on those on this side of the 

House to indicate their case is faulty, and so far there has been no evidence whatsoever given that this 

motion is desirable. However, in spite of that I intend to provide some reason why in my own views, Mr. 

Speaker, this motion is undesirable. 

 

One of the first questions that arises in this, can our Provincial Treasury dispense with this finance? At 

least the question comes up, is there another source of revenue that we could collect more easily and 

more fairly than this tax which members opposite wish to do away with? There has been no evidence 

that there is a better form of tax that is readily and similarly available. Another question we can raise is 

this, if we were to maintain expenditures and find another source, it would mean people who are not in 

the agricultural industry would be paying for expenditures that we the farmers would hope to be making, 

and this, Mr. Speaker, is a penalty on other industries in the province, and the question is, is this 

desirable? I contend that if we are trying to attract other industries to the province, we should not 

therefore penalize them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also think this motion if it was acted upon would be unfair to a group of people in this 

province that needs help the most, and for this I invite members to examine these facts, that in the 

province there are approximately 100,000 farm units, and also there are approximately 80,000 some odd 

farm trucks. This indicates to me very clearly a good number of our farmers do not have a truck, and I 

am also familiar with the fact that a good many farmers have more than one truck. I submit this 

proposition, Mr. Speaker, that the farmers who do not have trucks now are those who are in the most 

difficult financial circumstances. This resolution would do absolutely nothing to help this group of 

farmers, and I contend, Mr. Speaker, they are in the greatest need of more assistance. This resolution if 

acted upon would also be unfair to the transportation industry. There are a number of delivery people in 

the small town that never set tire on a municipal road or public highway, and yet they also pay their tax. 

The member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) protested that it was something to drain every cent out of 

the farmers’ pockets, and of course this is the sort of nonsense he has particular affection for. This tax is 

one in which 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

21 

the amount paid is proportional to the farm operation. It is also proportional to the quantity of product as 

it takes more gas to haul a heavy crop than a light, and this is self evident I think even to the members 

opposite, and therefore there certainly is a high degree of fairness in this respect. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I oppose the motion. I believe it would do nothing to help basically the 

agricultural industry and would not give assistance where it would be most needed. I oppose the motion. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — I did not intend to add very much to this discussion, but 

when I listened to the debate on resolution I thought to myself that some members must think there are 

all kinds of animals on the farm, and so there are, but I can assure them one thing, there are not any 

dumb farmers, and if there are any dumb animals around, they can certainly be found some place in this 

House. 

 

When I look at some of the records insofar as they pertain to the part of Saskatchewan in which I live, 

and which I want to quote, I find it necessary to point out the kind of assistance that is made possible to 

at least one municipality numbered 490, (and I could quote others). In the years 1960-61, because of the 

taxes that have been provided, much assistance has been received — the argument that we should start 

cutting taxes could only lead to a situation where the government would eventually become a police 

state, there would be no money provided for social services of any kind. I do remember that kind of a 

situation some years ago where there were no grants to municipalities, no grants to schools, except the 

minimum of $1.50 a day or $2.00 a day, where there were no services whatsoever. Under the Anderson 

government Mr. Speaker, I remember the budget at that time, if I could just refer to it, it was only $12 

million, and so, no services were available. Because we have the kind of tax structure that we have they 

are valuable source of money to help people who need assistance. This government has always provided 

assistance on the basis of equalization and as I said a few minutes ago if we look at these records, it is 

very obvious the kind of help this government is giving to my area where the people are underprivileged, 

quarter 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

22 

section and half section farmers. Here are some of the facts. R.M. 490 in the year under review only 

levied $43 thousand in R.M. taxes, and yet spent for public works in that one year $81,288 on rural roads 

and grid roads. On top of that if you will look at the records you will find they have a surplus of nearly 

$4 thousand. It is obvious they couldn’t spend $85 thousand if they could only collect $43 thousand. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): — What are you trying to prove? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I am trying to prove this, that on grid road grants were spent in the amount of 

$32,520. In addition there were other grants, $4,490 on page 247 and then equalization grant of $1,031 

on page 249, as shown in the 1960-61 report of the Department of Municipal Affairs. 

 

The grants indicated here, and I just glanced very briefly and there must be other totals, $38,041 to that 

one municipality, and if you took an average of the amount of licenses and all gasoline tax collected in 

that municipality for a year on not only trucks but on all the cars and all the trucks, and all the people 

who use taxable gas, I am sure the government wouldn’t collect more than $16 thousand or $17 

thousand a year. 

 

Therefore here is $22 thousand that it is possible to give a need municipality because of this system of 

taxation which we have, and when I hear the members on the opposite side arguing against the fuel-tax 

which is paid by people, I ask of the farmer just how much tax is he paying. Most of the time that my 

farm truck is used it is used on a road, and those roads have to be maintained. If I take seed to the farm 

or to the elevator, in fact I am using roads. If I haul grain I am using roads. The only time that I am using 

my truck in the farm proper is during harvest when one has to take grain from the combine to the 

elevator, and hon. members would want us to save a few cents of tax and lose this kind of an assistance 

from the government. Twenty-two thousand dollars or close to that figure to one municipality and I am 

quite certain in others it would be the same story. I think if anybody would support a motion like that he 

hasn’t given much thought as to what this tax means to the farmer. 

 

Opposition Member: — What about the farmers? 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

23 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I am going to ask you some questions before the hon. member starts talking to me. 

I can tell him he should have been up there 30 or 40 years ago when we didn’t have a single decent road. 

 

Opposition Member: — I was there, I was there. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — When this CCF government got in and started levying taxes on the people of 

Saskatchewan, we were able to get a fair deal, and so in the last 20 years or so we have been able to get 

decent roads and highways in that part of the country. You are not going to tell those people up there if 

you want to get votes from them, that you want to do away with this tax, because they are a lot smarter 

than some of the hon. members in this House and they appreciate the value of the gasoline tax in this 

economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I shall vote against the motion. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I am rather amazed at the speech by the hon. 

member from Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky). 

 

Government Member: — You are always amazed. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — In view of the remarks that he made about the farmers in his constituency, how he 

ever got down here I don’t know. The balance of his remarks are so ridiculous that I am not even going 

to attempt to answer them, but I think the member from Kindersley (Mr. Johnson) made some statements 

that ought to be answered, and the first one was when he said there was no evidence that this action was 

desirable. The rural municipalities have said it is desirable. 

 

Government Member: — They have not. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — They have so, they have voted in convention until such time . . . 

 

Government Member: — Until they brightened up. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — . . . as you and your delegates 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

24 

went there and told them that if they passed this resolution then their grid road grant would be cut, then 

they refused to pass it. 

 

Prior to that it was passed, then also my friend who is always babbling in the back hasn’t said one word 

in any debate in this session, when he stood on his feet. I think this gentleman has some ability to think 

sitting down, but he has no ability whatever to think standing up, and the rules of this House say that if 

one wants to take part in the debate, he should stand in this place, and I suggest if the hon. member 

wants to take part in the debate to do that, and I suggest that if he wants to get his indemnity at the end of 

this session he should stay in the House. He has only been here a very few days since the House opened. 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battleford): — You are a liar. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — He has talked to his desk more than any other member in the House. He is 

commonly known as the Defender of the Faith, and I would now ask him to withdraw that remark. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member must withdraw that remark. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — It is not true. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You must qualify it or withdraw. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Well here is the second man who sits on his seat and does more babbling. If you 

paid more attention to the road conditions of this province and said less when you are sitting down, and 

more sense when you are standing up we would all be better off, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. C.G. Willis (Minister of Highways): — I would like to hear what the hon. member . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Sit down and be quiet, Mr. Speaker, there is plenty of evidence throughout the 

length and breadth of the province of Saskatchewan that what this motion calls for is needed. Where are 

there a group of people who holler more about the cost price squeeze in which our farmers 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

25 

find themselves by provincial action alone. But, Mr. Speaker, wouldn’t we have a much stronger case 

when we are asking our senior government to do more for agriculture, if we as a provincial legislature in 

the largest farming province in Canada were prepared to do something ourselves. You will do nothing. 

On one hand they stand up and say, well this wouldn’t mean anything to the farmers, he wouldn’t save 

anything, but on the other hand you would think the treasury would go broke if they were to allow 

farmers to use purple gas in their trucks. Mr. Speaker, there is plenty of evidence to indicate that the 

actions asked in this motion would be of benefit to our farmers. Then my hon. friend from Kindersley 

(Mr. Johnson) says this would be a penalty on other industries. How can you impose a penalty on 

anybody by taking off the tax? I am amazed at the statement that comes out of the mouths of some 

people who sit opposite. 

 

What about the grid roads. Well the grid roads were built for the farmers. Doesn’t he realize that the 

farmers again have been discriminated against? The grid roads are used by all people in Saskatchewan, 

farmers included. Business men, professional people, everybody in the province of Saskatchewan, but, 

Mr. Speaker, the farmer was segregated out as a class that pays 50 per cent of the total cost of grid roads 

out of his pocket, and then he was segregated out again to pay his share of the other 50 per cent. 

 

Opposition Member: — And all the maintaining. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Yes, and all the maintenance. Mr. Speaker, on every occasion this government has 

taxed farmers as a class more than any other class of people in the province of Saskatchewan. They have 

been segregated out and taxes imposed on them, and I think deliberately, Mr. Speaker, deliberately 

imposed on them for the reason that we may see later on in some legislation that is now before this 

House. Then he talks about 100,000 farmers in Saskatchewan. Where has this man been for the past ten 

years. We don’t have 100,000 farmers in Saskatchewan to begin with, then he said there were 80,000 

farmers with trucks. Mr. Speaker, there are just over 80,000 farmers in the province today, so according 

to his how figures they all have trucks. Then he talks about delivery trucks. Why it would be unfair to let 

this poor old farmer, including myself, use tax-free gasoline in my truck, but the delivery boy would 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

26 

have to pay taxes on the gasoline that he used in his truck. Does my hon. friend not realize that the 

delivery boy can do something about it on his truck? He is not selling his income under a board that sets 

a control price, he can up the costs of delivery. I can’t put up the cost of my farm products. I have to take 

what people will give me. I have no opportunity of demanding more. I can demand it but I won’t sell it. 

Yes the delivery boy is working under free enterprise and I am not. There is the difference. 

 

Then I want to go to the member for Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky,) Mr. Speaker, I think people in this 

province are getting a little sick and tired listening to his harangue that comes out of this gentleman’s 

mouth two or three times a day. There is a vacancy in the cabinet, and he is obviously trying to get it for 

himself, and I think the more times he rises in his place, the less chance he has of ever getting it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — He has more chance than you. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Well he might make it in the next two years, but I would suggest even you won’t be 

a minister after the ballots are counted in the next election. As a matter of fact I don’t think you will even 

be in the building. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — My friend refers to the amount of money that was spent on providing services for 

this province during the days of the Anderson government. You know I used to be a Tory and I resent it. 

The tax-paying ability of the people of the province of Saskatchewan in 1944 was probably exceeded in 

that period 1929-1934, to provide $12 million. But the tax-paying ability of the people of Saskatchewan 

today, to provide $350 million is also exceeded, and if my hon. friend thinks it was possible to build 

roads, through the length and breadth of the province of Saskatchewan, with a total budget of $12 

million, two thirds of which was spent on direct relief to keep people alive, then he has holes in his head. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this gentleman knows as well as I know that any government that has $12 million to 

manage the affairs of the province of Saskatchewan and realizes the conditions in which the province 

found itself, 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

27 

through no fault of the Anderson government, must be ridiculous. The tax-paying ability of the people of 

this province was exceeded to raise even $12 million. And I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that if this 

government continues the tax level that we have arrived at today, you are going to force this province 

into similar circumstances in which we found ourselves in the dirty thirties, and you are the people 

responsible, you are the people responsible. My friend over there, the Minister of Natural Resources, 

talks about the lower taxes. This province taking into account the taxes that have been imposed since 

this government was elected in 1960, has the highest tax rate of any province in the Dominion of 

Canada. 

 

According to the Dominion Bureau of Statistics the highest taxation, Mr. Speaker, of any province in 

Canada, the highest debt of any province in Canada, and amazed at the attitude of my friends opposite. 

The loss of revenue in giving up this tax on gasoline for farm trucks wouldn’t interfere one iota with 

road grants. Not one iota. One can go through public accounts and in the first one hundred pages find 

expenditures that could be done away with without interfering with one service for the people of this 

province, and save more money than comes in from revenue from this tax on the gasoline that is used in 

farm trucks. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — There is no need to deduct the grant for grid roads to cut the expenditures of the 

highways department, and to cut the expenditure of any department, other than to take out waste and 

extravagance and slight grants to political friends. That is all. 

 

Any member who stand up in this House and votes against this resolution has given fair warning that he 

is not concerned with the plight in which the farmers find themselves Any member who stands in his 

place and votes against this resolution should never open his mouth again about the cost-price squeeze. 

Here is the opportunity to stand up and be counted as men and vote for the resolution or stand up and 

vote against it and be a bunch of cowards. Take your choice. 

 

Mr. H.R. Dahlman (Bengough): — Mr. Speaker, you know I don’t mind listening to 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

28 

back benchers over there who get up and make an oration, but when the former Leader of the Opposition 

has made the oration that he has made, then I think it is time all of us get into his battle. He is doing his 

level best to try and convince the people of this province that a depressed agricultural industry is a 

normal one. What would he ever say about the cost-price squeeze on the top. In 1959 when 1,100 

farmers and others went down to Ottawa for deficiency payments, supported by municipal associations 

and every farm organization, business men and everybody in western Canada, where was the Liberal 

party? Where were they? 

 

The thing of suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that this gasoline tax is not doing any good, it certainly is. We 

have to build our grid roads. You have to make up your mind whether you want grid roads or not. You 

have to have money to provide them, and this is one way we can do it, and in my opinion it is a fair tax. 

We took off the public revenue tax and do we ever get congratulations from the members opposite, oh 

no, oh no. 

 

You know I like men to stand up and talk a little common sense. Can’t you be practical once in a while? 

The harangue from the opposition all the time, is very subversive in manner and purpose. This thing is 

all political you know. That is why they are bringing this resolution in. 

 

Mr. J.H. Staveley (Weyburn): — What are you talking about? 

 

Mr. Dahlman: — They are trying to make a political issue of it. I don’t think the last speaker over there 

convinced himself. As a matter of fact he put a heck of a lot more into it than any member in this 

legislature was able to get out of it. That is all I am going to say. 

 

Mr. R. Perkins (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, I certainly did not intend saying anything regarding this 

question of allowing purple gas to be used in farm trucks. I would however like to say a word or two 

from the standpoint of a practical farmer representing practical farmers in the district in which I live, and 

with your permission, Mr. Speaker, I would like to relate three or four instances that involve myself, as a 

farmer, in which measures that have been brought about by this government, from not only the tax 

referred to, this gasoline tax, but other acts that affect farmers. 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

29 

I can name four things on our individual farm, that have been done by this government in the last year or 

years, that have benefited us a great deal more than the $15 or $20 or $25 that it will cost us to pay the 

tax on the gas that goes into our one truck. 

 

For instance, last fall a small bridge was put in by the grid road authority adjacent to our farm costing 

some $2,400. Now whether this would have been done without the gas tax or not, I am not going to 

argue, but this money we all know and all the farmers in my constituency know must come from 

somewhere. That is one thing, that affected our farm. Every spring and it will this spring again with three 

feet of snow we have 300 acres of water on the farm, for three or four days while the snow is going. This 

bridge will earn us more than the amount of money we would save by not having to pay tax on gasoline 

that goes into our trucks. 

 

I want to mention a saving that was made when we went in last summer to take home three or four pails 

of dieldrin to use in the control of cutworms in the early part of the season and later army worms, at a 

saving of about $4.00 a pail, four pails amounts to $16. Practically the same as we would pay in gas tax 

next summer, and exactly the same as we paid last summer. 

 

I want to mention that the amount of veterinary fees that were saved on calfhood vaccination and the 

visit of vets to our farms. The grants that were given to our municipalities saved us over $16 or $20 that 

we would pay out by way of gas tax. I can name another figure and it is the last one I will name. If I had 

longer I could think of another four or five savings that are made by new measures brought in by this 

government. Much greater than what it is costing us to put purple gas in our trucks. I want to refer to the 

increased school grants that have been made. 

 

Mr. W.R. Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, is it in order? 

 

Mr. Perkins: — The children, the thirty or forty children from our local school district benefit from the 

grant that comes from this government more than what we pay out in purple gas taxes. 

 

I have named four instances and at least $80, 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

30 

I think $100 or $150 have been saved me by this government. I as a farmer, and I am speaking for most 

of the farmers in my district, if they have to make a decision on whether they will have some of these 

benefits taken away by being allowed to save on the amount of gas which they put in their trucks, would, 

with me, vote against this motion. 

 

Mr. D.W. Michayluk (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, as a school teacher I think that I personally have the 

farmers and their economic plight at heart just as much as all hon. members sitting in this House. 

 

Opposition Member: — I doubt it. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — There is no one that would like to have this privilege of tax-free gas granted to the 

farmers more than I would. However, when this resolution was placed on the order paper I went back 

home, and as I live in a small urban community I had an opportunity to discuss this with a number of 

farmers. What do farmers think of this resolution as it pertains to them? In every instance I was given to 

understand that the farmers that have the opportunity to drive or live near a grid road whether they live a 

mile from the grid road or two, they think this is a blessing as far as driving is concerned. Now in what 

respect? Some of the farmers say that prior to the building of the grid roads they belonged to the snow 

plough clubs. Each farmer living on a particular municipal road had to contribute toward the cost of 

ploughing the roads. Every farmer had to take a turn in snow ploughing these roads. Now a winter like 

we had in the north this year, hon. members can imagine what is happening to farm tractors, and those 

people who have to start and operate these tractors for road clearance alone. 

 

Now hon. members will recall that at the 1960 convention of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities this issue was brought before the convention, and what was the result? I maintain that this 

convention was a fair representation of rural people of the entire province. This convention rejected this 

resolution. They rejected it, and the basic reason I maintain, Mr. Speaker, was the fact that people living 

in the rural communities and the municipalities would prefer to see grid roads completed, because this 

means so much to the people living in rural communities particularly during winter months. 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

31 

Now when this resolution was introduced in this House, the hon. member for Lumsden (Mr. Thurston) 

aptly pointed out what this government has done to assist farmers who own trucks, in regard to their 

license fee, and some of the privileges they enjoy which are not enjoyed by farmers using trucks in our 

neighbouring provinces. 

 

Now I said at the outset, Mr. Speaker, there is nothing that would make me feel happier, but when I go 

back home to my constituency and hear from these very people that are so concerned, that they do not 

mind paying the tax until such time as the grid roads are completed. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It is my duty to warn the House that the mover is about to close the debate. If any 

member wishes to speak do so now. 

 

Mr. D.T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to take much more time of 

the House on this issue this afternoon. I realize it is one of the most important issues facing the farmers 

in the province today, and I am sure you must realize by now as members on this side of the House 

realize, and I am sure the farmers have realized all along, that when the chips are down, Mr. Speaker, 

and when there is ever an opportunity to do something for the farmer, the government to your right will 

be every means try and prevent the farmers of this province from getting a break. It was never more 

evidenced than by the speeches made this afternoon. 

 

I am very happy, Mr. Speaker, that you were in the chair when all these speeches were made by the hon. 

members on the government side of the House, because after all they will be on the official records of 

the House, and I think the farmers in Saskatchewan are going to receive little comfort from statements 

made by members opposite. I am not going to deal with them all in turn, but I would suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, that the reason why the rural municipal men didn’t see fit to place the resolution on their list of 

resolution at the annual municipal convention, was for the very obvious reasons, the very obvious 

demonstration we heard this afternoon, when the member for Bengough (Mr. Dahlman) got up and he 

slammed his fist on the table and said if the government repeals the tax on farm fuel the municipality 

will have to go 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

32 

without grid roads. Today, Mr. Speaker, that is the reason why the rural municipal men in this province 

have not asked the government, because they were threatened that they wouldn’t receive any assistance 

whatsoever toward financing grid roads. 

 

I was surprised at the member for Kindersley (Mr. Johnson), he got up and said not one person on the 

opposition side of the House had made any case for the removal of this tax. Mr. Speaker, when I 

introduced this motion to the House some three weeks ago I pointed out at that time, and I am going to 

refresh the memory of the members that municipal arrears of taxes amounted to over $14 million, the 

arrears of larger school units taxes amounted to over $8.5 million. That most sinister mineral tax arrears 

is over $400 thousand. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order . . . 

 

Mr. E.A. Johnson: — On a point of order, may a member indulge in repetitive arguments and repetition 

of previous remarks? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — A member may not quote verbatim remarks, but he may refer back to them, as long as 

he doesn’t introduce . . . 

 

Mr. Johnson: — These are the same arguments he made before, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. J.E. Snedker (Saltcoats): — No, no, sit down. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Mr. Speaker, here is the significant thing since I pointed out the terrific taxes and 

the increases in the arrears of taxes, when I first spoke in the House, I have information since from this 

government, where now I have to correct the figures given to me a year ago. The deplorable part of the 

whole thing is that we find that the farmers are in a worse position now by way of information I 

received, that they were when I spoke just three weeks ago. Because I find out that rural power 

installation arrears have risen from $3,681,000 to $3,888,000 in that course of time, and I find that 

monthly arrears of money power accounts have risen from $316,000 to $450,000 as of the first of 

January this year. Almost half a million dollars, Mr. Speaker, and so I say 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

33 

when the member for Kindersley (Mr. Johnson) says that no one pointed out a case, he is just trying to 

drag in a red herring or muddy the water. He didn’t want the position of the farmer placed before the 

House at this time. 

 

Then I was interested in some of the remarks made by members opposite. Some said this was an 

insignificant little sum. The Minister of Natural Resources said it was only a flee bite. What is this sum, 

Mr. Speaker? When the Minister of Highways took part in this debate he estimated that the saving would 

amount to between two to five million dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The Minister of Highways did not take part in this debate. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Well, the Minister of Highways has stated this. He thought the figures were from 

two to five million dollars, somewhere thereabouts. Now I am going to challenge them, I am going to 

accept them, and I am going to point out that from two to five million dollars according to the member 

across the way, is an insignificant little sum, it is only a flee bite, two to five million dollars. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, if that is the attitude of the government then they shall stand condemned by the 

policies of their own government, because their total vote for agriculture in the budget this year and past 

years only amounts to between six and seven millions of dollars. One million dollar difference. If it is a 

flee bite to give the farmers a saving of two to five millions of dollars, then it is only also a flee bite, and 

also an insignificant little sum, when all this government can see fit to give to agriculture to the farmers 

of this province, those engaged in the major industry of this province, only six to seven millions of 

dollars, therefore, Mr. Speaker, in the eyes of the people of Saskatchewan, the farmers in particular, they 

can stand condemned by their own words and action. They should hang their heads in everlasting shame 

that they would ever allow a situation like that to exist. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — And I am going to point out to you, Mr. Speaker, from information we have at our 

disposal now, where some of 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

34 

this seven millions of dollars for budgetary expenditure comes from the hands of the farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I would like to point out to the hon. member that he cannot introduce any new 

material. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Well the seven million dollar figure should be right then. All right, firstly two to 

five million dollars as you say is an insignificant little tax. The last few years alone the Minister of 

Mineral Resources has seen fit to extract from the rural municipal road allowances in this province an 

additional $2¼ million. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! The hon. member is now introducing new material, which cannot be done. He 

is closing the debate and must refrain from introducing new material. 

 

Opposition Member: — Certainly he can if he is answering arguments over there. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — The member for Kindersley (Mr. Johnson) said no case had been presented to back 

up our request. It has been a mystery to me, Mr. Speaker, and I can well understand why they didn’t do 

it. There wasn’t one member from the government side of the House got up and told you, or told the 

members on this side of the House, or told the farmers of Saskatchewan, how much money they extract 

each and every year from the farmers who are fined for using purple gas in their farm trucks. They have 

never to this date told the members on this side of the House or the people of Saskatchewan how much 

they extract on this one instance alone. There has not been one member from the government side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker, stand up and apologize to the farmers of Saskatchewan for the imposition placed on 

them when their trucks are confiscated and impounded . . . under the same type of legislation. 

 

Mr. Johnson: — I would ask a question. Are you suggesting the farmers are more dishonest than other 

citizens? 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — The farmers are the most honest people in Saskatchewan, 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

35 

and if this government was as honest as the farmers are, Mr. Speaker, they would get away from this 

type of legislation and give the farmers a break. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the argument was well put by the member for Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) when he 

pointed out the situation as it applies to the grid roads. I don’t intend to go into that. 

 

Other members have dealt effectively with all the arguments coming from the government side, but I 

would suggest that in view of the position of the farmers as I pointed out when I introduced this motion 

some three weeks ago, in view of the ever increasing disastrous economic circumstances the farmers find 

themselves in today, in view of the fact that the latest information we could get, the large number of 

farmers who find themselves in the position at the moment where their last resources are being spent in 

trying to buy feed and fodder for their livestock, where they are trying to truck it with their own trucks, 

rather than have other truckers bring it in for them, in view of the fact that they are down now after 18 

years of socialist regimentation and legislation, to the point where their last available dollar is being 

spent in trying to preserve their livelihood by taking care of their livestock, in view of the fact that this 

government is going to give them no further concessions, and finally that this is the only government in 

the three western provinces that has seen fit to make the farmers pay this terrific tax on production, I 

urge the government to remove this tax. As I stated the Manitoba government allows the farmers to use 

tax-free gasoline in their farm trucks; the Alberta government to the west allows the farmers the same 

consideration. Mr. Speaker, they are placing themselves in the insignificant position where today in 

western Canada they are the only government, a socialist government, which sees fit to discriminate to 

an every increasing degree to those who provide the basic industry in the province. So, Mr. Speaker, I 

have the honour and the privilege on behalf of the farmers of this province, to move this resolution, and I 

sincerely hope even though some of the government members have spoken against it they will have a 

change of heart and do their best and see fit to support this resolution on behalf of the farm industry in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division: 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

36 

YEAS — 16 

 

Messieurs 

 

Thatcher Cameron Boldt 

Klein McFarlane Horsman 

Batten (Mrs.) Gardiner Coderre 

McCarthy Foley Snedker 

McDonald Guy Gallagher 

Danielson   

 

NAYS — 31 

 

Messieurs 

 

Lloyd Wood Perkins 

Meakes Erb Thiessen 

Williams Nicholson Snyder 

Blakeney Turnbull Stevens 

Brockelbank Stone Dahlman 

Walker Whelan Michayluk 

Kuziak Thibault Semchuk 

Cooper (Mrs.) Berezowsky Kluzak 

Strum (Mrs.) Kramer Peterson 

Willis Johnson Broten 

Thurston   

 

MOTION: RELOCATION OF RAILWAY LINES 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Peterson. 

 

Mr. H.A. Broten (Watrous): — Mr. Speaker, before I adjourned the debate the other day my colleagues 

opposite covered rather fully any arguments that have to be considered, the cautiousness that has to be 

considered regarding rail line abandonment in the west. I think I can add another couple of arguments in 

support of this motion. 

 

The abandonment of rail lines will add a certain cost to the farmer in that the farmer would have to haul 

his grain farther in most cases, and also his service centre would disappear in many instances, and 

therefore he would be forced to drive farther for his supplies. 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

37 

These conditions will add to the cost of production and many more farmers will be forced out of 

business because of the high cost of production and the low price for grain. This in turn affects the small 

businessman in our towns and villages. Forty thousand farmers in Saskatchewan alone have been forced 

off the farm because of economic conditions. I maintain, Mr. Speaker, that this rail line abandonment 

should not take place under present conditions, especially when the purchasing power of a bushel of 

wheat and cereal grain is at an all-time low. 

 

When we ask Sir, how low is the purchasing power of a bushel of wheat at the present time? If you take 

the history 1914 to 1957, according to the wheat pool pamphlet that was put out in 1957, it shows that 

the purchasing power has been lower than 1957 only four years, those years being 1930, 31, 32, and 33, 

in fact the purchasing power of a bushel of wheat was the same in 1957 as it was in 1933, and in 1958, 

59 and 60, it was lower than it was in 1957. You will see that actually there was only three years, 1930, 

1931 and 1932, when the purchasing power was lower than it is at the present time. 

 

When one realizes the low purchasing power which wheat is because of the deflated dollar, the farmer is 

not getting for his wheat or sale of grain, sufficient from the domestic market or foreign trade, it isn’t a 

time to change the picture of the prairie scene by rail line abandonment. 

 

I would like to just clarify the cost-price squeeze and when one looks at the Dominion Bureau of 

Statistics figures regarding the price index of the things a farmer buys to produce his grain, or any 

product that he makes use of to produce, let us take the years 1935 to 1939, according to the Dominion 

Bureau of Statistics, and if you take the index, inclusive of living costs, remember Sir, it was 100 in 

1935 to 1939, and by 1945, this figure had gone up to 123.6 and by 1960, it had gone up to 252.8, or an 

increase of 103.6 per cent in that period. Let us remember that wheat in the same period had gone down 

from $1.64 in 1945 to the farmer to $1.38 in 1960 — these are average figures that the farmer receives 

for a bushel of wheat in that period. Wheat has gone down from $1.64 in 1945 to the farmer to $1.358 in 

1960 — when the cost index went up from 123 to 252 in the same period. In other words the price of 

wheat went down 26¢ a bushel, while costs have increased 103 per cent in the same period. 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

38 

Mr. Speaker, if wheat were to figure in the cost index since 1945, the price of wheat to the farmer would 

have to be astounding sum of $3.34 per bushel. These figures are so startling that in many cases they 

can’t be understood. I ask farmers, politicians, business men and all citizens to look in to these 

happenings on the farm front. It tells why there are so many ailments in our society and economic 

conditions including our railway problems. The time to judge patterns for rail line service is only after a 

long period of a close relationship between cost and income which we haven’t had for many years. Also 

the proper income conditions would in all cases show a much different pattern of rail usage and needs 

than at present. I hope this will be taken into full account before permission is given to reduction in rail 

service. 

 

May I also say Sir, that the MacPherson Commission suggest that railways be considered mainly as any 

other business in calculating needs to its use, etc. 

 

May I say that the country was bound together by rail and steel at Confederation. I believe because of our 

peculiar transport problems we have in Canada that many factors have to be taken into consideration 

when contemplating rail line abandonment and rates. I think they should be clearly related to the 

thinking of the rail and transport policy of that period long ago, because many or all of the criteria which 

we went by is the same today. Mr. Speaker, what is needed today is more people to understand the full 

impact of lack of income to the farmers and how it not only affects himself as well as the railways, but 

how significant this lack of income to the Canadian economy as a whole. What we need Sir is an 

understanding people to grasp the needs and then solve the problem by definite action, and this may I 

add, must come from the federal scene. 

 

I do support the resolution. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is the House ready for the question? 

 

Mr. R.A. McCarthy (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to add a few words. I am not 

going to take very long. I have a lot of sympathy with the resolution. During the last summer the C.P.R. 

removed 80 miles of track in my constituency, so I can assure you it wasn’t very pleasant. On the other 

hand, looking at it in retrospect, I think we were probably to blame for some of it. 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

39 

After all if you read the MacPherson Commission as I did, part of it, you realize that trains cannot run up 

and down the track for practice, and our gentleman over there said conditions have not changed. They 

have changed immensely, even our farmers are not using the railroads. Business men and everyone else 

are not using them. We have all gone to the use of trucks and of course, I have every sympathy with 

them, I just want to say this, that if they hope to keep their railroads, there is no sentiment in this railroad 

business, it either pays dollars or it doesn’t, and if they want to keep their railroads, the most effective 

way they can do it, is use less trucks and more rails. 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — Well said Ross. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Good. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is the House ready for the question? 

 

Mr. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word on this, Mr. Speaker, I can’t 

altogether agree with my hon. friend from Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) . . . 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — That’s an Irishman. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — . . . and I certainly don’t agree completely with the MacPherson Report. I will agree 

with what has been said; that the cost will be an additional cost of operation on the farm economy, and 

also what I greatly fear will probably be a complete breakdown of our rural and urban communities. I 

think that is the very backbone of our economy and of our country. 

 

Now I believe that the trucking industry has cut into the traffic of the railroad, but I think it is primarily 

due to the railroads themselves. When you are set up to provide the service you try to provide a good 

service, and I think the government, ministers of the government should pay particular attention to this. 

This is the danger of centralization, Sir. When centralization takes place, as has taken place in the 

railroads you sort of lose touch with the small branch lines. The traffic is there, the service was there, if 

the service had been there that traffic would have been used, but 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

40 

many of us were not providing the service we required throughout the thirties. On our line for example, 

we provided a good service and the traffic was there. Curtailment of service due to an argument that it 

was not paying was not altogether so. It was more or less trying to conform to wishes of people trying to 

get out of this, this unprofitable line. 

 

Now I wrote to the railroad at that time when there was a suggestion of curtailing the service on our line, 

and I was prepared at that time to go ahead and take that line over on a rent lease basis from the railroad 

and they would not allow it. Putting on that line only a daily service that would provide express service, 

and passenger service, did prove that it would be economical. Now the argument I had from the railroad, 

rightly or wrongly so of course, is that their agreement with the railroad force, the working force, would 

not permit such an arrangement and I had quite a discussion with the western superintendent at that time, 

and he felt it could be handled on a daily service. They could take over the extra flow of traffic for the 

heavy freight. The point in this, the only thing I was trying to bring out, give more use to the 

government. What has happened to the railroad with specialization has been the curtailing of services to 

the small areas of our province, of our country, and the same attempt the government are going at right 

now in centralization will be the increasing of cost and curtailing of services. 

 

I certainly agree with the motion, but I just thought I would mention the dangers of centralization. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

MOTION: UNEMPLOYMENT 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Stone. 

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina City): — Mr. Speaker, when the hon. member for Maple Creek (Mr. A.C. 

Cameron) speaks in this House he receives the attention of the government benches, and many on this 

side of the House feel that members opposite made a mistake when they passed him up and chose 

another leader. His presentation is always enthusiastic, it is always forceful. He presents his outdated 

illogical Liberal policy with 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

41 

enthusiasm. The member for Maple Creek was at his best when he spoke in the debate on this resolution 

for his presentation was weak and illogical and yet most enthusiastic. What did he say, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, did the member for Maple Creek speak on this 

motion? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, I beg to advise the member for Gravelbourg that he did. He rose before 

this House, holding out in his hand the front page of a Medicine Hat paper. The paper was alleged to 

have taken a poll indicating that the New Democratic Party members would support one of the 

reactionary parties in the next election. It is evident and has been clearly demonstrated beyond a question 

that the hon. member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) does not realize that polls are used to mold public 

opinion. He does not realize, Mr. Speaker, that Harry. S. Truman, a former President of the United 

States, discredited, disillusioned, and deposited in the garbage cans forever the public opinion poll 

regarding elections. It is evident . . . 

 

Mr. Coderre: — It is 2 per cent instead of 47 per cent. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — . . . that the hon. member for Maple Creek needs more evidence if he is still doubting 

the purpose, the reason for and the inaccuracy of these newspaper-sponsored and politically-motivated 

manoeuvres, I remind him, does he not remember that some Liberal papers in the 1958 general election 

insisted that their public opinion polls indicated that the Liberals were going to be re-elected. Does he 

not remember that in election campaign after election campaign in Regina City, polls have indicated 

Liberal victory. Mr. Speaker, after the Harry S. Truman shellacking of Governor Dewey, and after the 

fantastic walloping of the Liberals in the last federal election, after the trouncing of the Liberals in the 

last provincial election, it seems to me it takes more nerve than logic to introduce this kind of an 

argument in a debate in this legislature. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

42 

for Gravelbourg (Mr. Coderre) is a good friend of mine and he is well known to my family, but he 

proves when he speaks on unemployment that members opposite know little about the problem, if his 

arguments or his presentations are any measure. Terming the contribution of the government to 

unemployment as “lip service” the hon. member for Gravelbourg ignores and shrugs his shoulders, 

ignores the expenditures for building, winter works programs, highway construction programs, the 

construction of technical schools and institutes, the training of unemployed people, housing projects, 

senior citizens’ homes, the construction of the Yorkton Mental Hospital, continued expansion of gas and 

power facilities, the Squaw Rapids and the South Saskatchewan Dams. These are all forgotten, all 

ignored, all swept aside under the heading of “lip service”. Lip service, when dealing with 

unemployment, spendthrift tactics, when wooing the rank and file taxpayer, is typical of the Liberals, 

Mr. Speaker, typical of the policy of the members opposite, typical of their inconsistency. 

 

Among the suggestions so boldly placed before the House by the hon. member from Gravelbourg (Mr. 

Coderre) was a suggested review of labour legislation, labour relations. He thought that we should have 

a good look at labour relations in this province and see if this is holding back employment, that perhaps 

we should create a good industrial climate. Mr. Speaker, we have some precedents and we have some 

fine examples; we have some wonderful evidence of what happens when you create the climate he is 

talking about and that he is hinting at; that he is suggesting as being conducive to employment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the province of Newfoundland, Liberal Premier Joe Smallwood pulled down the fences 

and opened the gates and invited industrialists in; in Newfoundland they passed legislation outlawing a 

bona fide and democratically-formed union; they organized company unions and passed anti-labour 

legislation which brought organized labour in this country to political action. 

 

Let us look at Newfoundland! Let us look at their unemployment! Is this the kind of labour legislation 

and labour relations . . . 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, I believe that the hon. member for Regina City is 

attempting to misquote me. I said have a good look at labour relations with the 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

43 

view of still maintaining projection for both labour and management. He is trying to imply that I said 

that the labour relations or any labour acts should be changed to comply similar to other provinces. I did 

not say that. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, I am just giving the hon. member for Gravelbourg a good example of the 

type of labour relations that exist in a Liberal province, and I was hoping that he would listen to me so 

that he would find out what sort of results you get regarding unemployment, when you have this kind of 

legislation. 

 

Does this labour legislation develop industry and does it prevent unemployment? Well, if this is the 

answer, the Liberal answer to our problem, let me tell the hon. member for Gravelbourg that in the 

Liberal province of Newfoundland at this date the latest statistics available show, not seven per cent of 

the working force unemployed as is the case in this province, Mr. Speaker, the rate is 10.2 per cent of the 

working force, the highest rate of unemployment in this country, in this atmosphere, in this good 

industrial climate, in this area of good labour relations in a Liberal governed province! 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have labour legislation that is progressive, that is supposed to have hurt us, that is 

supposed to hamper employment, I submit that the comparison that I have given contradicts this 

recommended Liberal solution. 

 

Quebec too, has labour legislation, not as progressive as ours, I submit. They have Liberal government 

but what about their unemployment, and what about the figures in the province of Quebec? I would 

point out to this legislature and I ask the hon. member for Gravelbourg (Mr. Coderre) to take careful note 

of the fact, almost 8 per cent of the working force in the province of Quebec is unemployed. 

 

I should go further and quote some even more embarrassing figures about the province of New 

Brunswick, but I can see the blushes of shame and I can read the embarrassment . . . 

 

Opposition Member: — You must be lookin in a mirror. 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

44 

Mr. Whelan: — . . . and I can understand the mental discomfort of members opposite, therefore I shall 

refrain from describing the unfortunate situation that exists among the unemployed there, because they 

were foolish enough to elect a reactionary Liberal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Gravelbourg talked about how the savings of thousands of little 

people were in the hands of giant insurance companies who had to reinvest their funds, and that we have 

restrictions on them. He said we should give them a certain amount of protection to invest, and I am 

quoting his very words: “Protection to invest”. Let us look at this. Let me ask you, just what control does 

the investor have over a finance company whose directors in eastern Canada decide that a borrower 

should pay $480 finance charges on a loan which, if borrowed in the same amount and for the same 

period from a credit union, would cost less than $180. Yes, $300 less from a credit union. What control 

does the little man who invests his money in an insurance company have over those directors who decide 

the interest rate, who decide the rate of exploitation, and the terms of these nefarious, outrageous 

contracts that are being opposed but not cured by the proposed, but never passed Senator Croll Bill. 

Surely, Mr. Speaker, even the hon. members opposite have some responsibility as Senator Croll 

suggests, to protect the public and to protect the investors from this double-edged sort of uncontrolled 

exploitation that cannot be explained away or excused by introducing the unfortunate plight, the relief 

fed and humiliated unemployed people of this country. 

 

Frequently, Mr. Speaker, we are told about how the smaller communities in this country are getting 

destroyed, and how we are doing nothing to prevent this. Mr. Speaker, in the United States, south of us, 

the states have the same kind of people, the same climate, but a different philosophy of government. Has 

this philosophy kept the communities alive in the Dakotas for instance? The population of Saskatchewan 

has increased beyond the population of the thirties, but what is the situation in North and South Dakota 

where the terrain is a similar, where the climate is similar, where transportation problems are similar? 

According to the figures supplied by the Canadian Bureau of Census as of March 1, 1961, the rural 

population of Saskatchewan during the fifties has decreased 3.6 per cent. During the same period, 

1950-60, the rural population of South Dakota had decreased 5.2 per cent. 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

45 

Mr. Speaker, I point out to members opposite that the government they have to the south of us is the 

kind of government that they approve of. 

 

What are the over all figures of the state of North Dakota? In 1931 the population of North Dakota was 

680,845 people. In 1961 the population of the state of North Dakota was 632,000, in other words 50,000 

below the 1931 figure. In the state of South Dakota in 1931 the population was 692,000 and in 1961 it 

was 680,000, still 12,000 below the 1931 figure. In the province of Saskatchewan over the same period 

the population increased by approximately 80,000. In other words where the climate is the same, where 

the terrain is the same, transportation problems the same, this province has a progressive policy that has 

increased the population over the 1931 level. The two states immediately to the south have not been as 

effective in this regard. 

 

As a cure for unemployment, members opposite urge us to assist private enterprise. The members 

opposite are the same members that have been questioning the idea of the steel plant and yet we are 

perhaps the only government in Canada that has underwritten industry to the extent that we have. The 

biggest industry of all is the steel plant and what has been the results. All of us know, all of us agree that 

a basic industry is needed in these prairies. Good, we say, wonderful, let us have the government back it. 

This is the kind of basic industry that we underwrite and what is the result? The members opposite have 

annoyed some of their own friends who have money in this great plant by doing everything in their 

power to create suspicion and discredit the operation of this plant. Most people in this city know that 

certain investors who are sympathetic friends of the Leader of the Opposition took him to the woodshed 

and gave it to him Mammy Yokum style in order to put the damper on this damaging statements 

regarding this necessary industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Gravelbourg (Mr. Coderre) rises in his place and standing up in all his 

innocence suggests that we should help industry. What more could we do, what more could we have 

done to underwrite employment than to underwrite a basic industry in this country? Did it get the 

government the kind of approval it deserves? Did it get the kind of support it deserves? 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

46 

I know I am sure members on this side of the House know that in spite of all the pious eulogies on behalf 

of free enterprise, members opposite would sacrifice industry for political gain regardless of the 

unemployment picture. In view of the record as recent as 1957, in view of the historical evidence, 

solutions for unemployment presented by members opposite are as thin as cob-webs, as concrete as 

cornstarch pudding and as elusive as a handful of smoke. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have merely tried to point out the inaccuracies, lack of logic and the unsubstantiated 

recommendations so blatantly presented for our consideration by members opposite. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — You don’t believe that yourself. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — He didn’t write it. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — What is our solution to employment? Concessions to industry, of course. Certainly 

winter works too, but if we needed the assistance of all the financial resources of this country to build 

pipelines, and if we needed the financial resources to build cross-country railways, if we needed the 

financial resources of this country to build giant waterways for lake freighters, if we needed the financial 

resources of this country to build T.V. stations, if we needed this financial resource to build highways, I 

suggest humbly but sincerely that it is far more logical to utilize, beginning tomorrow, and regardless of 

the outcry from the members opposite, far more logical and far more necessary to use the financial 

resources of this country to guarantee jobs for our citizens. We must arrive at a stage in our reassigning 

as a nation and as a people that we will say to the unemployed everywhere, we think you are the most 

important resource that we have and that we are going to organize this country for you, that we are going 

to mobilize the financial resources, we are going to give priority to economic operations within our 

country and that before guaranteeing anything else we will guarantee the people who own this country, 

the people themselves, jobs. 

 

This resolution talks in terms of approaching the federal government, of economic planning to 

accomplish our objectives. This particular reference in the resolution, asking the federal government for 

economic planning is a futile approach and like a drop of rain on 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

47 

the desert, unless we have the kind of government that will carry out the policy that is enunciated in the 

resolution. When you realize that the government in Ottawa is by patch-work and by ineptitude, and by 

lack of planning, keeping unemployed figures at a static high, when you realize that the federal 

government, the previous federal government, which was supported by the members opposite, was 

beaten in 1957 and thrown headlong in 1958 because it had allowed the unemployment situation in this 

country to rise to astonishing and record heights, when you realize that these two governments, 

reactionary, stubborn, and unrealistic, had allowed this kind of situation to develop in a country that is 

screaming for development, you realize how futile a reference in this resolution is if either of the old 

parties hold office at Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in view of their record, to have the members opposite talking in terms of curing our 

unemployment is as futile as saddling a dead horse and announcing that you are going to win the 

Queen’s Plate. Mr. Speaker, to suggest that you are going anywhere with either of these old parties on 

the road to curing unemployment is as ridiculous as entering a car in the Indianapolis Speed Way that 

has a burned out main bearing. As I pointed out in a similar debate last year, we are a small factor in the 

federal employment picture. If we were to build five South Saskatchewan River Dams and if we were to 

build millions of dollars worth of housing in the province, unless this activity is coordinated with every 

other province in this country, Saskatchewan would have all the unemployed people from Canada 

moving here for employment. We have neither the resources nor the population to underwrite this kind 

of project on a provincial basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as was so ably pointed out by other speakers on our side of the House earlier in this debate, 

there is only one cure, there is only one answer: the election of a socially motivated government; there is 

only one cure and that is the election of the democrats federally. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion as amended. 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, the resolution, proposed by the senior 

member for Saskatoon (Mr. Stone) deals with one 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

48 

of the most important questions which confronts the government of Canada and confronts the 

government . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, this resolution gives me a little bit of difficulty. There was the resolution and 

the amendment, the last speaker was dealing with both, if we are dealing strictly with the amendment 

then we must stay to the amendment. I realize that they are both tied closely together so would it be the 

wish of the House if I consider that they both be discussed at once, both the amendment and the motion. 

 

Hon. Members: — Agree. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You may proceed then. It is agreed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — Mr. Speaker, the resolution proposed by the senior member for Saskatoon, deals 

with one of the most important questions which faces the government of Canada and the governments of 

all provinces. As I have stated on various occasions, the number of unemployed in Saskatchewan this 

year is slightly less than what was recorded a year ago. Nevertheless 27 thousand unemployed is still too 

high a number for our province. We cannot ignore the unemployment problem, hoping that if we do 

nothing the people will go away by themselves — that is no solution. As a matter of fact, the 

government of Saskatchewan has always been in favour of a national policy of full employment. At the 

national winter employment conference which was held in Ottawa in the summer of 1958, I pointed out 

the need for the federal government to provide loans with the lowest possible interest rate for financing 

housing construction so as to stimulate employment. Likewise, I pointed out the need for opening up 

more access roads, in conjunction with the job creating program and the need of providing trade training 

for unemployed workers. 

 

Following this conference some months later, we were pleased to learn that the government of Canada 

had decided to introduce as of December 1st, 1958, a winter works incentive program in which 

provincial government and municipalities could take part. Under pressure from public opinion the 

federal government has continued and expanded its program in subsequent years. Each year the 

government of Saskatchewan has availed itself fully of the opportunities offered by this program. 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

49 

You all know that we have paid 25% of the direct labour costs of all approved municipal winter works 

programs, municipalities thus have to pay on 25% of the direct labour costs of such projects, the 

remaining 50% being paid by the federal government. 

 

If full employment were something the provincial government could legislate about without reference to 

the rest of Canada, we would have done that a long time ago. In matters which fall exclusively under 

provincial jurisdiction Saskatchewan does not wait for others to show us the way: Our Hospital Services 

Plan, a pioneering venture which was later on copied by others and is now a nation-wide institution; our 

government insurance offices is another pioneering venture of which we have reason to be proud; our 

labour legislation is the best in Canada and provides the wage earners with reasonable standards of 

wages, hours of work, holidays, workmen’s compensation and so froth. 

 

We are fully aware too, that in the age in which we live, with the advent of automation, manual jobs are 

found to become fewer, while the need for skilled workers, technicians and well educated people in 

general is increasing. We are told that about 70% of all jobs in Canada today are of a professional 

semi-professional, technical or skilled nature. In order to provide needed technical training for the young 

people of this province, the provincial government, as you know, Mr. Speaker, established a technical 

institute in Moose Jaw, which was officially opened in January 1961. Additional training facilities will 

be provided with the creation of new institutions for technical education in Saskatoon and Prince Albert. 

Even the Leader-Post in an editorial of October 25th, 1961 had to admit in this connection that the 

government of Saskatchewan through its vocational training plan had given, and I quote, “clear proof of 

a governmental step of social responsibility”. Of course, a great step forward in improving the 

qualification of young people in Saskatchewan was made with the change of the status of Regina 

College, which is now part of the University of Saskatchewan with rights equal to those of the Saskatoon 

Campus. 

 

All these measures will undoubtedly help some people find employment. We know that full employment 

cannot be attained on the provincial level alone, it has got to be on the national level and this requires a 

positive policy on the part of the federal government. We in Saskatchewan are doing all we can to 

increase the number of jobs; the number of man days of 2.1 for 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

50 

non-agricultural wage earners, created in Saskatchewan under the winter works incentive program is the 

highest in Canada. 

 

The resolution proposed by the member for Saskatoon (Mr. Stone) expresses the grave concern of the 

government of Saskatchewan at the growing threat of high and permanent unemployment. It urges the 

government of Canada to undertake immediate projects and economic planning to provide full 

employment. The need for more job-creating projects in Canada is a crying one. We would like to hope 

that the government of Canada will recognize this need as a permanent one and that it will use its power 

and its resources for a speedy elimination of unemployment. 

 

The employment situation in Saskatchewan is not as good as we might have liked, although at the 

beginning of February this year the number of unemployed was somewhat below that of what it was a 

year ago. We still have approximately 27 thousand people without jobs. The drought of 1961 has 

aggravated the unemployment problem in the province. The poor crop has drastically reduced the cash 

income of our farmers and this had had unfavourable repercussions on the amount of employment in our 

business and secondary industry. 

 

Apart from the general economic recession, there are several factors which contribute to make 

unemployment a grave problem in Canada. Our population is growing and we need more jobs to keep it 

employed, our people live longer than they did 50 or even 25 years ago. This means that we must have a 

greater number of needs for new jobs in order to accommodate the young as well as the older people. 

 

Mechanization of Canadian agriculture is another important factor. As a result of farm mechanization 

many people leave the farm every year and move into urban centres where they hope to find employment 

in industry. Furthermore, as a result of automation the need for manual and semi-skilled labour is 

decreasing in a number of industries. 

 

The government of Saskatchewan has taken measures to increase the number of jobs, particularly during 

the winter by introducing programs which are well known. Government construction and repair work 

has been reserved so far as possible for the winter months. During the past three winters this policy has 

provided work to 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

51 

approximately 1,466 men. We are pleased with these results and intend to continue this policy. However, 

the most important measure taken by the government of Saskatchewan with a view to creating work is 

its participation in the winter works program. According to the latest information received, the number 

of applications for winter works that have been accepted as of February 23rd was 1,004 against 692 a 

year ago. The provincial share of the direct payroll, cost of these projects is estimated at $954 thousand 

as against $684 thousand a year ago. The number of man-days of work created by municipal winter 

works program in Saskatchewan this year is estimated at 322,700 as against 194,000 a year ago. 

Considering the size of our labour force Saskatchewan occupies the leading place among the provinces 

with respect to winter work projects. As a matter of fact, the number of man days of work created for 

industrial workers in Saskatchewan is approximately 2.1, in Quebec it is 1.6, in Alberta 1.4 and still less 

in the remaining provinces. This shows clearly, Mr. Speaker, that we are making very good use of the 

existing opportunities we have to provide winter jobs. 

 

In discussing the unemployment situation in Saskatchewan we must not forget that during the last 

eighteen years our industrial labour force has increased considerably. The results of the census taken last 

year are not yet available to us. However we estimate that at the end of 1961, there were approximately 

179 thousand non-agricultural wage earners and salaried employees in Saskatchewan. In 1944, this 

number was less than 126 thousand, consequently we have an increase here of around 60 thousand. It is 

also significant that today some 70 thousand persons are employed in larger establishments, that is to say 

establishments employing fifteen persons or more. A number of years ago this was less than 50 

thousand. In mining alone we have today over 3,000 workers against a few hundred just eighteen years 

ago. I should also point out that between 1944-60 labour union members in Saskatchewan have 

increased almost three times, from less than 17,000 to almost 49,000. Through collective bargaining 

these workers have been able to achieve substantial wage increases of themselves and indirectly for most 

wage earners in the province. More purchasing power has been made available to the residents of 

Saskatchewan in this way. This money which has largely been spent on food, clothing, shelter, recreation 

and so on has meant a greater volume of business to Saskatchewan business men. It has stimulated 

production 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

52 

in our industrial establishments and this has created a larger number of jobs than would have otherwise 

been available. It is not surprising therefore, Mr. Speaker, that we have done remarkably well in the field 

of labour-management relations. Thus, in the course of 1961, strikes and lockouts in Saskatchewan has 

resulted in the loss of approximately fourteen minutes per non-agricultural wage earner as against 110 

minutes for Canada as a whole. We have reason to believe that Saskatchewan would have made greater 

economic strides if the federal government had had a full and consistent policy of economic 

development for Canada as a whole. In discussing the employment situation in Saskatchewan it is 

important to bear in mind that unemployment exists everywhere in Canada from Newfoundland to 

Vancouver Island. As in the past, Mr. Speaker, the government of Saskatchewan would be pleased to 

co-operate fully with any program or plan which the federal government may initiate with a view to 

combating unemployment in the summer as well as in the winter time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion. 

 

Mr. B.D. Gallagher (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, during the course of this debate we have heard a lot of 

rambling and raving from the other side of this House. I am sure that all members of this House are 

concerned about the problem that is mentioned in this resolution: 

 

“That this Assembly gravely concerned with the growing threat of high and permanent unemployment 

request the government of Saskatchewan to urge the government of Canada to undertake immediate 

projects and economic planning to provide a condition of full employment in Canada and so on.” 

 

I think after listening to members on the other side of the House, and I believe there was one whole 

sitting devoted to this resolution, one conclusion that I have come to after listening to five or six of them 

the other day, some of them spoke for as long as thirty minutes on this resolution, if the people to your 

right, Mr. Speaker, were very concerned about the unemployment after spending anywhere from two and 

a half to three hours speaking on the motion they would have come up with some concrete proposal to 

solve the unemployment 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

53 

problem in this country. These people have been talking the same for years. They can quote figures all 

they like, but they have never, to date, given us any sound assurance that they can do anything to relieve 

the problem of unemployment in Saskatchewan or in Canada. One of the things that I thought was 

significant in listening to them from the other side of the House, significant because they left it out, was 

the fact that since 1957 this country has had more unemployment than any time since 1940. Of course, a 

great deal of the reason for this increase in unemployment in Canada since 1957 is because of the fact 

that we have had a different government in Ottawa between 1957-62 to what we had before. I suggest at 

this time that as much as all of us are concerned about the unemployment to see that we have as close to 

full employment in Canada as possible, that all the economic planning in the world is not going to solve 

the unemployment problem when we have a government in power in Canada that follows along the 

policies that the present Diefenbaker government does in regards trade policies and fiscal policies. 

 

Ever since this government came into power back in 1957 we have seen the rate of unemployment 

growing in this country and I can well realize, I might warn my friends on the other side of the House 

that I am going to support this motion, because I am just as concerned about unemployment as they are, 

but I can well realize why they would suggest a program of economic planning because they believe a lot 

in planning so I think most governments do the planning themselves, the people of the other side of the 

House realize of course that there are not enough brains in the government, that you must hire your plans 

and I am going to suggest at this time that hiring a bunch of highly paid, long-haired planners is not 

going to solve the unemployment problem in this country. 

 

One of the suggestions made from the other side of the House was that if government would take on 

more public works programs that we would provide a lot more jobs and I would like to say at this time 

that no matter how much a provincial government or all the provincial governments in the country and 

the federal government try to provide through public works jobs, they are not going to solve the 

unemployment problem completely. It is just a stop gap, something like the boy who put his finger in the 

hole in the dike to stop the country from flooding. It helps for a little while but it doesn’t help for very 

long. 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

54 

There was a statement made by the junior member from Regina (Mr. Whelan) I believe, in comparing 

the number of people that were unemployed in the Liberal province of Newfoundland, I believe that he 

said there were 10% of the people in Liberal Newfoundland who were unemployed but he didn’t say, 

this is something that I think these people have been engaging in at all times and debates in this House, 

that this included all the fishermen in Newfoundland. 

 

In Saskatchewan, when he gives the figures for Saskatchewan he doesn’t say that at least 30% of the 

farmers of Saskatchewan and farmers in Saskatchewan are in the same category as fishermen in 

Newfoundland, that at least 30% of the farmers of Saskatchewan are unemployed in the winter time and 

so if he is going to give this kind of a comparison or this percentage figure for Newfoundland, let’s have 

the same kind of a percentage figure for Saskatchewan. Something that hasn’t been mentioned by any of 

the members from the other side of the House and they have been gloating over their accomplishments 

in this province, something that I think that they should be reminded of, the fact that since they got into 

power in this province in 1944, the working population of this province has gone down or at least the 

total population of Saskatchewan has not risen and one of the causes of more unemployment in British 

Columbia or in Winnipeg in Manitoba or in Ontario is because there has been an influx of people from 

Saskatchewan to these other provinces of Canada. 

 

Now it is significant that something must be wrong in Saskatchewan when people leave Saskatchewan 

and go to other parts of Canada to look for jobs and I think that the people on the other side of the House 

who have suggested this resolution should start to clean up their own house before they start telling the 

federal government or anybody else what should be done to provide jobs for the people of this country. I 

think that the main solution to the unemployment problem in Canada is the rise in the amount of money 

that is going to be invested or the government’s inducement to have people invest in capital expansion in 

this country. We have noticed that during the last five years, since the Tories took over in Ottawa, that 

people are not investing in this country at the rate that they would need to invest to keep the gross 

national production of Canada growing at 7 or 8 per cent which figure I think the gross national product 

must grow if we are going to employ all of the workers of this country. 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

55 

One of the biggest evils in the province of Saskatchewan, and one of the things that socialists across 

Canada have been doing, one of the reasons that I say that they have contributed to unemployment is the 

speeches that we hear from members from the other side of this house, members to your right and 

particularly I am going to mention the junior member for Moose Jaw (Mr. Snyder) also the member for 

Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) the other day when he was taking part in this debate, they deplore 

anybody who makes a profit, and, Mr. Speaker, this country was built on the profit motive and as soon as 

these people who sit to your right realize that people won’t work, people won’t invest, people won’t 

even farm, unless there is a hope of a profit, we’re not going to solve unemployment in Canada. 

 

They will get up with financial statements to show where some particular corporation has piled up 

millions and millions of dollars of profits and then they expect that these corporations are going to 

provide jobs to people in Saskatchewan. They never say that 50 per cent of the profits of these 

corporations are going into tax revenues, in the way of corporation tax to provide social services for the 

people that work in the corporations. I think that the people to your right, Mr. Speaker, are doing a 

disservice to the working people of Canada by getting up and raving and ranting about the profits that 

are being made by corporations in this country. It is the investment of individuals whether they be 

labourers, professional people or farmers, the investment of these people in companies or corporations 

that makes these corporations or companies grow to provide jobs for people who are looking for jobs in 

this country. 

 

I might say at this time, Mr. Speaker, that one of the causes of unemployment in this country, something 

that has been fostered by people to your right, by socialists all across this country, for the last twenty 

years, is some of the political speeches that they have been making, telling the people of Canada that we 

should have an easier way of life. I think that we are all agreed, we shouldn’t go back to the horse and 

buggy days, but the people who built Canada were not the people who were afraid to work. As soon as 

the politicians, the socialist politicians in Canada quit trying to leave the impression in people’s minds 

that the country owes them a living but rather that those people owe something, that they must make 

some contribution to their country, the more of those people there will be who will be gainfully 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

56 

employed and not living on social aid. 

 

Before I sit down, Mr. Speaker, I should say first of all in connection with a remark made by the member 

for Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) he was condemning free enterprise as being the cause of 

unemployment in this country and along with condemning free enterprise he was condemning the 

Canadian Chamber of Commerce. As long as we have people in the government, whether they be in a 

provincial government or any other government, who will get up and condemn the many members of 

business in this country, many of them small business men who belong to the Canadian Chamber of 

Commerce . . . 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — The hon. member is putting words in my mouth, I said the Canadian Chamber of 

Commerce and I didn’t talk about the chambers of commerce across the land, and I am not going to 

accept that. 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — Mr. Speaker, when the gentleman said the chamber of commerce, he must realize . . . 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I did not say the chamber of commerce, I said the Canadian Chamber of 

Commerce was carrying on this campaign of something or other. 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — Mr. Speaker, I hope the hon. gentleman realizes that there is a connection between 

chambers of commerce and the Canadian Chamber of Commerce. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — He doesn’t know the difference. 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — What I started to say before I was interrupted, Mr. Speaker, was that when you hear 

people from the other side of the House condemning organizations or condemning people who are in 

business because of what they are doing when actually they are trying to expand this country trying to 

provide jobs, you can’t expect that here in Saskatchewan these people are going to invest their money to 

provide the jobs that are so necessary for the people of this province. 

 

The amendment to the motion proposed by the member for Gravelbourg (Mr. Coderre), Mr. Speaker, I 

think would do a great deal to help provide jobs for the 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

57 

people in Saskatchewan I think it is significant in the last three or four years and especially the last year 

since the oil companies have started moving out of this province, since major industries have been 

developing in the provinces beside us, that something must be done here in Saskatchewan to try and 

encourage industry that is going to provide jobs for the people of Saskatchewan to come into this 

province and the suggestion that this government establish a tax-incentive program to encourage a 

greater establishment of industry thereby creating jobs for unemployed people in Saskatchewan is one 

that should be given the support of all members of this House and the other suggestion, Mr. Speaker, to 

consider a reduction of industrial power rates, I am sure that if the people who are sitting to your right 

are actually concerned with getting people to bring industry into this province, they will give their 

support to this other part of the amendment. 

 

I am very happy to say that I am going to support the amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say a 

word or two on this motion and amendment. First of all I would like to remind my hon. friends in this 

House that the Rt. Hon. Louis St. Laurent about six or seven years ago now in Quebec made a speech in 

which he said that in effect it is the responsibility of the federal government to so manage the economy 

of Canada that the working people, the people of Canada can get employment. People took him at his 

word and because he failed to so manage the economy that people could get jobs and we were getting 

more and more unemployment they kicked him out in 1957 and certainly rejected them in 1958. 

 

So the first part of the resolution recognizing that the great responsibility, the real responsibility for the 

economic condition of the country is a federal one is established on fairly good authority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word or two in regard to the amendment, first in the suggestion that there be 

consideration given to a tax incentive program. Actually this has been done for a good deal of time. A 

year ago we put into effect new regulations which provided for a three year holiday on mining tax on 

new mines and I believe that this is the only province in 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

58 

Canada that has that provision. Mining property in the north of the province is exempt from taxation 

until production and then it is a controlled rate of taxation; they pay a lesser rate. This has been true in 

the past, both in the Flin Flon area and in the Uranium City area, less than the average rate paid by the 

other residents of the area. 

 

Oil royalties are less in Saskatchewan and have been less in Saskatchewan than Alberta for a long time 

and in a great many cases they are less than the royalty in Manitoba. Alberta has now announced that 

they are putting into effect an increase in oil royalties which will commence this summer, so that we 

have had to a very considerable extent tax incentives. We have given consideration and will continue to 

give consideration to other forms of tax incentives. There are limits on this question of tax incentives if 

the government considers that it has any responsibility at all, because when you exempt certain groups or 

classes from taxes you either have to cut down services or else somebody else has got to pay more taxes. 

This is one of the things, yes it might even be complained of by my hon. friends opposite, that this is 

putting the burden of taxation on the farmers, I have heard them complain about that on occasion. 

 

In regard to industrial power rates, the situation has been that Saskatchewan Power Corporation has been 

always willing to negotiate with any new industry for an industrial rate and when necessary I know they 

are willing to go right down to the cost of generation and transmission of that energy. Again if you go 

below the cost then somebody is going to have to make up the difference. I think that there could be 

occasions when it would be good policy for a limited period of time to actually accept a loss. You 

couldn’t think of doing it on a permanent basis but for a limited period of time to actually accept a loss 

in regard to power rates though I have no objection to the amendment these are things that have been 

done and will continue into the future. 

 

I will support the amendment and I will support the resolution as amended. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

59 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 40 — An Act to amend The Workmen’s Compensation (Accident Fund) Act, 1955 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — We have only three or four amendments here, one is to 

protect truck owners, who may be under contract for some employer, in the event that they are injured. I 

think you all know of companies which may have a gravel contract and they have a number of truckers 

working for them who own their own trucks. It would be very easy to draw up a contract, Mr. Speaker, 

which would divorce altogether the individual owner of the truck from the employer but we do want to 

have these men protected and one of the amendments in this act will do that. 

 

Section No. 4 refers to volunteer municipal fire brigades. There has been trouble in this province as in all 

provinces in protecting people in this group and they are entitled to protection, I think everybody would 

agree to that, the same as the fire brigade in the city. We have an amendment which will clarify any 

misunderstanding which there may have been in this regard. 

 

One of the most important amendments we have, Mr. Chairman, is the increase of $10 per month to 

widows of men who have been killed in accidents in industry over the years and $10 per child up to the 

age of sixteen and an increase from $50 to $60 per month for the keep of an orphan. 

 

Then there are some amendments which refer to total disability, permanent disability and so forth. There 

is just one thing that I will mention. Up until the present time an employer was entitled to compensation 

based on his wages for the past year. Now we are going to amend that and he may choose the best twelve 

consecutive weeks out of the past three years — it will give him a better break. I think that is about all, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

There is one more that I will mention. Where an injured workman has lost a limb, that is a lower limb, 

he will be entitled to a clothing allowance of $96 per year and where he has lost an upper limb, a 

clothing allowance of $42 per year. 



 

March 29, 1962 

 

 

60 

There are some other amendments which I will not take time to explain at this time, Mr. Speaker, I will 

move the second reading of Bill No. 40. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 


