




















































Hansard: March 28, 1962


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

24th Day 

 

Wednesday, March 28, 1962. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT: LIVESTOCK CHAMPIONSHIP 

 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Before the orders of the day I would like to draw to the attention of the 

house that Kinistino as usual has won another championship. Mr. Sid Jones of Kinistino has won the 

Grand Championship in the Hereford Class with his yearling Hereford bull. 

 

Kinistino has always been a well-known constituency that raised a good grade of cattle. I want the House 

to join with me in congratulating Mr. Jones on his tremendous achievement. 

 

QUESTION: MEETING WITH DOCTORS 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are proceeded with I 

would like to ask the Minister of Public Health if he has any information for the House in view of the 

meeting that took place this morning. 

 

Hon. W.G. Davies (Minister of Public Health): — I would like to say at this point that useful 

discussions are taking place and they will continue. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I could ask a supplementary question. The minister has 

said they would continue, does he mean tomorrow, or next week, or could he inform the House if this is 

a continuing meeting or whether it has been postponed to a later date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — We hope, Mr. Speaker, to continue discussions this afternoon. 



 

March 28, 1962 

 

 

2 

QUESTION: RULINGS IN REGARD TO MINIMUM WAGE BOARD 

 

Mr. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are proceeded with I 

should like to ask the Minister of Labour when we expect to get the rulings in regard to the Minimum 

Wage Board or any decisions that they may have made, will we get it before the end of the legislature or 

of this session? 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t get the information that was 

required, about the minimum wage . . . 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I understand that there were some decisions that would be handed down with regard to 

the Minimum Wage Board. I was wondering whether any rulings or statements that may come from the 

Minimum Wage Board would be handed down in the near future, and if so will it be handed down 

before the end of the present sessions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — Mr. Speaker, I doubt very much if there will be any information before the end 

of the session. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

BILL No. 26 — An Act to amend The Physical Fitness Act 

 

Hon. O.A. Turnbull (Minister of Education): — This act, Mr. Speaker, rises out of action taken by the 

federal government in the immediate past few months when they created a new fund amounting to five 

million dollars which is to be spent in the area of physical fitness, and amateur sport. 

 

We, as a department, along with other responsible departments of provincial government met in Ottawa 

some two weeks ago at the request of Mr. Monteith, to try to work out a fair and equitable manner in 

which these monies could be dispersed among provinces and to also define what was intended in respect 

to the title of physical fitness and I think the House would be satisfied on two main points. One is that 

the federal government is not interested in channelling the monies to boards and other professional types 

of sports-governing 



 

March 28, 1962 

 

 

3 

bodies, but it is more interested in spending this money where it will do the most good in the field of 

amateur sports. The idea is to attempt to raise the level of physical fitness of a great number of people 

rather than provide a budget to sports-governing bodies who normally work with professional and 

to-quality athletes. 

 

I would agree to the definition of fitness, as certainly a much broader type of definition than to refer only 

to physical activity and sports, and while this is a bit nebulous in some respects, the definition of fitness 

was broad enough in scope to allow each province to determine a comprehensive and broadly-based 

program that can cover a wide range of the citizens in whatever activities they wish to pursue. It doesn’t 

mean, however, that money would not be available in some particular instances, my understanding is 

from our first round of discussion with Mr. Monteith that about a million or a million and a half would 

be taken out of the funds for federal use. These figures are all general because the final decision has not 

yet been made. 

 

This million or a million and a half would be taken out of the fund to be used for interprovincial or 

national or international types of sports events and members will be interested of course in knowing 

something of the plans that are now being made in the area of Banff for the next world olympics to be 

held there and the amount of activity that is going on in this general direction and it is in this type of an 

activity that the federal agency would participate. Undoubtedly there will be more information 

forthcoming on it. 

 

As far as we are concerned, I am happy to report that the Saskatchewan contingent was able to contribute 

materially in the setting up of a program that would provide an initial base of capital to every province. 

You can appreciate, Mr. Speaker, that if the money was to be divided on a per capita basis, there would 

be some provinces that would have such a small amount of money, particularly those provinces that now 

have not a program that it would be difficult for them to improve their position. 

 

Our proposition to the meeting was that there should be some basic sum of capital provided to each 

province so that the minimum staff could be paid for and this would allow every province to at least 

have a basic program. Let us assume for example that this basic budget could be fifty thousand a 

province — the balance of the funds could be divided on a sharing program depending on 



 

March 28, 1962 

 

 

4 

the activity, with some maximum ceiling on a per capita basis. This could be so arranged so that the base 

amount of money or the sharing program could be utilized by the province depending on their own 

position and scale the balance out so that whichever sum was the greater would be the money that would 

be available. 

 

The nature of the amendment here is simply to change certain wording within our own act by reasons of 

a different name, this is called a Physical Fitness Act and the other, I don’t quite recall the other name, 

but it was different from this, — oh yes, the Fitness and Amateur Sports Act was the former title — and 

so our act, the amendments to it are simple in order that our act will conform in name and with the 

federal act that is being proposed. 

 

I have not yet heard what the final decisions are in respect the federal plan but I have no reason to 

assume that they will be far from the general proposition that we put forth and that was generally agreed 

to by the conference. 

 

I move second reading to Bill No. 26. 

 

Mr. F.E. Foley (Turtleford): — I just want to comment very briefly on this bill, Mr. Speaker, and to 

say that insofar as the provisions of this bill will result in more emphasis being placed upon physical 

fitness and physical education in our province, I will be happy to associate myself with the remarks of 

the minister. 

 

I feel that the time has come when we should take a new look at the construction of schools generally in 

the province. I believe the fact that most of our city schools and the schools in our larger urban centres 

have been provided with gymnasiums has made it possible to conduct a high level of physical activity 

throughout the school year. However, in our smaller centres and in our rural areas it has not been 

possible, in my opinion, with the facilities that we have, to conduct a satisfactory physical training 

program, a sustained program throughout the winter months. With our severe climate, outside physical 

activity pretty well ceases when the snow blows in the fall and doesn’t commence again until the month 

of May, which means that in a school year of ten months we have about three and a half to four months 

of physical activity and outdoor sports and exercise. I would like 



 

March 28, 1962 

 

 

5 

to point out to the Minister of Education that while I recognize the additional cost and the additional 

burden this will mean on the taxpayer’s dollar, nevertheless I feel that we should consider a widespread 

program of gymnasiums in our schools that are presently under construction and schools that will be 

constructed in the future. I think in that way we can bring about a good deal more emphasis on physical 

training and physical education in schools throughout the province, for certainly, if we are going to have 

physical fitness in Saskatchewan, certainly, it must begin in the schools, and if it is to begin in the 

schools, we not only need the facilities that I have mentioned, but I think there is a great need too for 

more young people to take training in physical education at our College of Education and in other 

faculties. 

 

With those few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to note that the government is going to bring their 

act into line with the federal act and I trust when the council is appointed that our province will get its 

fair share of the funds that have been made available from Ottawa and that the minister will do all in his 

power to increase the amount of physical instruction in the province. 

 

Mrs. G. Strum (Saskatoon City): — I would like to add a few words to this debate and I would like to 

treat two aspects of the need for a community program. Following up the last speaker, the member for 

Turtleford (Mr. Foley), I would like to say that I think there is a great need for a continuing program 

throughout the summer months. I live in Saskatoon, between two big schools and I find that there is a 

great deal of juvenile delinquency goes on in the summer holidays with children who are on the street 

and nowhere to go, with no kind of organized recreation, with no support, with a vacant lot school yard 

so they hang over the fence and fiddle around and keep all the neighbours awake and it is a very 

unwholesome situation. Here are these kids, they don’t have to get up to go to school in the morning; 

they have the whole evening; they have no supervision; they have no equipment; they have no 

playground because they school property is sacred during the summer holidays an they are without 

anywhere to go. 

 

I think that when we are investing such terrific amounts in education in plant and equipment and in 

teachers’ salaries, that we should go a little further and get the 



 

March 28, 1962 

 

 

6 

full and maximum use of this investment by making it a year-round program. I think that our young 

people without a doubt are our most valuable asset and I think we have ruined and blighted many young 

lives by failing to support them in their leisure time by providing wholesome activities and I think that 

we must take up this slack and give them wholesome normal outlets for their energies and give them 

high ideals to live up to and good leadership. I think that some of this money should be channelled into 

the amateur, young pee-wee and below and early teens to feed them into the older groups. I think that 

these young people must be given normal outlets or they will find outlets that are less wholesome. 

 

I am glad that the Minister of Education himself has a lot of small young valuable children coming up, I 

think that is an excellent prerequisite for a Minister of Education and I know that when he looks at his 

own children he can see the need for a normal wholesome outlet for energy. This is particularly true 

when there is no wood pile anymore and there are no ashes to take out and there are no chores to speak 

of and there is so much free time which must be filled with something more than a stupid western serial 

on the television set. I think they are the most brain-softening devices ever to hit our western culture. I 

refuse to have one in my home. I am probably the only one in this House that hasn’t got a television set, 

but when I think of all the debasing influences to hit young people this is perhaps the maximum. 

 

Recently two young children were discussing a grandmother who appeared and they said, “where is 

grandpa?” and somebody said, “oh, grandpa is dead” and the kids said, “well who shot him”. Well, 

that’s just about the sort of ideal that is being present on television. 

 

I think we must counteract these influences by providing very good wholesome channels for physical 

energy, under high ideals and good sportsmanship, to build character at all stages in the development of 

our teenage youth. 

 

I would commend to the minister that he seriously consider year round programs for school plants. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 



 

March 28, 1962 

 

 

7 

BILL NO. 27 — An Act to amend The Secondary Education Act 

 

Hon. O.A. Turnbull (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, this is Bill No. 27 and it deals with two 

amendments in the main. I don’t think either one of them is particularly controversial. The first one has 

to do with cheque-signing machines and this amendment rises from the city collegiate boards in 

particular, where with modern business methods a cheque-signing machine would reduce their work 

load and increase their efficiency. Now members will notice there are some limitations to the use of this 

cheque-signing machine and that is the machines would not be able to be used on debenture money but 

the intention is to allow it to be used for the operation in the daily administration of the school board. By 

limiting the boards that can use the machine to those which employ fifty teachers or more this puts the 

machine’s potential only in the hands of the collegiate boards, and school boards of the larger cities and I 

draw those limitations to member’s observation. 

 

The other main area of amendment here has to do with grants that are twelve and eighteen dollars which 

amount to a thirty dollar per year grant for students that were residing within a unit but in a different 

district. As a means of reviewing grants, or because I should say that we periodically review our grant 

structure we now feel that this grant does not serve the purpose that it once was intended to serve we 

thought that we should bring our grant structures more up to date and change this section so that these 

grants are brought back into their original scope. The effect of the amendment would be that grants of 

thirty dollars per year would be payable to the boards for those non-unit residents; students which was 

the original intention. The intention was that you have students from one district going into another 

district, qualify for grants so that the students could be assisted in taking education not available within 

their home district. Now as the units have developed, this no longer applies so we have eliminated that 

but it still applies in relation to units, and we maintain the principle. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

BILL NO. 28 — An Act to amend The School Grants Act, 1960 

 

Hon. O.A. Turnbull (Minister of Education): — Bill No. 28 has to do with amendments to the 

Schools Grants Act. Members will know of the amount of new 



 

March 28, 1962 

 

 

8 

money that is coming into the education budget to provide for the increases in grants that have already 

been referred to in other places and this is a device by which we adjust formula so that emphasis can be 

placed on the school system and incentives provided so that we can at the same time increase the 

academic status of the teachers that are being employed, and therefore the emphasis is on the number of 

high school teachers that are employed, and this is increased by the assigned teacher cost going up a 

hundred dollars and the assigned cost of the number of high school teachers with professional 

certificates, which increases this particular factor in the formula by one hundred and fifty dollars. The 

third main area is to increase the assigned teacher cost in the elementary area that have standard 

certificates and this is to increase it by fifty dollars. 

 

Now if we had had more money than the two million eight, we undoubtedly would have spread it in a 

different manner. Because we didn’t have any more than this amount of money we thought it would be 

wise to continue to place emphasis on the areas of education, that should be encouraged and this I think 

is in the area that raises the status of the number of teachers, encourages teachers to increase their 

professional status, encourages boards to hire better qualified teachers, and thusly increase the level of 

graduates in terms of their capabilities to meet the challenge of the future. 

 

With this exception, Mr. Speaker, I move the bill now be read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

BILL NO. 29 — An Act to amend The Student Aid Fund Act 

 

Hon. O.A. Turnbull (Minister of Education): — Members will recall that the Hon. Mr. Blakeney 

introduced the bill and this is the two million dollars that was referred to in his particular bill. This in 

effect will increase the student loan fund up to three million dollars from its present position of one 

million dollars and the other important factor here is that the capital sum, the three million can’t be 

reduced by more than two hundred thousand in any one year, so that if we were to dip into capital side 

— this is the scholarship side of the question — which is not repayable — to place more emphasis on 

scholarships we could not deplete the fund by more than two hundred thousand dollars a year and so this 

would last presumably about fifteen years at this rate of expenditure. 



 

March 28, 1962 

 

 

9 

In actual facts, my understanding is that a capital fund of one million dollars has not been depleted but 

we have by using the loans been able — and by adding to it as it was depleted — to maintain the fund. I 

suppose, Mr. Speaker, that we could be criticized for not having more money in this field and I do feel 

that there has to be a greater effort in the area of providing students assistance so that young people who 

wish to take further education are not limited by the fact that they haven’t got necessary funds. I am not 

sure however, that the best way to satisfy this particular need is through these two particular methods we 

have here of scholarships and loans. There may be other methods that can be worked out and I would 

look forward and I referred to this at another time in the House where we could develop a type of 

in-service training in co-operation with industry, particularly in the vocational field that might be 

handled with an emphasis on student loans but with some direct relationship with the industry and 

members would be interested here to notice that we now have some requests, some of them are from 

industries, as to how we can assist them in their upgrading and providing better qualified students for 

their particular needs and another area is the nursing area. Members will remember that the nurses are 

trained now by working in hospitals and they not only take their training but also do useful work in 

hospital and this I understand is a four year course. Hospitals are now suggesting that there may be a 

different way of approaching this. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I would like to draw to the ministers attention that on second readings the principle of 

the whole is not under debate, just the principle of the amendment. 

 

Hon. O.A. Turnbull: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Then I would say this, that having 

discussed the main area of the bill I would suggest to members that there are other areas that we should 

look at and we may be able to use these monies for useful purposes as well as straight scholarships and 

loans. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I would move second reading of the bill. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the minister a question before you put the 

motion. 



 

March 28, 1962 

 

 

10 

As I understand it the additional two million dollars would be added to the sum that is already voted for 

this Student Aid Fund. Are all the monies that are taken out of the Student Aid Fund eventually 

replaced? Are they loans or are they outright grants, or are they both? 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: — Loans are loans, and scholarships are grants. With a scholarship, one the student 

uses it and the money is gone. The loan is so set up so that the money must be repaid. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Could I ask one supplementary question? It is possible then in theory at least for the 

two million sum that is already in this fund to be depleted over a period of years. 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: — Yes it is possible. 

 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, there is just one point where I would like to make 

an observation. I understood that when the Student Aid Fund was set up there was a million dollars put 

aside and it was the earnings from this million dollars invested that was used for the Student Aid fund as 

such. The original capital set aside was not used. That was the plan as I understand under which the 

original Student Aid Fund Act established. What I would like to point out is that I think that possibly 

more of this school lands amount could have been transferred into this section here in the Student Aid 

Fund so as not to get yourself in a position where you would be depleting the capital at any time. The 

crying need today in education, is for increased bursaries and increased funds to aid those students. I 

think that you didn’t go far enough just transferring two million dollars, you should have transferred 

more. I think you should protect the basic capital invested in this fund. Invest it so the interest and 

earnings from this fund would greatly enlarge the scope of the Student Aid Fund and your bursaries 

without running the risk of depleting the capital. That is the only objection I have to the bill. I am sorry 

there wasn’t more of this fund set aside. Now is the time to do it. Once the fund is set up here and the 

rest goes into the consolidated fund it becomes past history. I think that we should have taken the 

opportunity here to put more into this fund at this time. 



 

March 28, 1962 

 

 

11 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I had intended to leave any further remarks that I 

had until the bill got into committee but in view of what the member from Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) 

has said, I think I should say something on this occasion. 

 

It seems to me that the ever-increasing cost of education and the ever-increasing number of students who 

have to receive outside help in order to get the maximum education for which they have the ability, it is 

an increasing problem and what are we doing today? We are not taking care of the problem of the future, 

but we are setting ourselves up into a position where perhaps over a period of years the efforts that we 

have made today, the money will be used up and the problem has increased and we are in a worse 

position than we are at the present moment, and I agree with the member for Maple Creek that I would 

like to see a sufficient sum of money in this account that all of those monies that were paid out in grants 

should come out of the earnings of this investment. Loans are an entirely different thing, Mr. Speaker, 

they come back in and replenish the total sum and I am wondering if we are wise in setting up this 

Student Loan Fund in this manner whereby it can be depleted over a period of a very few short years and 

find themselves in a worse position then than we are even now, and I would like to see it on the basis 

whereby all the money other than that which is loaned and which is repaid should come out of the 

earnings of this investment rather than out of capital. 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: — I don’t have much more to add, Mr. Speaker, excepting that I recognize the 

points of danger that members have raised and I am certainly in accord with them. In the past it was my 

understanding that scholarships had not been of sufficient volume and members will notice that they 

were set up to seventy-five thousand dollars out of a million. This is certainly an increase 

percentage-wise than what it was formerly, and there may be a danger of the possibility to deplete 

capital; it would depend on the ratio of amount of loans that were out which would also use up the fund 

and this would be one governing factor. In actual fact I am led to believe that the earnings of the fund 

have been such so that the scholarships have been taken care of by the methods suggested by members 

and the fund was not depleted. It may be wise to put in a safeguard here so that we are assured that this 

sort of thing can’t happen, and I would also like to agree that as Minister of 



 

March 28, 1962 

 

 

12 

Education I would liked to have seen a larger sum of money for the fund. 

 

Mrs. Cooper: — May I ask the minister a question before he sits down? How much will be in the 

Student Aid Fund once this addition is made? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — What will be the total amount once this transfer is made? 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: — There will be three million dollars. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

BILL NO. 30 — An Act to amend The School Act 

 

Hon. O.A. Turnbull (Minister of Education): — These amendments fall into three main areas, Mr. 

Speaker, on Bill No. 30. The main amendment here is in respect to adjusting the boundaries of school 

units and this bill is to be amended so that the Department of Education can take whatever action may be 

necessary once the County Act comes into effect. Now I could ask for some guidance here, Mr. Speaker. 

The County Act has not yet been before the House and this is not dependent on the County Act but it has 

this relationship to it with respect to boundaries. I feel that there is no problem in proceeding with it and 

unless members object, I would like to do so. The effective section here then is that the minister, where 

he considers it advisable, may adjust the boundaries of units and members will recall that we have the 

municipal boundaries commission now in the country working with the municipal council, school units 

and citizens at large, finding out where the boundaries or counties will be if and when counties are 

formed. Now for the purposes of local government these boundaries, after having been determined will 

only exist as an imaginary line until such time as a vote is taken and they become operative. 

 

For the purposes of school administration, Mr. Speaker, the trustees would like us to make whatever 

adjustments that may be necessary so that they can continue with their work of school planning and the 

erection of buildings and the main part of the amendment here has the full support of the trustees. 



 

March 28, 1962 

 

 

13 

Another part of it that has to do with this section in respect to the boundaries of school districts, and 

members will recall that districts were about four by five miles in size, about twenty sections in size and 

once the district got over thirty or thirty-six sections I think they became composite school districts. The 

situation existed prior that the school couldn’t be established until the municipal council determined 

where it should go and because this no longer applies, this particular section will be so amended after it 

has been consulted with the Department of Municipal Affairs and with the SARM and they have agreed 

that this particular section could be amended so that it applies in the modern context of our school 

situation. 

 

The other part of it has to do with the same question that was raised in the other bill on cheque-signing 

machines and this is the other main part of the bill as members will see as they read it and the same 

general provisions apply so that the two acts won’t come into conflict and debenture money cannot be 

signed by cheque-signing machines and those areas that hire fifty teachers or more are the only ones that 

can qualify and this we felt was justified because the request does come from the city collegiate boards 

and not from the smaller areas and they wouldn’t be necessarily interested in cheque-signing machines 

and so until such a request is made we thought we would make the two bills the same. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Mr. Speaker, before the bill is read I would like to ask the minister if this measure 

could in any way affect the four non-unit areas in the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: — The adjustment of boundaries? 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Yes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: — Yes, it could. this section does give the minister power to adjust boundaries and 

the only area that is specifically excluded is the separate school district. I think that the answer to that 

would be yes, it could. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — I think the question that I really wanted to get at was that under this particular clause, 

could the minister take action to place into effect a larger school unit, where the unit is not already in 

operation, without a vote being taken as at present. 



 

March 28, 1962 

 

 

14 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: — My understanding is that under this act that the minister might not, but 

members should know that we are bringing in an amendment to the Larger School Units Act which in 

effect gives the minister the same power and under that act my understanding we could do it. 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — Mr. Speaker, do I understand correctly that this amendment is brought in to alter 

school unit boundaries? 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: — No, I made mention of the other, Mr. Speaker, so that members can debate it 

when that particular act comes in. This has to do with school districts. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — May I ask one question, Mr. Speaker, before you put the question? In the minister’s 

explanation of the bill he mentioned that this had the full support of the schools trustees. Has it the 

support of the Rural Municipal Association? 

 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: — No, I don’t think I could be fair and honest by saying yes, I don’t recall this 

particular question being put to the SARM, but it has been discussed by the Local Government Council 

which has representation of the executive members of the SARM of the school trustees and the urbans, 

and the members will be familiar with this particular body, and it has the support of that particular body 

and I think the answer to your question, Mr. Speaker, will be no, I don’t think it has. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I just want . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Maybe I should propose the question, unless you have just a question, so we can get in 

order, Mr. Danielson. I haven’t yet put the question to the House. These were just supplementary 

questions, which were asked. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I want to ask him to clarify something I heard, and I am not absolutely sure of this 

thing but it was in the first part of his remarks. He said that the changes proposed here do not apply. 

What did you refer then Mr. Minister when you said that the changes that you were proposing here 

namely to hand the power to the minister to alter school district boundaries, what did you refer to when 

you said it did not apply? Did you refer the larger unit as now constituted? 



 

March 28, 1962 

 

 

15 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull: — I am not quite sure what the member means, Mr. Speaker, I was using the word 

“apply” meaning a description of a situation, I was not meaning a particular governing body applying in 

terms of requests and I was referring in particular to the alternations of rural school districts which reside 

wholly within an organized municipality and where the council of that municipality formerly had 

jurisdiction in the establishment of this district, and this is the way all school districts were once set up 

as I understand. Now due to the nature of our reorganization and the efforts of the boundaries 

commission there may be some districts where these boundaries may have to be adjusted and it gives the 

power to the minister to do so excepting separate school districts. 

 

Mr. Ross McCarthy (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to point out that this is just 

another instance where this government is gradually taking the initiative away from the local people, 

they are centralizing, true they are doing it in connection with, or, I presume, to supplement something 

that is coming in the house in the future. At the same time it does point up to the fact that the more they 

centralize these things the bigger they make them, the less the local people are going to have to say about 

their local government. I think it is a mistake. I have sat on a municipal council for a great number of 

years and we have had applications from these different school districts to take a piece out of this one 

and put a piece in that one and all that sort of thing. We didn’t accept them all, we did accept some of 

them, but you find out that there are probably two or three people today got a notion they want to change 

and probably next year they want to change back. 

 

Another thing if I remember correctly they came before us but had to go before the Minister of 

Education before it was sanctioned. I am just speaking from memory now and I think that is correct. The 

procedure was applied to municipal council, the council either rejected it or approved it and then it was 

sent to the minister for his final approval. It just shows you the trend, the way we are going, I have 

claimed that all the time, some people over there have denied it. Here is a prize example of it. They are 

taking that portion of the responsibility, the local people had, and I don’t know who knows better than 

the local people where the boundaries should be. They are taking that part away from us and giving it to 



 

March 28, 1962 

 

 

16 

the Minister of Education. I don’t care who the Minister of Education is, I don’t think he should have 

that responsibility; I don’t think it is democracy; I don’t think it is in the best interest of this province to 

do that, but this is just a small item and you will see it creeping in. It is creeping in a great many ways 

and I just wanted to point out the weakness of that sort of thing, because after all, and I want to repeat 

again, there is nobody knows better what should go on in a local school district than the people who live 

there. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say a word in this regard. I feel much as the member 

for Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) has stated that this of course is the thin edge of the wedge and it actually 

bears out statements that I have made myself in this province and this House since I have been here and 

throughout the country that this government will use any method, particularly through the back door in 

order to put into effect the type of municipal organization that they want and the type of centralized 

control that they desire to have and have always desired to have since they came into office in 1944. 

 

Now I would be very remiss in my duties as a representative of many of the people of my constituency if 

I did not on this act as well as the Larger School Unit Act oppose any effort on the part of this 

government to impose their decisions on the people that I represent, in any way shape or form. We 

happen to be one of the four areas that has never organized into a larger school unit, the last vote . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The minister made it clear that that principle can be discussed in another bill, and we 

must keep the discussion to the bill that is before us, not the principle of the whole School Unit Act. It is 

just of this act. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — That may be your view of it, but my view of it is that if we allow this to pass in this 

particular act, it is of course going to have a bearing and an influence on the question when it comes up 

in later acts. It is exactly the same principle and whether it is done with regard to the School Act as such 

and with regard to reorganization of general school boundaries such as this act here will have an 

influence on, if it is done in that regard, then I think we are in a position or I would be in 



 

March 28, 1962 

 

 

17 

a position to oppose it as far as the reorganization of my area into a larger school unit is concerned. Any 

time the government of this province is going to take from the local people any of their power or control 

over their own affairs, it is going to affect not only the people of the area I represent but all the people of 

this province, and whether this particular clause is in the act as we are now considering, or whether it is 

in the larger school unit act, it has exactly the same import, no matter what act it is going to appear in 

and I say that I would oppose any measures that would place the power in the hands of any minister of 

this government to decide on what school boundaries are going to be or what municipal boundaries are 

going to be. That is a question which should be decided by the people that are most closely connected 

with these matters, the people that have for years administered local affairs in this province and so I say, 

Mr. Speaker, as far as I am concerned I am going to oppose this particular amendment on second reading 

of the School Act to give power to the minister to make changes in school boundaries with the exception 

as he stated of the separate school districts. 

 

Mr. H. Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words on this. I fully agree 

with the member for Melville (Mr. Gardiner) in what he stated. Once again we are up against the 

problem, the creeping socialistic control of all our activities and centralization. We have been told, Mr. 

Speaker, the last few months and on the floor of this House, I listened to the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs addressing the R.M. convention a few days ago, and that the purpose of a new unit act is to add 

more power to the municipal council and give them more and more right to run the business of the local 

district. But everything that has been done in this House this session is to the contrary, in the opposite 

direction, and the power has been whittled down, whittled down, until someone, I don’t care whether it 

is this Minister of Education or who you get sitting opposite as a minister to be able to issue his orders to 

the people all over this province and they having nothing to say about it and I am going to oppose this 

thing from beginning to end and I am going to do all I can when I get out in the country to expose the 

shame of this government policy in regard to reorganization of municipalities — under the pretence of 

vesting authority in the local authorities where it belongs, or where it should be. 



 

March 28, 1962 

 

 

18 

Hon. Mr. Turnbull (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, the only trouble with the argument of 

the opposition is, that they are off the point. If the members would read the bill, they will see that this 

does not refer to the question that they raised, which was the former of government to be within the 

boundary. This does not refer to the form of the school organization, this refers to a boundary, and this is 

not at all in any way, nor can it be stated correctly that it has to do with anything of the form of 

organization. The school units, the school districts are already there. This does not propose to change the 

form of government within those areas; it proposes to move the boundaries. I was perfectly clear to 

members, I thought, that the method by which the boundaries are to be decided upon is to be by 

consultation and the final definition of the boundaries is in the hands of the minister. The argument that 

these gentlemen have been talking about, is the form of government that is to take place after the 

boundaries have been settled which is entirely not the case here. It has nothing to do with this 

whatsoever. The situation that has been described here by the Minister of Municipal Affairs which 

referred to the taking of a vote to decide the form of government within those boundaries still applies. I 

suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, with those remarks I move second reading. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

Bill No. 31 — An Act to amend The Teachers’ Salary Negotiation Act 

 

Hon. O.A. Turnbull (Minister of Education): — Bill No. 31, Mr. Speaker, has to do with the 

Teachers’ Salary Negotiation Act and the amendments that are proposed here are to expedite both the 

setting up of the board and the manner in which the report of the board is to be tabled. I might say that 

the amendments that are being considered here have been agreed to both by the parties that use the 

mechanism, the trustees and teachers, and they in no way interfere with the application and the 

negotiation as such. These amendments are mechanical in nature that have to do with the setting up of 

the board. Formerly, one of the delaying problems we had was that after the members of the board were 

appointed they had a period of time where they could declare whether they were willing or unwilling to 

act and it might be that time was lost because at the end of that period of time somebody could say that 

they 



 

March 28, 1962 

 

 

19 

were unwilling to act and we didn’t think that this would be in the spirit of the thing, that if a person was 

appointed to a board that they should be willing to act and both the trustees and the STF agreed to this 

and therefore people that are nominated for positions on the board are required to indicate whether they 

are willing to act or not as they are nominated and we would know and both parties in dispute would 

know that all the people on the board are willing to act. 

 

Another part of it deals with giving the board additional time in which to get its hearing under way and 

this extends this period by five days, and if necessary, the minister can extend that for another period of 

time but not more than twenty days if there is sufficient reason. 

 

The third main part rises out of an amendment which has to do with the time limit for submitting of 

report and this is now altered so that it would now read to be ten days after the date of the completion of 

the inquiry which doesn’t in any way limit the function of the board. The board has its time in which to 

make its full obligations to consider all matters and once the inquiry is complete, they are required to file 

the report within ten days. We think that this is a proper type of procedure because it eliminates any 

undue delay between the period of time in which the inquiry is completed. The parties in dispute are 

interested in finding out what the final report is and should be spared the inconvenience of delay. 

 

With those remarks, I would like to move second reading of the bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 


