



















































Hansard: February 23, 1962


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

2nd Day 

 

Friday, February 23, 1962 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

ON ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. Franklin E. Foley (Turtleford): — Before the orders of the day are proceeded with I would like to 

call your attention and the attention of all the members of the legislature to a very fine looking group of 

students in the Speaker‟s gallery. They are my Grade XI and XII students from Glaslyn high school 

who, accompanied by my wife, and their driver Mr. Stan Phillips of Fairholme, were privileged 

yesterday to witness the opening ceremonies of the legislature and to attend the Lieutenant-Governor‟s 

reception. They are here today to see the assembly in session, and represent the communities of 

Livelong, Fairholme, Marlin, Robinhood and Glaslyn. I am sure they have all enjoyed their visit thus far 

and I know they are going to enjoy our proceedings this afternoon. I am sure all hon. members will join 

me in welcoming them most warmly to our assembly this afternoon. 

 

TRIBUTES TO DECEASED FORMER MEMBERS 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure all of us would like to join with the member for Turtleford in 

the welcome which he has extended to our guests of the afternoon. All of us have observed the fact that 

increasing numbers of groups of students have come to the legislature to visit in recent years. We want 

to welcome this and say how pleased we are that students do come and to encourage this kind of visiting 

in the legislature. 

 

Since we last met, Mr. Speaker, we have received information of the sad news of the passing of a 

number of former members of the legislature. It has been our custom in this house for some time that on 

this day, after the opening of the session, we take some time and pay our respects to these men and to 

the contribution which they 



 

Friday, February 23, 1962 

 

2 

 

have made. Probably there are many of us who did not know them personally. Nevertheless all of us 

who are sitting in the legislature have to some degree shared their experiences and shared their hopes for 

Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

May I just make some remarks with regard to these former members and move the usual formal motion 

with regard to sending to members of the family our respects at this time. 

 

Mr. Charles Agar, former member for Hanley constituency is one of the group who has passed away 

since we last met. I did not know Mr. Agar personally. I knew him only as a result of reading and 

hearing about him and from time to time passing by his farm home which is of course between here and 

Saskatoon. 

 

Probably most of us knew and certainly all of us knew well about the Rt. James Garfield Gardiner, 

whose son occupies a place in this house at the present time. It is, I think, a recommendation of our way 

of doing things, Mr. Speaker, that, while Mr. Gardiner was one with whom many of us disagreed rather 

strongly and of whom we undoubtedly spoke very critically on occasion, we do have a profound respect 

for his ability and a great admiration for many of his contributions. I am sure while we spoke warmly 

about some of his statements and actions, he spoke equally warmly about some of ours and that he 

would not have had the situation any different. It is partly out of this essential conflict of ideas that we 

do make progress in a political democracy. 

 

While he died after an illness which was noted by thousands and perhaps by more people in 

Saskatchewan and across the country, we do not need any formal sort of monument to this man who 

lived so long in the province and who gave so much of his lifetime in the service of the people of this 

province. Such on-going, continuing programs as PFRA and PFAA stand as an extraordinarily eloquent 

comment on what he did while he was with us and while he was involved in political life in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

It was not my privilege to know Mr. Robert James Gordon, member of this legislature for the 

constituency of Lloydminster. Like many members of this legislature, he came up through a familiar 

pattern. He came from the province of Ontario. He homesteaded in the province. He undertook 

responsibility as chairman of the school board, as reeve of the municipality, and latterly in this 

legislature. 



 

Friday, February 23, 1962 

 

 

3 

More of us possibly knew Mr. Justice Donald McNiven, who died in Regina and who was a member of 

the legislature for this city for a number of years. I had the opportunity to see Mr. Donald McNiven on a 

great many different occasions in the city. He was always extremely warm and friendly. The last formal 

occasion on which I remember being with him was the annual meeting of the YMCA in this city, 

something over a year ago. On that occasion he was the recipient of a testimony because of his work in 

connection with that outstanding organization. 

 

The remaining member who has passed away in recent months, Mr. Speaker, is Mr. Jack Young, who 

was my predecessor as the member of the legislature from Biggar. He was first elected in 1938. He 

chose not to stand for re-election in 1944. Mr. Young was a veteran of both wars. He served this 

province not only as a member of the legislature, but also as a member of our public service for some 

time before his retirement. He was widely known and well known in the constituency of Biggar, and 

there are many of my constituents who would want to have me pass on their appreciation for his service 

to them. 

 

Consequently, Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by Mr. McDonald: 

 

Resolved, That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret, the passing during the last year of five 

former Members of this Assembly, and expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions each 

made to his community, his constituency, and to this Province: 

 

Charles Agar, former Member for Hanley constituency, who died in Saskatoon on January 4, 1962. He 

was born in Belfast, Ontario in 1882, and moved west in 1905, settling briefly in Vermilion, Alberta, 

and Brandon, Manitoba, before making his home at Floral where he farmed. Mr. Agar sat in this 

Assembly from 1921 until 1944 and served as Speaker of the Ninth Legislature from 1939 until 1944. 

He was also a director of the Saskatoon Exhibition Board for many years, being president of that board 

in 1934 and 1935. 

 

The Right Honourable James Garfield Gardiner, P.C., a Member of this Assembly from 1914 until 1935, 

twice Premier of this Province, and Minister of Agriculture in the Federal Government for twenty-two 

years, died in Balcarres on January 12, 1962. Mr. Gardiner was born in Farquhar, Ontario, in 1883. He 

moved west in 1901 



 

Friday, February 23, 1962 

 

4 

 

settling finally at Lemberg. He farmed, taught school, and continued his own education, receiving the 

degree of Bachelor of Arts from Manitoba College in 1911. In 1914 Mr. Gardiner began a political 

career which was to last some forty-four years during which time he served the people of Saskatchewan 

as a Member of this Assembly, as Minister of Highways and Minister in charge of the Bureau of Labour 

and Industries, as Leader of the Opposition, and as Premier. Mr. Gardiner was appointed Minister of 

Agriculture in the Federal Government in 1935, a post he held until 1957. He was a Member of the 

House of Commons from 1936 until 1958 and was appointed to the Imperial Privy Council in 1947. 

Throughout his long career his interest in western agriculture never faltered, and the Prairie Farm 

Assistance Act, and the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Act will remain among the many projects with 

which his name is connected. 

 

Robert James Gordon, a Member of this Legislature for the Constituency of Lloydminster from 1917 to 

1934 who died in Saskatoon on December 1, 1961. He was born and educated at Nairn, Ontario; he 

homesteaded in the Tramping Lake district and farmed at Maidstone; he was Reeve of Eldon 

Municipality, Chairman of the Maidstone School Board, and chairman of various other public bodies. 

 

Donald Alexander McNiven, Q.C., who died in Regina on July 31, 1961, was elected to this Assembly 

as Member for Regina City in 1922 and held that seat until 1929. He was born at Walkerton, Ontario, 

moved west with his family and received his education at Virden, Manitoba, at Manitoba College, and at 

the University of Manitoba. In 1912 he was admitted to the Saskatchewan bar. He sat in the House of 

Commons for Regina from 1935 until 1944 when he resigned to accept an appointment to the Court of 

King‟s Bench. Judge McNiven served his community as a distinguished member of his profession, being 

at one time president of the Regina Bar Association and a member of the Council of the Canadian Bar 

Association. He gave leadership to his fellow citizens through his interest and active participation in 

community and fraternal organizations, particularly the Regina Community Chest, the Young Men‟s 

Christian Association, and the Masonic Order. He also served on the Saskatchewan Regional War 

Board, the Saskatchewan Wartime Relations Board, and the National War Labour Board. 

 

John Allan Young, who represented the Constituency of Biggar in this Assembly from 1938 until 1944, 

and who died at Kelowna, British Columbia on November 7, 1961. Born in Glasgow, Scotland, he came 

to Canada in 1911 and farmed in the Blaine Lake district. After serving in the Canadian Expeditionary 

Force from 1916 to 1918 he returned 



 

Friday, February 23, 1962 

 

 

5 

to the province where he served the Rural Municipality of Hillsdale as Secretary-Treasurer. He enlisted 

in the Royal Canadian Air Force in World War II, and later held the position of Superintendent of 

Insurance from which position he retired in 1955. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere 

sympathies with members of the bereaved families. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Leader of the Opposition and my 

colleagues, I would like to associate myself with the remarks of the Premier on this occasion. Like the 

Premier, it was not my good fortune to have known all of those ex-members that we are honouring this 

afternoon. I never had the privilege of meeting either Mr. Gordon or Mr. Young, but I would like to 

class among my personal friends the other three ex-members that we are remembering this afternoon. 

 

I remember Mr. Agar best for the part that he played in the councils of the party to which I belong. He 

had finished his active political career before I had the opportunity of meeting him. Up until the very 

end of his life span he played an active part within the inner councils of the Liberal party and was 

concerned with the welfare of the people of our province and especially agriculture in Saskatchewan. 

 

The late Don McNiven, I think, knew more people by their first name and more people knew him in the 

city of Regina than is the good fortune of most of us. He was a friendly man and I am sure he left his 

mark on our community, not only for the part that he played in the political life of Saskatchewan and of 

Canada, but his contribution to the fraternal organizations, religious institutions and other community 

projects for the betterment of society. 

 

The late Mr. Gardiner, of course, was a great personal friend of mine. I had the opportunity during the 

few years that I led the Liberal party of associating very closely with Mr. Gardiner not only in a political 

sense but as a great friend. I know of no one who had the welfare of Saskatchewan and Canadians as a 

whole more at heart than did the last Jimmy Gardiner. He made a mark on the life and the growth of 

Saskatchewan and of Canada that few people can ever hope to equal. As the 



 

Friday, February 23, 1962 

 

6 

 

Premier has mentioned, not only has Mr. Gardiner had differences with people who happen to sit on that 

side of the house. I had many differences with Mr. Gardiner, but he was the type of man who you could 

discuss your differences with and arrive at a conclusion that I think in most instances was the right 

conclusion. He was a tenacious man and I don‟t think he ever could have accomplished the things that 

he did for Saskatchewan and for Canada if he had not been a very tenacious man. I think that when 

history is written the mark of Jimmy Gardiner on the province of Saskatchewan and on Canada as a 

whole will be a mark that all of us will remember and the generations yet unborn will benefit from. 

 

It seems that every year when we rise in our place in the house to pay our respects to the contributions 

that these people have made to society and to our province — I know it has been my experience that 

every year I seem to have known more of them. This indicates to me only one thing — that we are all 

getting a little older. I hope that the contribution that all of these ex-members have made to society, to 

our province will be an inspiration not only to those people that are in this house but that it will be an 

inspiration to younger people and the general public to take a more active part in political affairs and 

community affairs of our province and our country. I am sure that if they do that they will never regret it 

and they will be making a very fine contribution to this world in which we live. 

 

Hon. R.A. Walker (Attorney General): — I would like to add a few words to the record in respect to 

the late Charles Agar, former member of this Assembly from Saskatoon county and later Hanley 

constituency. There are now I believe, Mr. Speaker, in this house only two members who were 

contemporaries of the late Charles Agar. Most of us had little or no opportunity to get to know him 

because he retired from active politics in 1944 when he retired from the Legislature. As far as I know he 

wasn‟t active in politics after that time. Members therefore have had little opportunity to meet him. All 

members of the assembly, even though they didn‟t know him, are well acquainted with his name. When 

you pass from here to Saskatoon and most of us do at one time or another during the year, you pass the 

Agar farm near Floral about ten miles from Saskatoon on the present highway No. 11. 

 

The Agar farm has always been a landmark, not only to those who were acquainted with his name in the 



 

Friday, February 23, 1962 

 

 

7 

political sphere but to those who were interested in farming. There is a saying among farmers in my 

constituency and south and east of Saskatoon that every time it rains in the vicinity of Saskatoon each 

shower overlaps the other right on Charlie Agar‟s farm. The crop always looked a little better there than 

most places in the Saskatoon district. It would be a very dry year indeed if there wasn‟t a crop standing 

on that farm. 

 

Mr. Agar came to Saskatchewan in 1908 as an early settler, engaging for a short time in firing 

locomotives for one of the railroads, later establishing himself in March 1908 on the present site of his 

family home. This farm served as something of a demonstration farm. Farmers who didn‟t even know 

him obtained the benefit of sharing his knowledge and skill in farming, many by simply observing his 

farming practices while going by the highway and adopting his farm practices on their own farms. 

 

Although Charlie Agar, as he was affectionately known by all who knew him, had little in the way of 

formal education, he had an outstanding ability to handle farm machinery and to handle livestock. This 

ability not only won him local renown but came to be appreciated far afield. There is a story that in the 

early days Charlie Agar had bought a new threshing machine and this machine was something of a local 

wonder. Because of widespread community and local interest in this threshing machine he was not 

surprised one day when a stranger came by, saw the machine threshing in the field and stopped in and 

asked him how it worked. Well, Mr. Agar in his well-known methodical manner went over the machine 

back to front, pointing out to his visitor the various parts of it and commenting on their function. In 

general he indicated complete satisfaction with the threshing machine, except for the self-feeder. Then 

he lifted the inspection door on the top of the self-feeder and he commented to the stranger, „I wish I 

could talk to the man who designed this feeder. I could show him how to design one that would work.‟ 

Both men took off their coats and examined the feeder in every detail, Mr. Agar pointing out its defects 

in design and construction. Eight or ten months later, after his meeting with the stranger had been 

forgotten he received a large freight shipment from the machine company, which turned out to be a 

newly-designed feeder for the threshing machine he had bought the year before. Accompanying it was a 

letter from the general manager of the company, expressing his company‟s indebtedness to him for the 

help he had given in redesigning the feeder for this particular threshing machine. 



 

Friday, February 23, 1962 

 

8 

 

Charlie Agar was not a typical politician in the ordinary sense in which we interpret those words. In the 

first place he wasn‟t a “die-hard” party man. Although he was a Liberal and spent all his life as a 

Liberal, with either a big or small „L‟ he always believed that he put the welfare of his country and 

province ahead of the welfare of any political party. In 1921 he was so dissatisfied with his party that he 

ran in Saskatoon county and defeated the incumbent Liberal member. He ran on the Progressive ticket 

and defeated him by a wide margin. That year he was one of the twelve independent and Progressive 

members elected to the legislature and that group comprised the largest opposition group. In 1925 in the 

next election the independent and Progressive members from Biggar, Gravelbourg, Saskatoon city, 

South Qu‟Appelle, Thunder Creek and Wadena were defeated and the effectiveness of this group in the 

legislature came virtually to an end. In 1929 at the next succeeding election Agar stood in his home 

constituency of Saskatoon county again, this time as a Liberal, and was re-elected. After 1929 the 

constituencies of Saskatoon and Hanley were united under the name of Hanley and Mr. Agar was again 

re-elected in 1934 and 1938 from the Hanley constituency. His last five years in this assembly were, as 

you know, spent occupying the Chair now occupied by Your Honour. It was as Speaker of this assembly 

that Mr. Agar filled the proudest role in his life, that of host to Their Majesties King George VI and 

Queen Elizabeth during their visit to this assembly in 1939. 

 

Mr. Agar was known during his terms in the legislature as a conscientious worker for the interests of his 

constituents. He always took a keen interest in all their problems, particularly their road problems and he 

made every effort to serve their legitimate desires. He was an early advocate of the design of highways 

which proposes following railway tracks rather than following of boundary or section lines. He 

advocated this primarily for the reason that it would shorten highway mileage and the relocation of No. 

11 highway between Floral and Saskatoon, along its present route was in with this policy. It was 

probably one of the first examples in the province where highways were relocated to follow railroad 

tracks. Now of course this pattern is becoming very commonplace. 

 

Mr. Agar, although busy in a political career lasting from 1921 to 1944 did not allow his political 

activities to interfere with his activities on a local and community level. He was one of the prime movers 

in the establishment of the co-operative elevator which is now the Wheat Pool elevator at Floral. 



 

Friday, February 23, 1962 

 

 

9 

Mr. Speaker, in adding to the condolences of this house on the death of Charles Agar, as a successor to 

him as MLA for Hanley, I would like to say that he was a generous-hearted great pioneer of 

Saskatchewan, respected by men and women of all parties and one who laid some of the firmest of this 

province‟s foundation. 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I should say something of the deceased 

members of this legislature whom we are honouring on this occasion, the one of whom of course being 

the Rt. Hon. Mr. Gardiner. I have had associations with Mr. Gardiner as everyone knows since 

becoming Minister of Agriculture in this province. I have learned to know his sterling qualities for 

fighting a good straightforward fight. Although we often disagreed on matters of agricultural policy, I 

can say that there never was any personal animosity between us. We worked together on the most 

friendly relationship. My great admiration for Mr. Gardiner was the fact that he was not only tenacious 

but he had the courage to back up his tenaciousness. 

 

I know only last summer, for example Mr. Speaker, when it was reported that he was in ill health, he 

drove his own car to Waskesieu to attend a conference of provincial agriculturists and he took great 

pride in doing so. He achieved a great reputation for determination and courage to the point where Mr. 

Gardiner was almost considered to be indestructible. There is no one who had a longer experience in 

public life or perhaps had a more stormy career, all of which takes its toll on a person‟s physical system, 

but through all of this with his tenacity and courage he came through. 

 

His record of service to agriculture is well known to everyone. I want to take particular occasion at this 

time to pay my tribute to Mr. Gardiner‟s contribution to the agriculture industry. 

 

The other gentleman whom I knew very well and perhaps whom other members of the legislature do not 

know as well, was R.J. Gordon, former member of this legislature for what was then the Lloydminster 

constituency. I knew Bob very well, as he was affectionately known as Bob in my district for many 

reasons. One was his very neighborliness, his generosity and his sense of good humour and fairness, and 

in addition a very good community leader. He served very capably as reeve of his municipality, as well 

as on the school board. He served with distinction in the legislature here. I believe he held the office of 

whip for quite a considerable 



 

Friday, February 23, 1962 

 

10 

 

length of time and I often wondered how Bob Gordon could ever use that whip with any degree of intent 

because he was so generous and kindly in his disposition, I just couldn‟t imagine Bob Gordon holding a 

whip over anyone. But I think it was by his example that he was able to keep the hon. members in order 

during that period. 

 

I often inquired of Bob‟s health when he retired to the coast, and I was always informed that he was in 

the very best of health. I had one occasion of seeing him not too long ago, when he was in the 

neighbourhood again, and it is good to know that he enjoyed very good health, as far as I know, right up 

to the end. I was disappointed in learning of his passing, and I want to take this occasion of adding my 

own personal sympathies to those who mourn his passing. 

 

The other member of the legislature was J.A. Young. Mr. Young became our municipal secretary shortly 

after returning from World War I. He was a very young man and inexperienced at the time but he soon 

gained a reputation for his knowledge in municipal administration, but more particularly Mr. Speaker for 

his generosity and helpfulness by assisting his ratepayers with many personal problems, and business 

matters and his extreme attentiveness to their needs as a municipal secretary generally. 

 

Mr. Young is often spoken of in the R.M. of Hillsdale as having been one of the finest municipal 

secretaries and one of the most courteous and as I said one of the most generous with his time in 

providing services to his ratepayers, his friends and his neighbours. 

 

Mr. Young subsequently became municipal secretary at Perdue. I have in all of these years of personal 

acquaintances with him, considered him to be a particular personal friend of mine and his passing is of 

particular regret to me. 

 

I wish to extend to those whom he has left behind not many in number, a brother and one or two other 

relatives, but many friends on this side of the ocean. He came from Scotland from a family of very good 

repute, from the city of Glasgow. Mr. Young and I used to often talk about his home land and he would 

tell me of his experiences in Scotland — the tremendous transformation that took place in his life when 

he readjusted himself to life on the prairies. He fitted in most adequately and he has rendered a most 

valuable service at the local level to municipal government as well as in the legislature of this province. 



 

Friday, February 23, 1962 

 

 

11 

For those three men I am pleased and privileged to add my word of condolence and inform the members 

of the qualities of two of the former members we honour today because I believe all of you are not too 

well acquainted with these two gentlemen. 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add a short word of 

tribute to the memory of Mr. Justice McNiven. Judge McNiven was a distinguished representative of the 

city of Regina in this legislature and later in the House of Commons. He served in this legislature as the 

representative of the city of Regina from 1922 to 1929 and again represented this city in the House of 

Commons from 1935 until 1944. 

 

He had a distinguished record at the bar of this province. He was admitted to the bar in 1912 and had a 

distinguished career in practice, culminating in his appointment as a Judge of the Court of King‟s Bench 

in 1944. Subsequently he was elevated to the Court of Appeal in, I believe, 1949. His career as a Judge 

was I think characterized by ability, — he was an able and learned man, considerate of counsel, a kindly 

and friendly man generally. 

 

His, Mr. Speaker, has been a life of service, as a lawyer, as a legislator, as a Judge, and as a 

humanitarian. The motion which you are to put, Mr. Speaker, refers to his distinguished service to the 

citizens of this city and this province in his association with such worthy undertakings as the 

Community Chest and the YMCA. I think that citizens of Regina and citizens of this province generally 

will join with me in expressing their sense of loss at the death of Judge Don McNiven and in expressing 

their condolences to those who have been left bereaved. 

 

Mr. G. Herman Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I shall not add very much to what has 

already been said on this occasion — there is not too much left that has not already been said. I did not 

have the privilege of knowing all the men we are honouring this afternoon, but I knew Mr. Agar very 

well. I sat in this house with him for ten years and he occupied the position of Speaker during six 

sessions of that ten years of service in this house. Altogether Mr. Agar put in 23 years of his life in 

service in this legislative assembly. He was very well known all over the northern and the western part 

of the province, as one of the best agriculturists in 



 

Friday, February 23, 1962 

 

12 

 

the province. I think if I remember correctly one of the first combines that was ever shipped into that 

part of the country was bought by Charlie Agar. 

 

He was very strong in his convictions. If he thought he was right well Charlie Agar would fight for that 

principle and belief that he held. I am not going to say anything more, but I think he devoted a period of 

service to his fellow man and the province of Saskatchewan that gave an example for others who are 

travelling along that line. 

 

I think we all knew Mr. Gardiner. He was a very well-known person. I have known him since the very 

early days, long before he became the Premier of this province. Mr. Gardiner put in 48 years in the 

service of Canada and the province of Saskatchewan. He became what we might call a national figure. 

He was honoured and carried the title of the Right Honourable. I noticed a short time after his death in 

the weekly press of this province an article that was printed in the Montreal Star and it said this: 

 

“The farmers of the country owe more to Mr. Gardiner than to any other politician since 

Confederation.” 

 

That is a great tribute from a paper like the Montreal Star, and one that is not printed in Saskatchewan or 

Western Canada but is printed in the East, in the province of Quebec. 

 

I often discussed certain matters with Mr. Gardiner. I remember one time in 1931 in the month of June. I 

came here one evening and the next morning I met him — I think the office at that time was in the 

Crown Building, and after a discussion of about an hour or so it was time for lunch. We went to the 

LaSalle Hotel. It was about 3 o‟clock in the afternoon before we left and it might be interesting to know 

— don‟t forget this was 1931 in the midst of the drought area — (we hope we will never see it again). 

At lunch that afternoon we discussed and he discussed exactly what the PFAA is today. Don‟t forget that 

he was in opposition at that time. Dr. Anderson was controlling this legislature — and he had not at that 

time been elevated to the federal cabinet. Practically every benefit as it is today was discussed between 

us then. The contributions by the farmers — there have been some changes of course — he made some 

himself — there have been some made in the operation of that plan since the present government came 

into power. 



 

Friday, February 23, 1962 

 

 

13 

There was one thing we discussed there that might be of interest and that was with regard to the 

contribution of farmers to this plan and we both decided that it might be necessary to extend that 

contribution not only to the grain farmer but to the livestock producer. This was discussed and it was 

decided that these people had to be assisted and helped just like the grain farmers of western Canada. 

However that was never done, but this plan was put into operation by Mr. Gardiner and it has been in 

operation since 1939. 

 

I think one thing Mr. Gardiner should be remembered for more than anything else is the Saskatchewan 

River Dam. True, he was not privileged to occupy a position in the federal cabinet during the actual 

construction of that dam. But we shouldn‟t forget this, that that dam was not built because there was a 

change in government in 1957-58 — because one of the first things Mr. Gardiner did when he went to 

Ottawa was to lay the plans the groundwork for that dam. Millions of dollars was voted by the federal 

government on the insistence and the pressure of Mr. Gardiner to survey and test the dam site and to 

experiment with certain lands on the production of crops to see they could actually do by this irrigation. 

All this work was done under Mr. Gardiner‟s insistence and pressure to the federal government. He was 

much on his own when it came to the fight for this great undertaking in the beginning. Today of course 

they all think it is all right. Even in the east they now agree that the Saskatchewan River Dam is a 

benefit not only to western Canada but to Canada as a whole. I think the biggest part of the credit for the 

Saskatchewan River Dam belongs to Mr. James G. Gardiner. 

 

I knew Mr. Young, but not very well. He was on the opposition side when he was in this house. I 

remember him well from committee, and I remember him also from the municipal conventions when I 

happened to serve on the committee once or twice and he was on the same committee. I had a great deal 

of respect for Mr. Young. 

 

I have known Mr. McNiven since he was a member in this house, where he sat for a number of years 

before going to Ottawa. His recent history is well known to everyone. He served as a Judge of the 

King‟s Bench. He was a very, very nice gentleman to meet. He was very friendly and never passed you 

by without at least saying hello. I think he was extremely well liked in the city of Regina and we all 

regret that he could not be spared to be with us for sometime yet. 



 

Friday, February 23, 1962 

 

14 

 

I don‟t know any of these other men Mr. Speaker and with these few words I express my sorrow to the 

bereaved. 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to add a few words to 

those of my colleague in connection with the late Mr. Justice McNiven. He was one of the most 

dedicated and honourable men ever to reside in the city of Regina. 

 

The first time I ever met him was during an election campaign back in the thirties. As was the custom 

then and still is — the candidate with two or three of his friends would go through the various office 

buildings and meet as many people as they can. On this particular occasion Mr. McNiven with some of 

his colleagues came to the office in which I was employed and had a few pleasantries with two or three 

of the officials who happened to be in at that time. I was sitting at my desk and as the group filed out, 

Mr. McNiven happened to be last. He walked over to me and introduced himself. 

 

Some reference has been made to the fact that he was chairman of the community chest, which is quite 

correct, and in the year 1937, which as we all remember was one of the worst years of the depression, 

the community chest under his leadership collected a total of $40 thousand. In 1944 he was chairman of 

the Saskatchewan Regional War Board and the Saskatchewan Wartime Relations Board. In 1949 he was 

chairman of the National War Labour Board in Ottawa. I remember him quite well when he was active 

in those various duties. 

 

Most of us here will remember the two trainloads of farmers who went to Ottawa twenty years ago this 

month. At that time Mr. McNiven was Member of Parliament for the city of Regina. Most of us took 

advantage of the next afternoon, which was a Sunday, to go through the federal Houses of Parliament 

and I noticed Mr. McNiven taking around an elderly woman who was one of the delegates, from I 

believe the Canora district and showing her the various points of interest. I thought it was most gracious 

of him, the lady lived far from his own constituency and there is a saying which goes something like this 

and I quote: 

 

“The mark of a real gentleman is a man who willingly does something for others who can be of no use 

to him.” 

 

The late Mr. Justice McNiven was such a person. His many friends and acquaintances in the city of 

Regina and in the province of Saskatchewan regret his passing. 



 

Friday, February 23, 1962 

 

 

15 

Hon. A.M. Nicholson (Minister of Social Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, having been a member of the 

House of Commons while Mr. Gardiner and Mr. Justice McNiven were members, I feel I should not 

allow this opportunity to pass without paying a brief tribute to them and also to the late Charlie Agar. 

 

Mr. Gardiner had the distinction of being elected to represent the people of this province again and 

again. I don‟t believe anyone in the history of the province has been elected to provincial and federal 

office on as many occasions. During the period when I was in the House of Commons, periodically there 

were friends who came to Ottawa from my constituency who supported Mr. Gardiner‟s party and when I 

arranged to take them in to meet Mr. Gardiner they were always surprised that he was so ready to make 

an appointment with an opposition member. I think this is one of the secrets of a healthy democracy 

when we are able to disagree on political matters and yet retain a friendly relationship with one another. 

 

No mention has been made of the work Mr. Gardiner did early in World War II as Minister of War 

Services. This was a difficult role and was assigned to him by his Prime Minister, and Mr. Gardiner 

discharged these duties with a credit to himself and to his country. I would like to extend my sympathy 

to the family in the loss of this outstanding Canadian. 

 

Mr. Justice McNiven reminded me very early after I went to Ottawa that he and I came from the same 

county, the county of Bruce. I want to endorse what has been said previously that there are very few 

who have the good fortune to know as many people on a first name basis as the late Mr. Justice 

McNiven did and he made an outstanding contribution during his lifetime. 

 

I represented the government at the funeral of the late Charlie Agar. He was one of our home town boys 

made good. We were born about five miles apart in Ontario. Our local paper the Lucknow Sentinel 

through the years told something of Charlie‟s achievements. Charlie‟s brother-in-law, Hon. Jack Sturdy 

was my predecessor in the cabinet from Saskatoon, and I was asked by the cabinet to represent the 

government at the funeral of Mr. Agar. I would like to pay my tributes to these three and extend my 

sympathy to the families of these very distinguished citizens. 



 

Friday, February 23, 1962 

 

16 

 

Mrs. J.E. Cooper (Regina City): — Mr. Speaker, could I add just one word about the late Mr. Justice 

McNiven. He was a member of my church and I had the very great pleasure of working with him on 

many occasions on various community activities as a member of the Regina Community Chest and later 

I served with him on the executive of the Regina United Appeal. Also he was on the men‟s advisory 

committee to the Y.W.C.A., when I was chairman of the board and I had many occasions to call on him 

for help and advice regarding matters connected with the building, and I always found he was very 

generous with his time and very wise with his advice. 

 

One more activity in which I worked with the late Mr. Justice McNiven was in connection with the Ina 

Grafton Gage Home in Moose Jaw, a home for elderly ladies. He did a tremendous amount of work in 

assisting in getting that home established. He was chairman of our board of directors and he was very 

generous. He furnished a living room for the elderly ladies in memory of his wife who had predeceased 

him. In every area, and there were many in which I worked with him, we certainly did appreciate his 

advice and his generosity. I add my tribute. 

 

Mr. Douglas T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t want to take up too much 

of the time of the hon. members this afternoon, but I do want to express, along with those who have 

spoken previously, our sentiments and thoughts for the very meritorious service given to the people of 

Saskatchewan by the gentlemen whose names have been brought before us this afternoon. 

 

It was not my pleasure to know all of these gentlemen, but I did know two of them personally. I would 

be pleased to be associated with remarks of members on both sides of the house on behalf of Mr. Agar 

and more especially this afternoon I want to register the great satisfaction and privilege that has been 

mine along with that of the people of the constituency I represent and I am sure the rest of the people of 

Saskatchewan and Canada in once again paying our tributes to the memory of the late Mr. Gardiner. Mr. 

Gardiner had left a great impression on myself very early in life and because of that when I look back it 

hardly seems possible to realize now that having known the man personally at that time, a day would 

come when I would have the 



 

Friday, February 23, 1962 

 

 

17 

pleasure and opportunity to sit with one of his sons in this legislature. 

 

I believe the story of the life of the late Mr. Gardiner could have been titled „The Life History of James 

Garfield Gardiner versus the Great Western Drought‟ because all through his political career all his 

energies and all his activities were directed towards making Saskatchewan and the great plains area of 

western Canada a better place for the people of that area to live in. All his major pieces of legislation 

were directed towards building up the economic status and the well-being of the people of the western 

plains. 

 

It is indeed a tribute to the memory of Mr. Gardiner when we stop and realize that during the years of his 

greatest battles, in most instances he was fighting against very great odds. I am sure that we all realize 

that during the years of his greatest success he represented the interests of agriculture on behalf of all the 

people of Canada. Dealing as he was during those years with ten provinces, there were times when at 

least four of those ten provinces, and sometimes more, had governments in their provinces of a different 

political philosophy to his own. I think the biggest battle he ever had was to go down and convince the 

people who live in the eastern part of Canada, and who far outnumber us, of the types of program, the 

types of legislation and the type of economic well-being the people on the prairies desired. 

 

I am sure that we on this side of the house and many members on the other side of the house will agree 

with me that it was indeed a credit to this man that he could stand up and keep fighting until he got what 

he thought was best for the people of Saskatchewan. As I said his greatest battle was against drought. 

 

Each era seems to develop its outstanding figures. I doubt if in the years ahead we will ever be able to 

match a man of the calibre of the Rt. Hon. Mr. Gardiner. For 44 years he was an active figure in public 

life. As far as I am concerned I think that the greatest memorial to his many years of service will be 

found in two of the most important pieces of legislation ever placed on the statute books as far as 

western farmers are concerned, in as much as they have developed the great mixed agricultural economy 

in the west. I refer of course to the P.F.A.A. and to the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Acts. My colleague 

has mentioned something in respect to the P.F.A.A. but I think the greatest tribute that could 



 

Friday, February 23, 1962 

 

18 

 

be paid to the memory of the late Mr. Gardiner insofar as the P.F.A.A. is concerned, was that during the 

time since the inception of this act, having left the federal House of Commons, was the fact that in all 

those years after having had the experiences of the economic conditions of the 1930‟s, during the years 

after this act had its inception there was hardly a case of social aid or relief required by the farmers in 

western Canada. If there was one or two, certainly the figures would be very, very few. I think that was 

probably the greatest measure of success of any piece of legislation ever brought into being. That act has 

been amended over the years until today it has become a major piece of legislation affecting all the 

farmers of the three western provinces, and I am sure that in many cases they would hate to see this 

piece of legislation destroyed. 

 

Of course the other piece of legislation that was to have far reaching effects on the farming industry of 

western Canada was the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Act. This of course once again was an act designed 

to battle the great drought. Because of the developing of this act over the years and because of the 

benefits accruing from this act over the years, we find that in the three western provinces today, we not 

only have a great grain growing economy but we have one of the greatest livestock industries built up in 

western Canada. Because this man represented an era and was so successful I would suggest this 

afternoon that we of a younger generation have equally as great a challenge. I hope that those of us who 

have the responsibility, both on this side of the house and on the other side of the house will see that 

these two pieces of legislation alone are carried, and we can by getting together try and stabilize and see 

that every progress is made in the future toward building and adding to types such as I have mentioned. 

 

I think the greatest satisfaction I got out of knowing Mr. Gardiner was the fact that in spite of the 

tremendous personal battles and party battles that he had throughout his political career, I think the 

greatest satisfaction I ever had was when we used to sit down and discuss different people in public life, 

different prominent figures in public life, different political parties, I have never yet known or can recall 

an occasion when the late Mr. Gardiner ever had one disparaging word to say against his political 

opponents. Many times we would discuss certain personalities, different political parties and every 

occasion, only the good points were brought out. I think that this probably more than anything else has 

led to the great success he enjoyed in public life. 



 

Friday, February 23, 1962 

 

 

19 

So this afternoon I would like once again to associate myself with the remarks made by other members 

in this legislature and to pass on my respects to what I felt was one of the greatest Canadians of his era. 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, I rise this afternoon not only to add some expression to 

the words which have been voiced in regard to some of these members who have passed away, but as 

well to extend what is probably not often given to a member of the legislature to extend to hon. members 

that are sitting here the appreciation of myself, Mrs. Gardiner and the members of our family for the 

many kindnesses that have been extended to us on the occasion of the passing of my father not very long 

ago. 

 

I think in a way that history is being made today because of the fact that I think that never before have a 

group of men been paid tribute to in this house that probably had worked together throughout the history 

of the province of Saskatchewan to create advantages to the people of this province. I say that for those 

who sat on either side of the house on all occasions that we are speaking about here today. 

 

I didn‟t have occasion to know Mr. Gordon and Mr. Young as well as the other three, either as a boy or 

later on since I have entered public life, but I have had the opportunity of sitting in the legislative 

galleries and seeing both Mr. Young and Mr. Gordon when they were members taking part in the 

activities of this house. However the other three, when you look back in the political history of the 

province, I don‟t believe, you couldn‟t find any three gentlemen, that have interwoven in their lives and 

experiences more of the political history that has taken place in this province during the past number of 

years, since its organization in 1905. 

 

I would like to relate here that the late Mr. Justice McNiven and my father were students together at 

university and one of the things I can remember as a young boy, particularly when we were living in 

Ottawa, the night when Mr. Justice McNiven, the Rev. McIvor who was federal member for the 

constituency of Fort William, Dr. J.B. Ritchie, who many in this house will have known, particularly 

those from the city of Regina, the late Bob Milliken, and Joe Thorson who were all fellow graduates of 

the University of Manitoba used to get together for a social evening in our home. I can assure you if you 

ever wanted to have a good cheering section at a football game 



 

Friday, February 23, 1962 

 

20 

 

or a baseball game you could have hired the group and they would have performed a great service to any 

athletic association, because during the evening they always got together and gave out the old cheers 

from the University of Manitoba. Any one here who knows Dan McIvor or knew Mr. Milliken or Dr. 

Ritchie or any of the others could well realize the noise that would emanate throughout any private 

residence when an occasion such as this would take place. 

 

The late Mr. Justice McNiven and dad, from the time that they left university were very closely 

associated not only in the public life of this province but as friends in the city here when they 

represented together constituencies in the federal House of Commons and since that time in a private 

way because of the fact that Mr. Justice McNiven, of course, after being appointed to the bench could no 

longer take an active part in political affairs. I had the opportunity of knowing Mr. McNiven very well 

and I considered him, in spite of the difference of age, a very close friend. I am sure I can speak here, 

particularly with the members for Regina, in saying that Mr. McNiven to me was a very good friend, he 

was always generous, he was always kind and he always had happiness in his eyes and I think happiness 

in his heart. 

 

The last occasion on which I was with Mr. McNiven at a public function was at the United Church 

conference meeting that was held last spring when Mr. Justice McNiven spoke about the operations of 

the home spoken of here today by Mrs. Cooper, and on that occasion he gave forth in just the same style 

as he would if he were working for the political party in which he believes, or if he were working for 

any of the great causes he believed in during his lifetime. He gave out that day with the same enthusiasm 

and the same spirit. That was the last occasion on which I had the opportunity of hearing Mr. Justice 

McNiven give his all for those people that he knew best. 

 

Mr. Agar, although not being as closely associated with the family, I did know much of his background, 

and I appreciated very much the fact that the Attorney General here today (probably the others were not 

aware of the fact) stated Mr. Agar had not always been a straight party man as probably most of the 

others were that we are remarking about this afternoon Mr. Agar walked across the floor of this 

legislature just shortly after my father became Premier of the province of Saskatchewan and leader of 

the Liberal party in this province. 



 

Friday, February 23, 1962 

 

 

21 

There were two members that crossed the floor of the house to sit with the Liberal government of the 

day on that occasion. Mr. Agar later received the Liberal nomination. The other person in question was 

not nominated by the Liberals in his constituency and did not return here to sit in the house following 

that particular incident. 

 

There are other things that took place during the history of this province in the years that Mr. Agar was 

here that will probably go down in historical events and one of them, I think as a Liberal here this 

afternoon I can truthfully say, probably had more to do with the defeat of the Liberal party in this 

province in the election of 1944 than anything else that took place during the years they were in office. 

Of course I refer to the history-making occasion at which Mr. Agar officiated as Speaker, when the 

length of the legislature of this province was extended to a period of six years. So Mr. Agar, along with 

the other gentlemen, took part in much of history creating work in this province. 

 

I would like here this afternoon to join with other members in expressing sympathy to the families of 

those four gentlemen that passed away during the past year. I would also like to extend as I said before 

the appreciation of our family for the kindness and consideration, not only to the members of this house 

in the past few moments, but of the government itself and friends throughout the length and breadth of 

this province, no matter what political party they might belong to and no matter what political faith they 

might have supported. 

 

I would just like to take a moment to refer not to events that have been mentioned here by other 

speakers, but to events that might bring something more in a family remembrance of some of the 

history-making things that took place during the career of my father when he was in this legislature, 

when he was Premier of the province. 

 

Much has been said here this afternoon about his activities as federal Minister of Agriculture, but I can 

say that the years that he really enjoyed in his public service were spent in the place that we are meeting 

here this afternoon, in the legislature of this province. I can remember on many occasions his telling 

stories of things that took place here, probably things that have been forgotten and will be forgotten by 

history, things that would never be written into history books, but would 



 

Friday, February 23, 1962 

 

22 

 

provide interest to all the people of this province, not only things relating to self personally, but things 

that have an important meaning to others who sat in this house and to the people of the province 

generally. 

 

I was quite pleased to hear the reference of one of the speakers, I think it was the Premier, to the affect 

that he had been in charge of what we would term today the Department of Labour. Probably no one in 

the province of Saskatchewan today remembers the fact that he was the Minister of Labour or what we 

would term it at that time, when he first came into the government of the province of Saskatchewan. 

There are many other portfolios that he held during the time that he was in this legislature that we have 

probably forgotten about as well. I think of labour in particular because quite often we hear of the 

differences that exist between the working man as a labourer and the farmer and I think for this reason 

when people realize that many years ago they belonged closely together, the working people whether 

they were on the farm or in the factory — that one man was assigned to look after the problems of the 

working people in this province in spite of the fact that he might have been felt to be more of a farm 

representative in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would say that probably one of the history making occasions in which he took part, and something that 

many of us have forgotten today in this house, was in 1935 when the riots took place in the city of 

Regina at which time he was the Premier of the province. I can remember the occasion quite well though 

only a small boy. I can remember the morning after sitting out under the tree about 5 o‟clock in the 

morning to see what was going to take place when the head of the R.C.M.P. came up to our home in 

order to pick up my father and the Hon. T.C. Davis who was then Attorney General to go out and meet 

with the workers who had come from all parts of western Canada and had finally been stopped here in 

the city of Regina and where very unfortunate things had taken place due to circumstances over which at 

that time very few had control. That is one of the periods of history that probably today many in the 

province have forgotten and there are probably many cases of political interest. 

 

There is just one other point that I would like to make here today. I know that among the tributes here 

this afternoon, there are many of those who have worked with him and as the member for Moosomin 

(Mr. McDonald) mentioned in his remarks, that he had had many arguments with him. 



 

Friday, February 23, 1962 

 

 

23 

I can assure Mr. McDonald that it was not only those on the other side of politics or even those on the 

same side of politics that had arguments with dad down through the years — that I have had many 

myself on many occasions, arguments over many things as usually develop in any well-run family. I can 

probably remember having more heated debates and discussions than possibly anyone even in the 

opposition and they might not believe this. At the same time I think I can say that I learned more 

through arguing with him than I did through any other process, and of course I think that is also true 

whether it is in our formal education or whether it is in our education in life — through the arguments 

and difficulties we probably have with one another, whether it is family, whether it is political, whether 

it is in the social life of our community that many of our troubles are finally solved, that many of our 

difficulties are resolved. So I think here this afternoon the greatest tribute that could be paid to him has 

been paid to him by the fact that many have referred to the circumstances under which they have had 

differences of opinion with my father. I know that he would want that expression of thought left here 

today. 

 

I do want in closing to express the appreciation to many of you who were able to attend and pay your 

personal respects on the occasion of the funeral service which was held in our home town at Lemberg. I 

can remember remarking to someone that afternoon, although most would regard it as one of the worst 

days of the winter that we had experienced, that it was probably a day which he would have appreciated, 

having come through the pioneering era in this province and perhaps as someone has indicated, perhaps 

being a believer in the old type of Liberal in the province of Saskatchewan, that he has been referred to 

on many occasions, he must have had a glint of a smile in his eye as he watched many of his friends 

come to the funeral on that occasion, on a day which was typical of the western winters here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. It was typical of many of the days on which he campaigned politically, many 

of the days that he attended meetings on behalf of agriculture and on behalf of others and on behalf of 

himself. I am quite sure he would have appreciated a great deal the tribute that was paid to him in that 

way on the day that he was finally laid to rest. I just want to extend on behalf of the members of my 

family and myself our sincere appreciation for the kindness shown by members of the legislature. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by Mr. McDonald: 

 

“That the Resolution just passed, together with transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of deceased 

former members, be 



 

Friday, February 23, 1962 

 

24 

 

communicated to the bereaved families, on behalf of this Assembly, by Mr. Speaker.” 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

APPOINTMENT OF CLERK ASSISTANT 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Before we leave the orders of the day I beg to inform the assembly that Roy 

Borrowman, Esq. has been appointed Clerk Assistant of the Legislative Assembly during the present 

session. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4 o‟clock p.m. 


