




















































Hansard: March 01, 1962


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

6th Day 

 

Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

 

ON ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

TRIBUTE: St. David’s Day 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Before the orders of the day, because of a statement appearing in the press I feel I 

have some responsibility to make a comment. My reference to the press and the statement appearing in it 

is not as is frequently the case in the house address or remarks which have been erroneously reported by 

the Leader-Post. My reason for rising is a statement which appeared in the Western Mail published in 

Wales a few weeks ago. This statement referred to the fact that four cabinet ministers in the province of 

Saskatchewan were of Welsh ancestry. My colleague, the Minister of Labour, Mr. Williams, the 

Provincial Treasurer, the Hon. Mr. Blakeney, and the Minister of Health, Mr. Davies, and myself. 

 

This being March 1st, and thereby St. David‘s Day, it seems to me fitting and proper that I should rise 

and draw this to the attention of most of the hon. members of the legislature because it may have 

escaped them. You will note it did not escape the attention of the Provincial Treasurer and he has seen 

fit to see that it doesn‘t escape the attention of any of the rest of you as well. 

 

There is an old saying that when two Englishmen get together they form a club; when two Scotsmen get 

together they form a Caledonian society; when two Irishmen get together they fight; when two 

Welshmen get together they form a choir. I would expect after this an invitation for my three colleagues 

and myself to form a quartet and entertain the legislature on some occasion. Now, I just don‘t really 

know how to express myself adequately on this particular important occasion, I read awhile ago of 

Welsh historian of some 200 years ago who pointed out that the Welsh people in his opinion were not 

only the fairest in the land, but the most 



 

Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
2 

intelligent, the bravest, the most gentlemanly-like, and he concluded by saying that he was the best 

Welshman of them all. I just wanted to make the point that unlike the Irish on St. Patrick‘s Day we don‘t 

boast; unlike the English on St. George‘s Day we don‘t bow to the mother country; we just try to be 

natural, and appreciate the fact that we did come from that country, or our ancestors did come from that 

country, and to pay respect to the many other citizens who also came from that country. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS FROM FILLMORE 
 

Mr. D.T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Before the orders of the day are proceeded with I 

would like to direct the attention of the members of the legislature to the very fine group of young 

people from the district of Fillmore and surrounding districts. These young people are under the 

leadership of Mr. Harry Elder, their 4H club leader, and the very able assistance of his wife, Mrs. Elder, 

and representative members of the 4H tractor club, 4H grain club, 4H homecraft club, I am sure their 

stay here this afternoon will be most interesting. I am sure I speak on behalf of all the members when we 

say how very pleased we are to have them with us. 

 

QUESTION: I.B.M. MACHINES 
 

Mr. W.R. Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are 

called I should like to direct a question to the Minister of Health. Have the I.B.M. machines, which I 

understand the department needs for the new medical plan, yet arrived in Regina? If not, when will they 

be here? 

 

Hon. W.G. Davies (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I can‘t tell my hon. friend in detail 

what kind of machines the medical care commission, which is an independent body, intends to use, but I 

understand that all of these matters are being looked after and that we will be able to announce them as 

they are made known to us by the commission. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I think the Hon. Minister of Health has not answered my question. He knows very 

well the machines I am speaking about, are they here? 



 
Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
3 

Mr. Speaker: — These questions cannot be debated on the orders of the day. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — All right, I will ask a supplementary question Mr. Speaker. If after the long delay 

these machines do arrive, could the minister tell the house how long it will take to train the personnel 

that are required to operate them? 

 

Hon. W.G. Davies: — Mr. Speaker, I think I should say in the first instance that we need no other 

machines than the machines we have now in the government service to do all that is necessary for a 

medical care plan. Certainly from time to time other machines will be used and any supplementary 

equipment that is now being considered would be part of the general use by the medical care plan, but I 

want to disillusion the hon. member of any notion that any entirely new machinery is absolutely required 

to put a medical care plan on the road as some of you said. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I thank the minister. May I ask one more supplementary question? If you don‘t need 

these new machines why are you spending hundreds of thousands of dollars to purchase them then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — Mr. Speaker, I don‘t know what the hon. member is referring to and if he would 

try and be more specific I will try and give him an answer. 

 

QUESTION: TELEPHONES 

 

Mr. F.E. Foley (Turtleford): — Before the orders of the day are proceeded with I would gather from 

perusing the telephone directory of the city of Lloydminster, that the Saskatchewan portion of that city is 

serviced by Alberta Government Telephones. I would like to ask the Minister of Telephones if any other 

Saskatchewan cities are thus serviced by either telephone systems from Manitoba or Alberta, and what 

arrangements do we have for revenue from those centres so serviced? 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour & Telephones): — Mr. Speaker, there is another town, the 

town of 



 

Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
4 

Creighton, which is also served from the Manitoba side. Now with regard to the details, I can‘t give you 

that at the moment. 

 

QUESTION: UTILIZATION OF FEES — MEDICAL PLAN 

 

Mr. W.R. Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Before the orders of the day are called I would 

like to direct another question to the Minister of Health. Has the government made any decision as to 

whether the medical plan, when it is inaugurated, will include utilization of fees as recommended by the 

Thompson Commission? 

 

Hon. W.G. Davies (Minister of Public Health): — This is a matter initially, Mr. Speaker, which would 

be recommended by the commission. We have no recommendation as yet from the commission, and no 

decision has as yet been made. 

 

ST. DAVID’S DAY 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are 

proceeded with I would like to associate myself with the remarks of the Hon. Premier on this auspicious 

day, St. David‘s Day. I think all of us of Welsh ancestry are particularly proud when we stand in our 

places on St. David‘s Day and commend to you the glories of the Welsh. St. David, as is well known, 

has no particular reputation for slaying dragons, has no particular reputation for rooting out snakes 

(probably we will hear more of this in a few weeks from the hon. member from Cannington (Mr. 

McCarthy)), but he does have a reputation for being a scholar, a man of learning, a man of peace, and 

these are virtues which I take great pleasure in commending to the house on this occasion. 

 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Berezowsky, seconded by 

Mr. Thurston. 



 
Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
5 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina City): — Mr. Speaker, before beginning my remarks this afternoon I would 

first like to pay tribute to some of the people who helped elect the government in my constituency. This 

group of people are the ladies in the CCF-New Democratic Party. In my constituency, particularly, these 

ladies look after the polls, canvass for memberships, organize whist drives, teas, but above all they 

participate in establishing policies for our organization. 

 

Mr. W. Ross Thatcher: — The membership is falling off, eh Ed? 

 

Mr. Whelan: — The columnist whose accurate pen got under the opposition leader‘s skin is 

representative of the women who know and who realize that they have a stake in Saskatchewan‘s 

political future. Speaking in the Throne Speech debate regarding the new Liberal from Assiniboia, the 

hon. Leader of the Opposition said . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Four hundred out last night. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — that (you read the Leader-Post) I am now quoting directly from the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition‘s speech. 

 

―Some Liberals will have doubts and perhaps misgivings as to the motive for making such a major 

political change at this time.‖ 

 

And why shouldn‘t they Mr. Speaker. Here is a real doubt raiser. This Liberal-come-lately said in 

Ottawa in April, 1957, and I quote: 

 

―I believe the only thing standing between the producers on the prairie and cash advances is the 

ingrown and slavish loyalties of western Liberal members to the party whip.‖ 

 

This quotation is among many similar stinging statements. I merely try to account for the doubts and 

perhaps misgivings that can be expected. 

 

Here is another one that will raise some doubts. Speaking in the House of Commons in July, 1960, the 

new Liberal said and I quote: 



 

Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
6 

―Obviously neither the Conservatives nor the Liberals would be permitted for a moment by their big 

business masters to control the profits of big business.‖ 

 

If they are wondering about his attitude toward his newly-acquired leader I recommend another doubt-

raiser in the form of a news release in Regina, dated October, 1960, part of which reads as follows: 

 

―The Liberal party under Mr. Pearson is as uncertain and inept, as bankrupt and devoid of positive 

policies as it has always been.‖ 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You haven‘t . . . 

 

Mr. Whelan: — The Leader of the Opposition mentioned doubts and misgivings as to his motives. I 

would be surprised, Mr. Speaker, after reading these quotations, if the old time Liberals were not 

suspicious, uncooperative, even downright hostile. 

 

Some of the followers of the Liberal party may have their doubts and their misgivings about the Leader 

of the Opposition as well. Perhaps one of his earlier political announcements might help them to make 

up their minds. For instance, such remarks regarding the Liberal government in Ottawa quoted in the 

Leader-Post November 28, 1947, read as follows: 

 

―At a meeting in the Mortlach town hall Thursday, W. Ross Thatcher, Moose Jaw CCF Member of 

Parliament said the federal government in the past few months has made a series of blunders 

unprecedented in Canadian agricultural history.‖ 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . smarter . . . members who haven‘t yet . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — And for the members of the house who have been hearing the latest announcements 

about labour domination . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I wakened up. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — The following clipping makes most interesting reading. 



 
Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
7 

When he was the federal member from Moose Jaw in answer to a Leader-Post editorial entitled, ―A One 

Sided Development‖ the following news story appeared in the Leader-Post, dated January 8, 1958, and I 

quote this doubt-raiser: 

 

―The editorial stated that the Moose Jaw member like Mr. Coldwell has publicly received his 

instructions from the CCL and it is becoming obvious that it is the labour wing which pretty well 

dominates the CCF council and policies. Mr. Thatcher said that, ‗the allegations contained in the 

editorial are unfair, and in line with the usual biased political attitude of the Leader-Post editorial 

page‘.‖ 

 

We have another short but interesting statement when the Leader of the Opposition was pressing hard 

for election to the House of Commons in April, back about 1945, and I think it should raise some doubts 

too. I quote: 

 

―These old parties vested with power and authority deliberately, complacently and unnecessarily 

tolerated suffering and distress in Canada. Private enterprise cannot solve the problem of 

unemployment alone. We did not trust the winning of the war to private enterprise and we cannot 

entrust it to the winning of the peace.‖ 

 

And again another doubt-raiser from the Moose Jaw Times Herald, dated May 19, 1945 that should be 

interesting to those with their doubts and misgivings. I am quoting the Moose Jaw Times Herald, the 

hon. Leader of the Opposition: 

 

―The government of Saskatchewan has done more for the people of the province in the ten months that 

it has been in office than was previously accomplished in 39 years of administration by Liberal and 

Conservative governments.‖ 

 

His accuracy in this early stage of his political career, I suggest, hits the target and sums up the situation, 

it is the true story of the CCF administration then and now. However, I think it is going to raise some 

doubts and misgivings regarding motives. 

 

In the light of the recent medical care discussions 



 

Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
8 

and in view of the statements of so-called policy that has been emanating from the bench opposite, with 

the need for real political leadership, and I think for the benefit of the hon. members of the house, please 

allow me to quote the hon. member from Morse as he was quoted in the Leader-Post on June 12, 1948: I 

am quoting now. 

 

―The medical association opposes the CCF because of its policy that every citizen has the right to 

adequate health services. Many doctors object to the prospect of losing big incomes if state medicine is 

adopted. Moreover they control medical colleges and keep down the numbers entering which is one of 

the reasons why Saskatchewan lacks an adequate supply of doctors.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, even the roughest critic in our group has refrained from such blatant criticism of the 

medical profession. In view of the statement from the new Liberal and the new leader opposite, frankly 

could you blame their new-found followers, if they have doubts and misgivings about the motives. 

 

There are some questions that should be asked about the speech that was made by the hon. member from 

Morse, the Leader of the Opposition, I think the people of the province should be entitled to some 

information. He says there will be a tax holiday for five to ten years for certain businesses, but qualifies 

this by saying it is his personal point of view. What I want to know is this — what is the Liberal party‘s 

point of view? What is the Liberal party, a one man show? In his remarks on Monday he stated that the 

royalties at Creighton were out of line. He was referring to mining operations near Flin Flon across the 

border, and then he talked generally of tax reductions for all of the people. Why isn‘t he specific? He 

says, and I quote: 

 

―It would be the objective of our party to reduce the sales tax.‖ 

 

He doesn‘t say how much; he doesn‘t say why; he talks in terms of general reduction when he is 

discussing ordinary people. Regarding royalties for the companies and regarding new industries and 

certain kinds of business, he is very specific. 

 

―I favour,‖ he says, and I am quoting him; ―I favour major tax holidays being given to any new mining 

industry locating in 



 
Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
9 

Saskatchewan of from five to ten years.‖ 

 

My point again — if he can be specific regarding royalties and tax holidays then I suggest he be specific 

regarding the reduction for the general public. Let us not kid ourselves, because of the vigilance of the 

people, no government in this province will be allowed to play the part of a political sugar daddy by tax 

holidays and more royalties unless all the blanks are filled in and all the details are provided. 

 

Mr. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — You will never have industry. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — He talks in terms of reducing government employees. Will he accomplish this by 

selling the power corporation to private enterprise? This would be a sizeable reduction in employees. 

 

Now in reviewing the medical care commission Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, the hon. 

member from Morse, when criticizing these appointments, made reference to Dr. Wolf as follows: 

 

―A university professor in Saskatoon, another gentleman who gets his pay cheque from this 

government.‖ 

 

We all know the government makes grants to the university. Does this criticism suggest that all the 

teachers of the university and all the educators and all the doctors of the University Hospital, do the 

government‘s bidding, because we pay a grant to the university? And more pertinent, federal 

governments, Liberal and Conservative federal governments of this country have always paid the 

judiciary their salaries. Does it follow then, that the judiciary does what the federal government tells 

them to do. I contend the inference regarding Dr. Wolf is ridiculous, particularly when the parallel is 

applied to the university staff or the judiciary. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — In his remarks the hon. Leader of the Opposition was hard put for a reply to the 

Minister of Agriculture. He said something like this, that he wouldn‘t let him look after a horse, but I 

humbly suggest Mr. Speaker, there is indisputable evidence that the minister is capable of 



 

Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
10 

looking after the people of Cutknife constituency, and his record in the Department of Agriculture is 

clear cut, and further evidence that the hon. minister looks after his department in an efficient and 

effective manner. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — During the speech by the Leader of the Opposition reference was made to the former 

Premier of this province, in what I consider to be an unparliamentary and undignified and unnecessary 

manner. 

 

Mr. I.H. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — True. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from Morse took great delight and with emphasis 

referred to the former Premier as ―little Tommy.‖ Since this unparliamentary reference was made I have 

thought of a good many adjectives that might be applied to someone whose name started with an R. I 

went over quite a list of names and I thought of such adjectives as rotund, ranting, roaring, rash, 

revolting, roughest, resounding, and then I abandoned them all, Mr. Speaker, for they too were 

unparliamentary, and I said to myself, just because the hon. member, the Leader of the Opposition used 

this type of loose reference to a former Premier, and thereby lowered the dignity of this house, let‘s not 

have an elected representative from Regina doing the same thing. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — But in any case, I have come to this conclusion, Mr. Speaker, that a man who was 

Premier of this province for a longer period than any predecessor, that a man who has the respect of all 

parties in this province, that a man who is recognized for his progressive programs throughout the North 

American continent, cannot be pulled down by unparliamentary references from the hon. member from 

Morse. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — And he should know that the people of this province judge a man, not by his weight, 

but by his sincerity, his integrity and his ability. 



 
Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
11 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Throughout the Throne Speech debate, the Leader of the Opposition referred to Cuba 

as the only other socialist government in North America. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well . . . 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Although I do not condone Cuba‘s Castro type of government I have to say though that 

the free enterprise method which the Leader of the Opposition so powerfully expounds, in my estimation 

was responsible for the squalid poverty-stricken, and deplorable conditions that exist in that island. 

These conditions were the hatchery for the unfortunate dictator-type of government that exists there 

today. Yes, the promoters and supporters of monopoly enterprise can take full credit for the Castro 

situation. 

 

I have limited my remarks regarding the Throne Speech as it applies to the province, and my 

constituency, in fields that have not been covered by other speakers. In addition I have commented on 

the worn-out, tired, dog-eared, speeches that the Leader of the Opposition made again this year. 

 

I should like to offer evidence of continued and expanding endorsation of democratic socialism. 

Recently in Australia, although by some method of election I fail to understand the democratic socialists 

received half a million more votes than the old party coalition, but failed to get elected. I predict this 

upsurge in popularity will continue and that they will be elected again in the continent down under. 

 

There are developments in Canada too, evidence that the New Democratic Party in British Columbia, is 

on its way to power. In the February 24, 1962 issue the Financial Post considers the possibility of Bob 

Strachan becoming the next Premier of that province, and the Financial Post is no friend of this party, 

but they say, and I quote: 

 

―can he make it? The most realistic assumption right now is that he can and probably will . . . 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — And further down they give their reason. 



 

Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
12 

―It would certainly be unrealistic to assume that any resurgence among the Liberals or Conservatives 

could achieve power for either of those parties, simply because their strength in the 52 member 

legislature is minute.‖ 

 

And in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, since the Leader of the Opposition quotes the Toronto Daily Star 

very respectfully, I suggest to the hon. member from Morse, that Richard J. Needham, associate editor 

of the Toronto Star, wasn‘t surprised when a CCF government was elected in 1944, and neither was he 

surprised when that government lasted eighteen years, and he writes, and I quote: 

 

―And I wouldn‘t be surprised if it lasted another eighteen years.‖ 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion. 

 

Mrs. Gladys Strum (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, at the outset, I wish to congratulate you on your 

elevation the high office of Speaker. Last year in the public accounts committee and in this house, I was 

impressed by your patience, your fairness and your grasp of the technicalities involved in the smooth 

functioning of what is sometimes a very obstreperous assembly. The dignity and purpose of the 

institution will be well served, I am sure, under your guidance. 

 

I wish also to congratulate the mover, the hon. member for Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) who made a 

very valuable contribution to this debate and told us things about the north, a part of the province with 

which many of us are unfamiliar. The hon. member for Lumsden (Mr. Thurston) in seconding the 

Address, as usual gave us many valuable and significant facts which revealed his interest in the welfare 

of his constituency and particularly of the co-operative movement which continues to add to the growth 

of our economy and the competence of our democratic institution. 

 

I wish also to offer my sincere congratulations to our Premier, on his rebuttal to the speech yesterday. 

He is no newcomer to the leadership of our province and the respect and affection which he has long 

been held by the teaching profession, the trustees‘ association, 



 
Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
13 

and university circles are the result of long years of dedicated service to the ideals of democracy in 

education. As Provincial Treasurer, he added to his reputation as an economist and an administrator. His 

ability is recognized beyond the boundaries of this province, and his unshakeable integrity has never 

been questioned. His record is a strength to our province and to this house in the difficult task that we 

face, that of continuing to build more broadly and even raising our sight in face of the very difficult 

financial situation. 

 

It is fitting at this time that we should extend a welcome to our new member and we trust that the hon. 

member from Weyburn (Mr. Staveley) will enjoy his new experience as a member in this legislature. 

 

Now I wish to discuss the basic and fundamental differences in the approach and philosophy of the two 

political camps represented in this house and to present evidence to show the Speech from the Throne 

carries forward the basic philosophy of our party. Our national leader well deserved the eloquent tribute 

paid him yesterday by the Premier. Mr. Douglas has repeatedly affirmed that our objective is the welfare 

state. While we as a province can only operate within the limits of our jurisdiction, I submit Mr. 

Speaker, that this year‘s throne speech and the legislation it forecasts are compatible with this objective. 

Perhaps we should define what we mean by the welfare state. 

 

One of the most important and influential documents ever to come out of Britain was the Beveridge 

Report in 1942 and of it, it is said, the scheme proposed in some ways was a revolution, but in more 

important ways it is a natural and inevitable development from the past. It is a British revolution. The 

welfare state is the answer devised in Britain to the problems presented by a highly organized industrial 

society. This process has a long history, beginning in the reign of Elizabeth I and in the 1830‘s. 

Successive governments in Britain have increasingly intervened to protect what they called at that time 

the common weal, or welfare, and this long chain of legislation which began with the Elizabethan poor 

laws culminated in national assistance legislation in 1948 was brought in what Englishmen call the 

welfare state. 

 

I submit that our new medical insurance plan is an important development in our path to the welfare 

state. To those who say we cannot afford to embark on the plan of medical security at this time, let me 

point 



 

Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
14 

out, that in Britain it was under the urgent stimulus of the second world war and in particular as a result 

of the national unity created under bombardment and perhaps more revealing still, because of the gap in 

social services and contrast in living conditions that came to light when whole areas had to be evacuated. 

 

You will recall the stories that came out of the slums of London and other industrial centres when 

children were moved to palatial country homes and it was discovered that some had never slept in a bed, 

or eaten an egg, or peeled a banana. The appalling conditions of need uncovered in the national 

relocation of population were remedied and the result brought roars of protest from people who had been 

pleased to live off land revenue and investment income. We can all recall the sad story of the titled sons 

of the nobility who had to go to work at last to earn their own living, because of the high succession 

duties. This redistribution of the nations‘ wealth is achieved through a system of compulsory 

contribution, the word is taxes, death dues, succession duties, income taxes, insurance premiums but it 

was not the method so much as the result that surprised everyone. Barbara Ward, the British economist 

who had a series of lectures on the CBC this winter under the Massey lectures has this to say about the 

economic result of this moral about face. She says: 

 

―To me one of the most vivid truths is, that there is a moral law in the universe, is that the fact that 

when men or governments work intelligently and farsightedly for the good of others they achieve their 

own prosperity too.‖ 

 

Take our western experience of the welfare state. We do not plan to do it as a stroke of business, it was a 

moral decision, yet one of the consequences has been to reduce the business risk. Mass consumption 

secured by social security enables the economy to avoid the booms and collapses of the old economy, 

and she goes on to say: 

 

―Honesty is the best policy used to be said in Victorian times but I would go further, I would say that 

generosity is the best policy and the expansion of opportunity sought for the sake of others ends by 

bringing well-being and expansion to oneself.‖ 



 
Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
15 

Galbraith supports this too in The Affluent Society, but in a slightly different way. He points out that the 

immediate cause of depression is the fall in the aggregate demand, meaning a dropping off in the 

purchasing power available and being used for the output of the economy. 

 

Unemployment insurance means, he says, that a man‘s purchasing power is protected when he loses his 

job. It falls, but it no longer falls to zero, thus a measure designed to reduce the security associated with 

unemployment also acts to counterbalance the lack of output, or cushion the swings of boom and bust. 

We add that this of course is not peculiar to unemployment insurance, but also to farm support prices, 

which forced public outlay when farm price and income and purchasing power falls, have the same 

effect and so do public welfare payments and old age pensions. All these measures permit a modest but 

steady flow of purchasing power from those who are no longer able to work. If he had been writing this 

in Canada he would have added family allowances to the list. 

 

Despite the protest of my hon. friends opposite, the welfare state is the best friend private enterprise ever 

had, because it pumps purchasing power into circulation constantly and regularly every month. The 

welfare department of the federal government and the provinces is not only a humanitarian agency, it is 

a stabilizer of the business economy, but it comes out of taxes, I hear. True, but it turns over and over, 

again and again, and it makes corporation income, personal income, and profit possible. It is the 

adrenalin in the arteries of trade. 

 

Another costly expense in terms of taxes, is education. The expenditure on education cannot be tied to 

production but it must be tied to needs. The value of this year‘s crop will be cut in two, but education 

last year got an increase of $4 million. School grants were increased by $3.1 million. In 1944-45 total 

grants were just about $3,160,000. The estimates for this year were just exactly ten times that figure, or 

an increase of tenfold in seventeen years. Has this meant better education or more graduates? Well I 

have an interesting table here on Grade XII examination results. In 1941-42 the number of graduates 

from Grade XII was 2,766. Ten years later it was exactly 100 less, but since that time it has climbed 

steadily and has more than doubled. I got these figures just this week from 



 

Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
16 

the Department of Education files. 

 

We are now seeing the effect of bussing students in to the larger centres. Boys and girls do not have to 

leave home to get a high school education now and the 1960-61 figure for Grade XII graduation was 

5,543 or just more than double the 1941 figure. True there are more drop outs than anyone likes to see. 

True the urban population has grown, true, they do not all stay in school. It is the rural upswing that has 

hit the universities and has forced us to plan for an extra branch of the university in this city. 

 

Now let us look at the figures for university attendance. In 1946-47 it was slightly more than four 

thousand, or to be exact, 4,195. Let us assume that visiting students from outside accounted for 195, and 

let us put the Saskatchewan figures at 4,000 even. The figure is swelling every year. I have not the 

figures for 1961-62, they are not published yet. The forecast estimate by 1970 is 10,000. I have seen 

another figure quoted as 8,000 for Saskatoon and 5,000 for Regina. If the College of Education were to 

include all the teacher trainees for the province, that would be a very conservative estimate indeed. 

 

Now let‘s consider the expenditures on the 4,000 students of 1941-42 and the students of 1960-62 and 

these are from the University of Saskatchewan annual report, which all of you may get. The general 

operating expense in 1946-47, the figure $1,863,824, capital $90,923, research 0. In 1960-61 general $6 

million, note the other is under $2 million, this is $6 and over half, $6,655,453. Capital, nearly $2 

million, $1,966,000, and the grants for research $1,500,506. Of this sum, grants made by the province 

were for operating: $3,307,500 and capital $1,251,845, or over $4½ million. The 1970 enrolment 

estimate is from the commission for financing education in Saskatchewan. Now this means taxes. Taxes 

must come from production, and at this point, you and I as taxpayers must ask, will education increase 

the gross national product? Is it a good investment? This is a sensible question. Do our employment 

demands require special skill? Is prolonged training necessary? Do we need university degrees in 

nursing? Should we have two universities and three technical institutes in a province the size of this? 

 

I want to quote from a report on changing patterns in industrial relations from the Industrial Relations 

Centre 



 
Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
17 

of McGill University at their thirteenth annual conference last summer, June 6 – 7. Dr. Dymond, 

Director of Economics and Research of the Department of Labour, Ottawa was making a speech and I 

quote from his speech; this is what he said: 

 

―Pointing out that there is a new aspect of employment coming to light and this is, the changing 

requirements of the job. We are undergoing a technological revolution, as well as a social and 

industrial revolution.‖ 

 

He lists the technological changes in industry under these headings: new products; changes in old 

products to increase their market ability, or to make production easier and cheaper; new materials (we 

all think of nylon, plastic and synthetic textiles); new sources of power; increased mechanization or 

automation of production processes; changes in communication; the use of new computing machines; 

and changes in plant organization and layout to accommodate these processes and this organization. 

 

Now the findings and the conclusions of this industrial analysis has great significance for us. The people 

have to be equipped to handle the new jobs of our changing industrial economy. 

 

A first level sort of generalization which might be made concerning the impact of all these changes are 

summarized thus; total manpower requirements are frequently altered; output changes almost always 

increase and are in terms of both quality and quantity. 

 

Now this is where our employment figures fit in. The need for semi-skilled workers declines, while the 

requirement for skilled maintenance workers and other highly technical occupations usually rises, and 

when you look at the chart showing categories of workers that are needed, on page 7 of the report, the 

comment is this, 

 

―While total employment in these selected plants in the five industries mentioned declined slightly in 

the period between 1950-59, it can be observed that office employment increased substantially while 

non-office employment showed a sizeable drop and this new product improvement, in more complex 

production methods, greater quality control and other factors have 



 

Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
18 

resulted in these industries increasing their requirements for more technical specialists, such as 

engineers, technicians and a great variety of staff specialists.‖ 

 

Even inspection has been altered. Inspection has generally increased in significance both in terms of the 

number of workers required and the upgrading of their skills. Quality controlled techniques are 

becoming more complicated, involving in various cases statistical quality control, X-ray inspections, 

ultrasonic testing and hardness testing in materials, requiring physics and chemistry. The level of 

education required of the inspection staff has risen steadily with the job. This we all know is true, and he 

says the automatic transfer equipment and conveyor systems have replaced much of the unskilled labour 

formerly required for handling operations. The point at which there is the greatest demand for new 

workers are sighted as, 50 per cent increase in draftsmen and even greater gains were made in the 

professional highly technical administrative and staff specialist occupations not listed in the wage rate 

survey. 

 

Another thing that I thought was very interesting was the shift and the almost changed or exchanged 

positions of farm workers and clerical workers. The graph on occupational groups by category showed 

this; that while agricultural labour had dropped from 40% to just about 10% the white collar group had 

reversed that and had risen from 16% to just under 40%. Now here, Mr. Speaker, is where our education 

needs show up. Not only is unemployment a forced loss of dignity and self-respect, it is a blank in the 

production line and it is a loss to the nation. Galbraith gives the dollar loss due to unemployment 

between 1929 and 1932 in terms of the gross national product, he points out that the drop of the loss of 

$44 billion when the value of the gross national product dropped from $157.8 to $113.6 billion. He puts 

it very forcefully on page 117 of The Affluent Society when he said this: 

 

―No diminution in energy or initiative of workmen or their employers could have an effect comparable 

with this massive increase in forced idleness by individuals who have much preferred to work.‖ 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

―More recently unemployment increased from 



 
Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
19 

$1.6 million in 1953 to 3.2 million in 1954 in the last depression.‖ 

 

And he says that if instead of this slight decline there had been the usual increase of the immediately 

preceding years production would have been 20 billion greater. 

 

I am not going to rob the hon. member of his radio time, I assure you, I don‘t think that is fair, and I 

hope you will never have to accuse me of being unfair. 

 

This brings all of us face to face with the need for private, public and co-operative development in 

investment, the need for social planning and government responsibility and the sound moral and 

economic basis of the welfare state for which the new democratic party stands. Whether it is an 

expenditure for capital investment for power and telephone or for the building of highways or the 

modernization of farms, the outlay is justified. If it is to bring health and education as the natural right of 

our families, that too is not only morally sound, it is good business. It is an investment in our future 

growth, in full employment and expansion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support the motion and I finish on the nose. 

 

Mr. J.H. Staveley (Weyburn): — As a new member in this legislature, in fact the newest member of 

the legislature, I have sat very quietly and unobtrusively in my seat here in the corner of the chamber 

since this session opened. I feel that it is only right and proper that I should stand up and give my hon. 

friends from the government side of the house an opportunity to look me over. At the same time that will 

give me the opportunity to add my voice to the other voices which have spoken before this time in 

extending my congratulations and compliments to you Mr. Speaker, on the honour which has been 

bestowed on you in your new official position. As a new member I wish to co-operate with you in 

making a difficult task easier. I can assure you, Sir, that if I am ever out of order in this chamber it will 

be only from my lack of knowledge of the procedure of this house and certainly it will be with neither 

malice nor premeditation. 



 

Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
20 

I would also like to congratulate the hon. members from Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) and Lumsden 

(Mr. Thurston) on their addresses of last Monday afternoon, when they moved and seconded the 

Address-in-Reply. However, in all honesty, I must confess that I do not and cannot agree with 

everything they said. I appreciated the welcome that was extended to me by the hon. member from 

Cumberland. I also appreciated the spirit in which he offered me his advice, which if I remember 

correctly was to emulate the past Premier. I think in this case, I must also confess that the advice was not 

appreciated to the same extent as was the spirit in which it was presented. In fact, I would respectfully 

suggest that this is just about the same standard of advice and judgment shown by this entire government 

to the people in the province of Saskatchewan, and which is responsible for so many of the difficulties 

and problems which we face today. 

 

I am not particularly concerned about the concern of the hon. member from Cumberland as to my fate 

and future in this legislature. I think Mr. Speaker, that that is really a matter of concern only to myself 

and to the people of the Weyburn constituency. If those people had wanted the Douglas influence to 

continue to represent them in this legislature, they would have elected the Douglas protégé, but their 

thinking was very definite in this regard as was indicated by the very substantial majority which was 

given to our Liberal cause in the Weyburn by-election. This was in spite of the fact that the former 

Premier worked, particularly during the latter part of the campaign even harder than myself. But he had 

come to the end of the road in Weyburn and our majority, Mr. Speaker, was greater than the majority 

which Mr. Douglas enjoyed in either one of his last two elections. 

 

I listened with great interest to the hon. Premier‘s eulogy for the late-departed Premier. You know Mr. 

Speaker, I have never needed Mr. Douglas to remind me that I am my brother‘s keeper. And is the hon. 

Premier so narrow-minded that he thinks that Mr. Douglas has a complete monopoly on sincerity. You 

know Mr. Speaker, these paragons of virtue are also very human people and they are subject to the same 

temptations as all of us here in this room. Sometimes they even become obsessed with the desire for 

personal political power and sometimes they even govern themselves accordingly. 

 

The result of the Weyburn by-election was an 



 
Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
21 

overwhelming condemnation and repudiation of the policies of this socialist government . . . 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Staveley: — . . . symbolized for so long in this province by the name of Douglas. This afternoon I 

would also like to thank the many hon. ministers and members of the government for their warm and 

friendly reception following the official opening of this session. Through my many years of activity in 

municipal government I have become personally acquainted with many of the hon. ministers and 

members of this government and I am sure that I will enjoy my further associations with them. I am 

quite looking forward to my first term in this legislature with great interest and anticipation. I enjoyed 

particularly the speech of the hon. Leader of the Opposition on Tuesday afternoon and I can now 

understand better than ever before why the socialists become so disturbed when he speaks, because 

sometimes the truth really hurts. I was afraid for a few moments that afternoon that my hon. friend, the 

Minister of Agriculture, was going into orbit without benefit of capsule. I am told that I will get used to 

this very quickly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my earnest desire is that in the days ahead I may be able to make a contribution of some 

value to the deliberations of this chamber. 

 

In beginning my maiden speech in this legislature I would like you to know that I feel very privileged to 

be associated with all the members of the legislature and in the administration of the public business of 

the people of our province. And I feel particularly honoured to be associated with my esteemed 

colleagues in the opposition and to join them in the valiant efforts that they have been making and which 

they will continue to make to bring about better government in this province. 

 

I bring with me to this legislature a deep sense of responsibility, first of all to all of the people of the 

Weyburn constituency and then to the rest of the people in the province of Saskatchewan. I have always 

felt that a house of government should be characterized by an atmosphere of dignity and I will so 

attempt to conduct myself at all times. It is my sincere hope that my hon. friends in the government will 

not force me to adopt an attitude which I would deplore as 



 

Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
22 

unbecoming to this chamber and which I am sure that both they and myself would regret. 

 

Six years ago I would not have dreamed that I would ever sit in this chamber as a member of the 

legislature of Saskatchewan, because the idea had never entered my mind that I would ever be a 

candidate for public office at the provincial level. However, just before the provincial election of 1956, 

community pressure was exerted upon me to act as the Liberal candidate to contest the constituency 

which had been held for so long by the then-Premier of the province, the Hon. T.C. Douglas. We 

enjoyed a very pleasant, interesting and clean campaign in that election and when the smoke all cleared 

away, we had reduced the Premier‘s majority by approximately two-thirds. This of course was a most 

unexpected development and a moral victory, particularly when our Liberal party received a substantial 

majority in the city of Weyburn, the Premier‘s former hometown. 

 

I was quite happy over this whole situation. I thought at that time that I had learned something about a 

political campaign. I had formed many friendships over the constituency and our success far exceeded 

my expectations. Then came the provincial election of 1960. But this was a very different kind of 

campaign from that of 1956 and I realized that I had not learned very much about a political campaign 

from my experience of four years previous. I am not going to go into any details with respect to that 

campaign because many of them are rather distasteful to me. I am only going to point out that in spite of 

the campaign waged against our cause we again further reduced the Premier‘s majority and it was then 

that I knew that the day would come when I would have the honour to represent the people of the 

constituency of Weyburn in this legislature. 

 

Shortly after the election of 1960 I listened to the broadcast of the national convention of the CCF party 

held here in Regina and at that convention it was very evident and obvious that the top brass of the CCF 

party, including Mr. Douglas, did not want a national convention to choose a national leader until such 

time as the founding convention of the new party was held in 1961. But Mr. Argue had other ideas and 

by his ingenuity and by his energy Mr. Argue caused himself to be elected the national leader of the 

CCF party. It was on that day Mr. Speaker, that I thought I saw the hand-writing on the wall. Events 

since that time have proved that that thinking was correct. I felt that Mr. Argue would be led down the 



 
Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
23 

garden path — that Mr. Douglas would go to that convention with enough delegate support to easily win 

that convention and that we would be faced with a by-election in the Weyburn constituency. I expected 

that by-election to be held within six months from the national NDP convention, because I was sure that 

the hon. members of the opposition in this legislature would point out to Mr. Douglas, in a nice way of 

course, the necessity of giving up his seat in this house, since it would be impossible for him to do 

justice to his provincial responsibilities in this situation. Of course he was being paid by the people of 

this province to carry out those responsibilities. So Mr. Douglas resigned his leadership of the 

Saskatchewan CCF — he resigned his seat in this legislature as a member for the Weyburn constituency 

and the dream of a by-election in the Weyburn constituency became a reality with the election held on 

December 13th last. 

 

In the interests of good government in this province I would like to take a few minutes at this time and 

go back over some of the details of that by-election campaign. Now I realize that many of the hon. 

ministers and members of the government are quite conversant with that campaign because many of 

them became more or less permanent residents of our community during that campaign. But as I have 

just suggested, in the interests of good government, I would like to refresh their memory and also bring 

to the attention of others some details concerning that campaign. I am sure that if the hon. members of 

this government will give their honest and their earnest consideration to the findings of that campaign, 

their deliberation could make a great contribution to better government in Saskatchewan. We cannot 

overlook the fact that the government candidate was defeated and this of course reflects the thinking of 

the people. 

 

First I would point out that in one of the campaign broadcasts, conducted by someone rather close to the 

hon. Premier, concern was expressed over what the Liberal candidate was telling the people of the 

Weyburn constituency. Now in reply I advised those people campaigning for the government that they 

should be much more concerned about what the people of the Weyburn constituency were telling the 

Liberal candidate. So point No. 1 Mr. Speaker, is that the hon. members of this government should listen 

to what the people are saying and they should find out what the people are thinking . . . 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 



 

Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
24 

Mr. Staveley: — . . . because this is a democracy and in a democracy the government leads and guides 

the people — it does not drive them. The people of the Weyburn constituency, and I am sure this is a 

reflection of the thinking of the people all over the province, as illustrated by the results in Athabasca 

and in Turtleford, I say the people of the Weyburn constituency were telling me that they were most 

unhappy and dissatisfied with the waste and extravagance of this government. They were telling me that 

they were very upset over the lack of jobs for our young people in Saskatchewan. They were telling me 

that they were opposed to the county system of municipal government, which this government tried to 

force on them against their wishes. They were telling me that they were most disturbed at the continually 

increasing burden of taxation and the overwhelming load of the provincial debt. These are some of the 

things that the people of the Weyburn constituency were telling me before the election. So it is my 

sincere hope that the hon. members of the government will accept these statements in the spirit in which 

they are presented. So that they may realize that the government of this province must be conducted on a 

practical and businesslike basis, rather than on the irresponsible socialist experiment which has 

characterized this government and which is leading this province and the people in it, to ruin. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Staveley: — I am sure that the hon. members of the government will be most unhappy when the 

people of Saskatchewan change this government at the next provincial election, but they will not be able 

to say that I have not tried to help them by pointing out what the people of this province are thinking 

about their policies. I would like to suggest Mr. Speaker, that after Athabasca, and after Turtleford and 

Weyburn, and after five by-elections in the province of Ontario, socialist members of government and 

socialist supporters are fast disappearing from the political scene in Canada. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Staveley: — I would now like to take just a few minutes to tell you something about the Weyburn 

constituency and the people in the Weyburn constituency. First I would like, in this 



 
Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
25 

chamber, to express my sincere thanks and appreciation, once again, to all of the good people of that 

area who gave me the honour of representing the constituency in this legislature. I would assure them 

once again that my one aim is to be worthy of their confidence and to represent every person in that 

constituency to the best of my ability. 

 

I do not really believe that I need to say very much about the people of the Weyburn constituency 

because they speak for themselves in many ways. They have spoken for themselves in the past. They 

speak for themselves today and they will speak for themselves in the future. They speak by their actions 

and by the contribution that they make to the social and economic development of this province. They 

are a vital part of this province and an important part of this province and they are making a great 

contribution to the life and to the history of Saskatchewan. 

 

I was born in Weyburn and I have lived for over half a century in the Weyburn community. I believe 

that I know these people and that I know their problems. I have a very deep feeling for the people of my 

community, I rejoice with them in their successes, I grieve for them in their misfortunes and I am proud 

to represent them in this legislature. 

 

In the not-too-distant past the basis of our economy in the Weyburn constituency was grain farming. Our 

farmers are good farmers and they have improved their standard of farming practices with the 

improvement in farm equipment. But sometimes even the best of farmers suffer financial hardships, 

particularly when faced with unfavourable weather conditions, when their crops are attacked by pests or 

disease and when government policies are not in their good interest. So it was that last year our 

community, like many other communities in this province, suffered a disastrous crop year. However, 

with some carry-over from the 1960 crop, with what grain we raised last year and with the benefits we 

received from the vision of the late Rt. Hon. James G. Gardiner, through Prairie Farm Assistance Act, 

our people will get by. Because they have the courage and the faith and the fortitude to carry on to better 

days. Many of our people are original pioneers or the sons or daughters of pioneers and they have 

learned to live with and to conquer adversity, even political adversity Mr. Speaker. Again, with the 

vision and the wisdom of the late Rt. Hon. James G. Gardiner, through the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 

Act it has been possible for our farming community to greatly 



 

Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
26 

expand the livestock branch of the agricultural industry. This has broadened our agricultural economy 

and has provided for a more stable economy in our area. 

 

Since I have mentioned agriculture and since I have mentioned the name of the late Mr. Gardiner, I 

would like to say just one more word in this connection. No man in the whole history of Canada has 

done so much for the farmers of western Canada as did the late Mr. Gardiner. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Staveley: — I am proud, Mr. Speaker that he was a Liberal. 

 

We have heard a lot of talk about industry in this province by this government. I would respectfully 

suggest that agriculture is still the basic industry of Saskatchewan. So I say that one of the first, and 

greatest, responsibilities of this government is to do everything in its power to protect and assist this 

industry, to insure its economic stability and success, even at the expense of some of the socialist dreams 

that have become nightmares in this province. 

 

Within the past seven or eight years another factor has entered the picture in parts of the Weyburn 

constituency which has again broadened our economic basis. This is the development and expansion of 

the petroleum industry in the Weyburn area. This has broadened the tax base in parts of our constituency 

and has assisted many of our rural municipalities and our urban centres, as well as many individuals, 

either directly or indirectly. It is my considered opinion that if the petroleum industry has been treated as 

fairly by this government as it has been treated by the civic officials and the people of the Weyburn 

constituency, our oil development would have been much more extensive than it has been. During my 

terms as mayor of the city of Weyburn, it was a pleasure for me to work with these oil people to the 

mutual benefit of the industry and our community and they have been a great contribution to our 

community in many ways. 

 

I would like to say just a word about the civic officials and the civic government of the city of Weyburn 

before I stop speaking specifically about the Weyburn constituency. I have known all of the aldermen 

and the mayors of Weyburn for the past many, many years, and it was my privilege to serve the people 

of Weyburn 



 
Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
27 

for many years as one of their civic officials. But I have known these people to be capable 

administrators, to be sincere and conscientious in their responsibility and to be concerned, not only with 

their own city but also with our province and our country. I know from my personal knowledge that the 

government of Saskatchewan has at all times enjoyed the full and complete co-operation of the city of 

Weyburn and its officials. I was somewhat concerned when the hon. Premier in his wisdom, saw fit to 

disregard the request of this city for an audience. He explained his reasons — which would probably 

apply to any city or any municipality in the province, but he gave no hope for a meeting in the future and 

yet I know that the government met with the council of the city of Regina just a few days after. If the 

hon. Premier has decided that he will meet delegations only from constituencies represented by socialist 

M.L.A.s, I am afraid that he will not enjoy the respect and confidence of the people of this province. If 

this is to be his policy, I would strongly urge the people of Saskatchewan to elect a Premier who will 

represent all of this province and not just some communities . . . 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Staveley: — . . . because the people of Weyburn deserve and will expect better treatment than this. 

 

I would like to turn now for just a few minutes to some of the proposed legislation as set out in the 

Throne Speech. First, I would like to say just a few words about the attitude of this government toward 

municipal government. I would like to go back to the provincial-municipal conference held in the city of 

Regina, here in this very chamber in December of 1956. Indeed, I would like to go back further than 

that. Why was this conference called? It was called because this government was shamed into calling a 

conference. I would remind the hon. members of the government that during the campaign preceding the 

provincial election of 1956, the Liberal party went on record that one of the first things it would do if it 

formed the government, would be to call a conference with representatives of municipal governments. 

This conference would be to discuss the responsibilities of local government and ways and means of 

providing local government with more revenue to carry out those responsibilities. But after either 

turning a deaf ear to the repeated requests of the 



 

Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
28 

local government for financial assistance, or merely paying lip service to these requests, this government 

finally followed the suggested policy of the Liberal party and called the conference. But what a 

disappointment to local governments, Mr. Speaker. Those delegates from municipal government went to 

that conference with the firm belief that a brighter day was dawning for those charged with the 

responsibility of administering local governments, the very basis of the democratic system of 

government which we boast that we enjoy here in Canada. But what happened Mr. Speaker? Minister 

after minister of this government got up and suggested that municipal officials were not competent to 

properly discharge their duties and that the whole structure of municipal government would have to be 

changed before further financial assistance should be provided by the provincial government. 

 

In support of that statement, I would like to quote a remark of the late departed Premier and another of 

the late departed Provincial Treasurer. In the opening statement of Premier Douglas he said this and I 

quote: 

 

―But unless the basic reorganization step can be anticipated, it seems clear to us that merely raising the 

amount of direct financial aid will not come to grips with the inherent problem.‖ 

 

And the Hon. C.M. Fines said this and I quote: 

 

―Further financial relief, however, should only be made to local government which is soundly 

organized and effectively administered. We cannot afford to waste the taxpayers‘ hard earned dollar.‖ 

 

Knowing Mr. Fines‘s attitude toward the taxpayers‘ hard-earned dollars, I can only assume that he had 

his tongue in his cheek when he made that remark. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Staveley: — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the hon. members of this government were aware of how 

close that conference came to ending in chaos before the basic issues could even be discussed. Out of 

that conference a child was born, a child of this government — the Continuing Committee of Local 

Government Reorganization, fathered by this government and born out 



 
Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
29 

of the travail of municipal government. Its responsibility in life was to accomplish what its father could 

not accomplish — to bring about the county system in Saskatchewan and so make a reality of a dream 

this government has entertained since 1944. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Staveley: — Now when I say this, I do not suggest that our municipal structure is perfect. No 

government is perfect at any level, but undoubtedly some changes could be made which would improve 

and strengthen municipal government. I believe that most municipal officials would agree with this. I 

would like to make one point very clear because I do not want either to be misquoted or misunderstood. 

I am not opposed, and the Liberal party is not opposed, to some reorganization of municipal 

government, provided that the changes made are approved by properly conducted votes of the ratepayers 

concerned. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Staveley: — It is just as simple as this, Mr. Speaker. This is the way of democracy. This is the way 

of liberalism. Now, why has this government consistently refused to allow the people of this province to 

have a vote in this matter, up to this time. Is it because the continuing committee recommended that no 

plebiscite be held? Mr. McAskill, the chairman of the continuing committee, told the 1959 convention of 

the SARM and I quote: 

 

―It was not in the committee‘s jurisdiction to support a vote. That was up to the provincial 

government.‖ 

 

I respectfully suggest Mr. Speaker, that if this is the case then it was also not in the committee‘s 

jurisdiction to suggest that a vote not be held. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Staveley: — I would like to quote the late departed Premier once again, when he said and I do 

quote: 

 

―The provincial government will accept the wishes of the rural people. No arbitrary 



 

Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
30 

action will be taken by the government nor will any pressure be exerted to bring about changes, either 

in the structure or the boundaries of local government.‖ 

 

He is quoted in the Leader-Post of March 5, 1959. So I can only assume that the reason why this 

government has consistently refused to allow the people of this province to express their wishes in this 

matter by a plebiscite, as was the case with the plan for state medicine — was that the government was 

afraid that the good judgment of the people of Saskatchewan and of the opposition in this legislature 

would overrule and defeat the ill-conceived plans of the government. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Staveley: — Speaking of ill-conceived plans I would like to comment just very briefly on the 

government plan for state medicine, legislation covering which was passed by this government during 

the last special session of the legislature. Certainly this was the most ill-conceived, poorly presented, and 

badly handled piece of legislation that this province has ever known. It has not enjoyed the support of 

the public, regardless of what the hon. Premier said a day or two ago. It does not enjoy the support of the 

medical profession and it does not even enjoy the support of all members of this government. It has 

never been asked for by the people of this province. Who wanted this? Not the people of Saskatchewan. 

They repudiated it three times, in Athabasca, in Turtleford, and in Weyburn, and certainly not the 

medical profession, they are still repudiating it. The hon. Premier, the hon. Provincial Treasurer and all 

of the people of Saskatchewan are stuck with it. This is one of the legacies of the late Premier who was 

prepared to gamble with the health of the people of his province in the hope that he might stay alive 

politically. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Staveley: — I am not going to discuss this legislation as such, Mr. Speaker. My colleagues who 

debated this legislation before I sat in this chamber are much more competent to do that than myself. But 

there is one very significant point that I would like to bring to your attention. Who were the architects 

who drew the blueprints for this Douglas 



 
Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
31 

monument and where are they now? The late Premier, who has removed himself from the provincial 

scene, the Deputy Minister of Public Health, who is removing himself from the provincial scene, my 

very good friend the hon. Minister of Public Works, the former Minister of Public Health, disassociated 

from further responsibilities in this field. So we have another chapter in the old, old story, the socialist 

plan, people pay, and pay, and pay. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Staveley: — But the people are also wondering Mr. Speaker, and I believe that the hon. members of 

this government are also beginning to wonder. The legislation contained in the Throne Speech is sadly 

lacking. Certainly these sins of omission are as great as the sins of commission and this is a very barren 

Speech from the Throne. It is not constructive. It is drab, unimaginative, it is just the type of a speech 

that you might expect to be presented on a cold, bleak, wintry day. I would suggest that it is something 

like a winter works program and it will probably die with the going of the snow. 

 

I will not support the motion. 

 

Mr. M. Semchuk (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate you on your election 

to the high office which you now hold in this assembly and I want to tell you that I am sure that you will 

rule justly and impartially. My sincere congratulations, Sir. 

 

I would also like to congratulate the mover and the seconder of the motion in reply to the Speech from 

the Throne, my very good friend and colleague the hon. member for Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) and 

also the hon. member for Lumsden (Mr. Thurston). Both of these gentlemen made an excellent 

presentation and made it very clear and I am sure we are all very, very proud to be associated with them. 

 

I think I would also like to congratulate the hon. gentleman that just sat down, the newly elected 

representative for the Weyburn constituency (Mr. Staveley). I notice that one of the first things that he 

said Mr. Speaker was that he enjoyed the speech of the hon. Leader of the Opposition. I must confess, 

Sir, that I too enjoyed it very much. I thought, in fact I was 



 

Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
32 

wondering whether I was in this legislature or whether I was at an auction sale or whether I was in a 

circus. I had a lot of fun. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — What are you saying? That you like a circus. 

 

Mr. Semchuk: — Insofar, and I am saying this most sincerely, I am serious, I did enjoy the kind of 

pitch that the hon. gentleman made. As a business man I know how psychological selling is done. I have 

some knowledge of it and he made quite an interesting pitch and as I say I enjoyed that type of an 

approach. 

 

Representing the northern constituency of Meadow Lake, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words 

to this assembly on some of the programs and some of the development that has taken place in that part 

of the province of Saskatchewan. I say, Sir, that as I learn more about the workings of government, I am 

more and more impressed with the great progress that we have made in this province of ours during the 

last few years. I might take highways for an example. Our highway department has built more and 

maintained more highway miles in the province of Saskatchewan with the amount of money available to 

them than any other government in this country. All we need to do is look around us. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Semchuk: — It was interesting, the other day to hear the hon. Leader of the Opposition bewail the 

fact that the people around Creighton had a very small amount of blacktop. I do not know how much 

blacktop highway there is around Creighton. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — One mile. 

 

Mr. Semchuk: — But I do know, Mr. Speaker, that in the late thirties I lived in that area, I lived around 

the Nipawin area and I used to truck. Mr. Speaker, we had to carry an axe to chop the stumps out of the 

roadway at all times, not only around Creighton or around Nipawin or around Garrick or around Foxford 

or around Meath Park and Candle Lake but all the way across the northern, what we call the north but it 

is actually the central part of 



 
Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
33 

Saskatchewan. I am sure that the people around Meadow Lake know what the roads were like before 

this government came into power. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — They used to take a team along to pull them out. 

 

Mr. Semchuk: — That is right. I am certainly pleased that this government is aware of the importance 

of No. 4 highway. No. 4 highway is the second longest highway in the province of Saskatchewan, 

starting at the United States border, on the west side of the province and going north to Swift Current, 

through Rosetown, the Battlefords and on to Meadow Lake. Then of course it goes to Dorintosh to the 

Meadow Lake provincial park, the natural resources road, and I might say a very good natural resources 

road, takes off north to Canoe Lake. The total length of this road is close to 500 miles. I might say too 

that Canoe Lake has some of the best pickerel fishing in this country. 

 

If you will look at a highway map of the province of Saskatchewan, you would notice that No. 4 

highway is the only north-south highway serving the west side of the province of Saskatchewan, 

although there are many north-south highways on the east side. It therefore serves a great percentage of 

people living in the province. I want to commend the minister and the government for rebuilding No. 4 

last summer, from Meadow Lake south and improving it to within 19 miles of Glaslyn. I do think that 

the oiling of No. 4 highway from Meadow Lake to within 19 miles of Glaslyn would be definitely in the 

interests of the people on the west side of the province and in fact in the interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Semchuk: — Most of the goods coming into the Meadow lake area, into north-western 

Saskatchewan nowadays come in by truck and also most of the goods such as the forest products and 

farm products coming out of the north-western portion of Saskatchewan come out by truck. A dusty 

gravel road into that area, with the amount of traffic that is on it, is quite dangerous, particularly through 

the forest reserve. It gets quite dusty and the dust hangs heavily over the road. 



 

Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
34 

We have more and more traffic in the north-western portion of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I also might mention that we have a box factory at Meadow Lake, which is utilizing the trees from our 

forest and is processing numerous boxes for various fishing operations and so on. This box factory is 

doing an excellent job for the people up there, providing employment and most of their stuff is trucked 

over this road. We have also recently started a fence post treating plant and this is expanding at a very 

good rate and of course can utilize this highway as well. 

 

Now to go back to tourism just for a moment or so, Sir, there are many, many people from 

Saskatchewan coming into the north-west, the Meadow Lake provincial park is at the stage where it 

requires the extension of a road from No. 26 up to Lac Des Isle and a bridge across the Waterhen, to 

connect No. 26 with the park road. I certainly hope that the government will try to do something about 

this development which would help people from the west side of the constituency of Meadow Lake, as 

well as traffic from Alberta which is starting to come into north-western Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to bring to your attention Sir, a very recent publication, a publication which was put out by 

the Department of Industry and Information entitled ―Saskatchewan Invites the Angler.‖ I am certainly 

pleased with the space allocated to north-western Saskatchewan in this booklet. I certainly want to thank 

the government on behalf of the people of north-western Saskatchewan. The Department of Industry and 

Information has done a tremendous job in publicizing tourist traffic in this province, and tourist traffic is 

growing at a tremendous rate. Our own people are doing more touring and visiting in our own province 

and more outside traffic is coming in. While it is a job of government of course to promote this industry, 

because it is an important industry, it is also I feel quite important that tourist operators, hotel keepers 

and the motel keepers publicize also what they have to offer and what the accommodations are and what 

the recreational facilities and relaxation facilities are in various parts of our province. The general 

impression has been for many years that all we have is the wide open spaces, that all we have is 

elevators and oil derricks and wheat fields. It is true we have these things in the southern half of the 

province, but it is also true that we have many fine lakes, tremendously wonderful lakes, good fishing 

lakes, lovely sand beaches — in fact 



 
Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
35 

the whole northern part of Saskatchewan is a tremendous holiday area. In particular, Sir, the north-

western quarter of the province of Saskatchewan. I sometimes feel that if we could transplant the north-

west quarter of the province to the south, we could make it the best part of Saskatchewan in no time flat. 

I know we can‘t take north-western Saskatchewan to the people in the south, but we certainly should be 

able to bring the people to north-western Saskatchewan. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Semchuk: — There is just another item or two that I would like to mention and I would like to 

mention the Hanson Lake road for a moment or two, that is the road from Smeaton on to Flin Flon. I 

have watched the development of that road and the road from La Ronge on to the Churchill River, with 

more than passing interest. I am convinced that the Hanson Lake road is probably one of the best 

investments that we have made in the roads to resources program. I have no doubt that the Hanson Lake 

road will benefit the people of Saskatchewan in many ways — it will open up new forest resources, 

water resources, possible mineral resources and of course there is a great tourist potential. I have 

travelled along that road and I think it is a tremendous thing. However, I have no reason to change my 

thinking regarding the La Ronge to Uranium City road. While a road from La Ronge to Churchill and on 

to Reindeer, I think is essentials, to tap a highly mineralized area for possible exploration and 

development, I think it would be difficult to justify the building of a road to Uranium City at the present 

time. Of course, I appreciate the fact that this is a cost sharing agreement between the provincial and the 

federal government. 

 

I think, Sir, that rather than continuing building this road from the Churchill to Uranium City, it might 

be more practical to complete the road north of Buffalo Narrows on to La Loche and then to go from La 

Loche as far north as Descharme Lake, thus making it economically practical to commercially fish 

numerous new lakes, including Lake Athabasca. It is probably not generally known, Sir, that Lake 

Athabasca cannot be practically fished in the winter time. The commercial fishermen tell me they just 

can‘t find the fish. The lake is tremendously large, it is 200 miles long, but it is practical to fish it in the 

summer time. Also I am 



 

Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
36 

told that if we had a road to Descharme Lake that this fish could be flown in from the various lakes in 

the north, economically into Descharme Lake and trucked out. I am told also that the quota on Lake 

Athabasca alone is two million pounds annually and adding a number of other lakes in the area this 

would make quite a substantial increase insofar as commercial fishing in northern Saskatchewan is 

concerned. 

 

Of course there is another item too that I think has some possibilities and that is the harvesting and 

processing of the millions of pounds of northern blueberries and cranberries that are found north of the 

Clear Water River. I think there is some economic possibility that this might be part of the solution to 

the economic and social problems facing the native people in that area. I feel that we must constantly 

keep some of these fact in mind. That is the northern population increases, the changing social pattern in 

the north and the fact that we now have communications with these people. We have roads to their 

communities, in fact we have good radio communications, roads, we even have power into a lot of these 

communities. I feel that now these people in many of the communities are ready and I think willing to 

adopt the white man‘s way of life. 

 

During the last fifteen years and particularly the last five years this government has done a tremendous 

job in providing the kind of services that are necessary to improve the economic well-being of our 

northern people. Not only have we provided roads and communications and health services, which were 

practically non-existent during the former administration and I feel very strongly about this Mr. Speaker. 

I have lived in northern Saskatchewan all my life and I have seen how these things have developed and 

what we did not have in years gone by. 

 

I am pleased to note in the throne speech that there are going to be more northern schools, that there is 

going to be more provided in the realm of vocational training, and I would just like to say that it might 

be worthy of consideration that perhaps we should think in terms of training our teachers in the art of 

teaching the Métis and the Indian children in the way that they are taught to teach the handicapped. They 

should have specialized training to teach these young people. They are special cases. They are different 

in many respects than children that we know, and probably the teachers should have special training in 

that regard. 



 
Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
37 

There is just one more item that I want to mention before I sit down and that is that the farm land in the 

Meadow Lake area, as is probably known to many of you, is sub-marginal to a great extent. Our farmers 

came into our area in the hungry thirties. They were mostly wheat farmers who had come from the 

southern half of the province and they settled in the Meadow Lake area. Naturally being wheat farmers, 

this is what they thought of when they came into our area and they continued to grow cereal grains. Of 

course these were not too satisfactory. As this government provided more services to the agricultural 

industry, as we had better agricultural representatives and better services in that line and so on, our 

people began to realize the importance of diversifying their farm operations in the northern areas. Of 

course with the community pastures that we have now, provided by the Department of Agriculture, this 

has made a tremendous difference and many of our farmers have gone into livestock to quite a 

considerable degree. Some of them are also growing rapeseed and other seeds which are helping them to 

farm economically these small tracts of land that they are farming. But we have quite a problem 

regarding flooding in some of the areas around Meadow Lake, the Loon River area, the Loon Lake area, 

I am talking about the lake and not the town, the Beaver River, and I certainly want to commend the 

Department of Agriculture, the conservation and development branch for the work they have done there. 

I am very pleased with the amount of work they have done there so far, but I feel that it is very 

important that the overall picture of this north-western portion should be studied, engineered and water 

control programs set up for the whole area, rather than a piecemeal program. I think that many 

thousands of acres of land could be utilized if such a program could be instituted. 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, due to the fact that the throne speech promises education grants for northern schools 

and vocational training and also more recreational facilities and more services to agriculture, I will 

support the motion. 

 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate I would like 

first of all to take this opportunity to express to you sincere congratulations on your election to Speaker 

of this legislative assembly. 



 

Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
38 

I am sure that this choice was made in recognition of your ability and the contribution that you have 

made to this legislative assembly since 1945. 

 

I think it is recognized by everyone that there is no substitute for experience and your seventeen years as 

a member of this legislative assembly, as the faithful representative of the people of the Wadena 

constituency, and your previous service as Deputy Speaker of this house is, to us who sit on your right, 

ample assurance that you will conduct the business of this legislative assembly with tact and diplomacy. 

 

I want also at this time, Mr. Speaker, to convey sincere congratulations to the former Speaker, the 

present Minister of Municipal Affairs, and I would like also to convey congratulations to ministers of 

the government who are holding different portfolios than when we met last fall. I want to take this 

opportunity to wish them every success in their new departments. 

 

I, like a number of other members of this assembly didn‘t have an opportunity during the final stages of 

the last session of this legislature, the second session of the fourteenth legislature, to express publicly the 

complete satisfaction which I feel in the choice which was made by our provincial convention last 

November in the choice of the leader to succeed the Hon. T.C. Douglas. In our new Premier we have a 

man of integrity, a man who has been recognized as a top-notch administrator, a man who has the 

complete confidence of every government member and of our organization as a whole. I want to take 

this opportunity to wish him success and pledge to him our unqualified admiration and support at this 

time. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — While in the process of extending congratulations, I want also to congratulate the hon. 

member for Weyburn. I am sorry that he is not in his seat at the moment. I would like to congratulate 

him on his election to this legislative assembly and in so doing I feel sure that if he were here, he would 

also feel that he should be reconciled to share my few kind words with Messrs. Peterson and Kelln. 

 

Last in order Mr. Speaker, but certainly not least in importance, may I also offer congratulations to the 

mover and the seconder on the Address in Reply 



 
Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
39 

to the Speech from the Throne. The presentation which was given by both the hon. member for 

Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) and the hon. member for Lumsden (Mr. Thurston) were very well 

executed, very well done indeed, and I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate both of them 

at this time. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — As one of Moose Jaw‘s two members in this legislative assembly, I want to take just a 

few minutes of the assembly‘s time to express the gratitude that I feel, and the gratitude of the people of 

the constituency which I represent, for the various measures which have been adopted as a result of 

government action and policy decisions, which have made the city of Moose Jaw, my constituency, a 

better place in which to live. 

 

As many Moose Jaw citizens are aware, and I imagine also many other citizens are unaware, the school 

grants to the city of Moose Jaw during the fiscal year which is about to end total some $872,983.21, a 

very substantial figure Mr. Speaker, and an increase of some $177 thousand approximately over the 

previous year‘s grants. 

 

Also in the field of education, as a representative of the Moose Jaw constituency, I, among a large 

number of other people, was extremely grateful for the decision through the joint dominion-provincial 

project to extend existing facilities at the Moose Jaw Provincial Technical Institute. This is a program 

which involves an expenditure in excess of a million dollars, I understand, and it will provide training 

for the upgrading and the qualifying of many thousands of people in the years that lie ahead. I think the 

vital necessity for this kind of training during the days in which we are living, in these days of 

technological change, is being recognized more and more as time goes on. 

 

As a graduate of Central Collegiate Institute in Moose Jaw, I was also pleased during 1961 to attend the 

opening of the extension to the Moose Jaw Central High School. This extension includes the addition of 

a gymnasium, a beautiful new library, some shop facilities as well as other facilities which have been 

added to the old structure. This was another improvement to the school system in Moose Jaw for which 

we are very grateful. 



 

Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
40 

Under the urban assistance program the people of Moose Jaw were also gratified to have that portion of 

No. 2 highway which passes through the city of Moose Jaw improved. Street lighting was also added. In 

addition to this there has been a good deal of work done on No. 2 highway north of Moose Jaw and an 

interchange at the junction of the Trans Canada and No. 2 highway. This expedites the movement of 

traffic on these two very busy highways and it is something that is appreciated not only by the people of 

Moose Jaw, but by the travelling public generally. 

 

The news of the purchase of additional property on the south short of Buffalo Pound Lake, directly 

between two existing pieces of crown land was also welcome information. This, I understand gives us, 

now, approximately 935 acres on the south shore of Buffalo Pound Lake, involving approximately 3½ 

miles of shore line. It provides unlimited possibilities for a bona fide provincial park in this area, and we 

are looking forward to very substantial developments there in the months and the years that lie ahead. 

 

I would also at this time like to draw to the attention of the Minister of Highways the immediate need for 

an all-weather highway connecting No. 2 highway with that portion of Buffalo Pound Lake. This will 

undoubtedly serve a great many people during the summer months as expansion of this provincial park 

proceeds in the future. 

 

I want to take just a very few minutes this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, to draw attention to and make some 

comment in respect to, a subject that has received a good deal of publicity over the past number of 

weeks. There has been a good deal of comment and no lack of controversy on this particular subject, and 

I refer, of course, to Saskatchewan‘s prepaid medical care program. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that some 300 thousand people in the province of Saskatchewan, 

or almost a third of our total population are not covered by any form of medical care plan, by none of the 

private insurance plans that are in existence, and in view of the fact that a large number of these are 

deserving people who have been excluded for a number of reasons, including a lack of finances, I would 

suggest that it might be expected that a government-sponsored, prepaid medical care plan would be 

welcomed by those people who must admit they are either unwilling or unable to provide this service for 

approximately one third of our population. It would not seem reasonable to expect that we should find a 

―dog-in-the-manger‖ attitude in this type of a situation. 



 
Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
41 

Many of our senior citizens, as a result of various misfortunes in their earlier years, including 

unforeseeable sickness and capitalist depressions, find themselves in their twilight years unable to cope 

with the rising costs of medical care. Their needs are so great and their resources are so limited that it is 

impossible for anybody to make a profit out of them. As a result many of these people have become 

what we sometimes refer to as our ―forgotten people‖. Unavoidable sickness in old age oftentimes 

results in an accumulation of debt which these old people are never able to see over the top of, and this 

in turn resolves itself into something of a desperate situation where death seems to offer the only 

solution to their problems. 

 

The United States Sub-Committee which was headed by Patrick D. MacNamaro, the Sub-Committee on 

the ―Problems of the Aged and The Aging‖ held nationwide hearings in the United States during the 

year 1959-60, and this committee reports that existing private plans are too expensive for the pocket 

book of the average citizen over 65 years of age. Now this committee pointed out also that the coverage 

of these plans in a great many instances was far too limited to be of a great deal of assistance to those 

people who may become involved in a lengthy illness. Hearings which were held in San Francisco 

during 1959-60 reported stories of suicides among our senior citizens, and this report indicated that the 

notes which were left behind by these senior citizens indicated that in the great majority of cases they 

were poor, they were ill, they were in pain, and as a result they were discouraged and many took their 

own lives in these particular instances. 

 

This report also indicated that the suicide rate rises very sharply after retirement age, and I believe this 

spells out something of the picture for us Mr. Speaker. So I suggest it would be reasonable to expect that 

the administration of health services in one sector which could be vacated by these opponents of our 

proposed medical plan. This is a service which should be left for the people of Saskatchewan through 

their government to provide for the people of our province. This is a field in which the government 

through its medical care plan can provide service all of our citizens at cost. There is no private plan 

which is prepared to do this. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, frequently we have our humanitarian instincts appealed to. We are asked to 

contribute to many organizations, and we are expected to respond generously and rightly so, I believe. 

Every 



 

Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
42 

year we have a United Appeal campaign. Various organizations during the year appeal for our help for 

aid to underdeveloped countries for underprivileged people in other parts of the world. We are asked on 

a number of occasions during the year to contribute to CARE of Canada for the purpose of feeding 

hungry children in far away lands, and I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this represents an attitude whereby 

we have come to the understanding that the rich should help the poor, and the strong should help the 

weak. I suggest if this represents a sensible and reasonable attitude towards the people in undeveloped 

far away countries, then I suggest also it should represent a sensible attitude toward the poor and the 

unfortunate people close to home. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — I suggest Mr. Speaker, that it is rather difficult to understand the attitude of various 

organizations whose branches pledge their support to various other organizations who oppose our 

proposed medical care plan, especially when we in Canada and in the United States are inclined to boast 

on a great many occasions of our high standard of living. 

 

An example of this opposition was carried in a story in the New York Herald Tribune. It was reprinted 

in the Enginemans‘ Press of January 5, 1962, and I would like to quote for a minute if I may Mr. 

Speaker. This article says: 

 

―Watch for the American Medical Association to be joined in a massive $20 million campaign by the 

National Association of Manufacturers and the Chamber of Commerce against the administrations‘ 

medical care plan. To combat it these three organizations are teaming up for the first time. The 

estimate of $20 million drive against the controversial bill comes from a high administrative source.‖ 

 

I think Mr. Speaker, that perhaps the kindest thing that can be said about those people who oppose the 

proposed medical care plan is that they are not progressive, and I would like to offer in evidence also an 

editorial which appeared in the Toronto Globe and Mail of July 25, 1956, and it quotes the gentleman 

who is presently the Leader of the Opposition in this house: 



 
Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
43 

―Progressive thinking people are leaving the Liberal party more and more each year because it is no 

longer a party of reform. Today the Liberal party is legislating more and more for special groups and 

interests and less and less for the average citizens.‖ 

 

Now this editorial, Mr. Speaker, continues: 

 

―Thus spoke Mr. Thatcher, in Moose Jaw in 1948. Mr. Thatcher was then, as now, Moose Jaw member 

in the House of Commons, but whereas he then belonged to the Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation, he has now pledged his troth to the Liberal party. 

 

We suggest that Mr. Thatcher is quite sincere and quite right in deciding that the Liberal benches is 

where he belongs. He has battled for public ownership and he has battled against it. He has argued that 

corporation taxes should be raised and that they should be lowered; that special services should be 

extended and that they should not. Government price fixing at one time has drawn his wrath and at 

other times his applause. Having stood at various times and in various circumstances for everything, 

Mr. Thatcher is ideally equipped to serve under the banner of Prime Minister St. Laurent.‖ 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — 

―There he will find every possible opinion represented right, left, and particularly sideways.‖ 

 

The editorial concludes by saying: 

 

―He should advance quickly in a government which as he once complained is encumbered by dead 

wood.‖ 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — I suggest Mr. Speaker, that these inconsistencies, these misrepresentations, and these 

contradictions have long been the stock and trade of this old worn out Liberal party. 

 

The Liberals argue that the proposed medical care 



 

Thursday, March 1, 1962 

 

 
44 

plan in this province will be too costly to be acceptable to the average person in this province. They 

argue that it will disrupt existing services and that it will cause general chaos. Now this would seem to 

be a very sinister, a very unpopular plan indeed, and yet these same Liberals who sit opposite us in the 

house today, are the same Liberals who claimed during the second session of the fourteenth legislature, 

that the then Premier, the Hon. T.C. Douglas, was rushing this plan through in order that he could go 

into the field of federal politics in a blaze of glory, claiming full credit for this medical care plan. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald: — . . . blaze . . . 

 

Mr. Snyder: — I suggest once more, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberals would like to have it both ways. 

Fortunately, I suggest the people of Saskatchewan have reached a degree of political maturity. They 

have seen this type of political melodrama from the Liberals opposite many, many times before and they 

are unimpressed. 

 

I just want to suggest that those who are trying to stem the march of progress will find that their efforts 

have not only been in vain, but also that they will appear very petty and very shameful in the days that 

lie ahead. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, having a number of other remarks which I intend to make a little later on I would 

beg leave at this time to adjourn the debate. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:50 o‘clock p.m. 


