




















































Hansard: April 04, 1962


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

29th Day 

 

Tuesday, April 4, 1962. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT: RE CHAMPIONSHIPS 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, all the members will be aware that we 

have indicated that we would have a reception in the chamber for the Canadian curling champions from 

Saskatchewan. We had thought that it might have been arranged for Friday which would have been a 

more satisfactory date, however, for a variety of reasons this was not possible. For a variety of reasons it 

isn’t possible to have it next week. Consequently arrangements have been made to have the reception 

here in the chamber tomorrow afternoon at 4:30 o’clock. Since I may add, we have last talked about it, 

another sports champion from the province in the person of Mr. Glasser of Regina who has won a 

Canadian bowling championship and we have decided to include recognition of him in the ceremony at 

the same time. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT: RE RECIPROCITY AGREEMENT 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I would like 

to advise the house with respect to a matter which was the subject of a question on the orders of the day 

earlier in the session and dealing with reciprocity with the province of Ontario with respect to long 

distance traffic. I would advise the house that I have executed on behalf of the government an agreement 

with the province of Ontario which will have the effect of lowering the license fees which will be 

payable by Saskatchewan truckers in Ontario and by Ontario truckers in Saskatchewan, by a substantial 

amount, by some 60 per cent. This with the hope of encouraging more long distance trucking in Canada. 



 

April 4, 1962 

 

 

2 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. D.T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are called, I 

would like to direct the attention of all members to a group of schools students who just arrived in the 

Speaker’s gallery. They are from the Glenavon School District, and attend Glenavon School and they are 

accompanied by their teacher Mr. Allan Jurzyniec. I am sure as on other occasions all members of the 

legislature will join with me in wishing them a very enjoyable afternoon. Another significant thing I 

would like to point out at this time is one of the young gentlemen above the clock happens to be the son 

of the former member for Qu’Appelle-Wolseley. 

 

THIRD READING 

 

Bill No. 30 — An Act to amend The School Act 

 

Hon. O.A. Turnbull (Minister of Education: — I move the bill be read a third time and passed under 

its title, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It has been moved by the Hon. Mr. Turnbull that Bill No. 30, An Act to amend The 

School Act be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Mr. Speaker, I beg to move, seconded by Mr. McFarlane that Bill No. 30 be not now 

read a third time but read six months hence. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 17 

 

Messieurs 

 

Thatcher Danielson Horsman 

Klein McFarlane Coderre 

Batten (Mrs.) Gardiner MacDougall 

McCarthy Staveley Snedker 

Barrie Guy Gallagher 

McDonald Boldt  



 

April 4, 1962 

 

 

3 

NAYS — 31 

 

Messieurs 

 

Lloyd Thurston Johnson 

Meakes Wood Perkins 

Williams Erb Thiessen 

Blakeney Nicholson Stevens 

Brockelbank Stone Dahlman 

Nollet Turnbull Michayluk 

Kuziak Whelan Semchuk 

Cooper (Mrs.) Thibault Kluzak 

Strum (Mrs.) Berezowsky Peterson 

Willis Kramer Broten 

Brown   

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the third time and passed. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 


