



















































Hansard: February 26, 1962


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

3rd Day 

 

Monday, February 26, 1962 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

 

ON ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

QUESTION: MEDICAL PLAN 

 

Mr. W. Ross Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are 

called, I would like to direct a question to the Minister of Public Health. Is the government in a position 

to announce the date of the inauguration of the new medical scheme? 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I am not in a position at the moment to 

announce the date but I expect before long to make such an announcement. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — One supplementary question to the minister, Mr. Speaker. Does the government 

intend to institute the proposed medical scheme without first meeting with the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons? 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — The policy on this Mr. Speaker, will be announced in due course. 

 

QUESTION: COLLECTION OF TAXES 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Then, Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are called, I should like to direct a 

question to the Provincial Treasurer. Will the government consider halting the collection of increased 

sales tax, which it commenced levying January 1st, until it is in a position to announce the beginning of 

the new medical services plan? 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Provincial Treasurer): — The answer, Mr. Speaker, is no. 



 
Monday, February 26, 1962 

2 
 

QUESTION: FIRE AT WEYBURN MENTAL INSTITUTION 

 

Mr. J.E. Snedker (Saltcoats): — Before the orders of the day are proceeded with, I would like to ask 

the hon. member from Moose Jaw, the Minister of Public Health, when we may expect a report from the 

commission set up to study the cause of the fire at the Weyburn Mental Institution last fall? 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — Mr. Speaker, I am very sorry, but I did not hear the question. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — I should like to ask the Minister of Health when we may expect the report of the 

commission set up to study the cause and effects of the fire at the Weyburn Mental Institution, set up last 

fall, when we may expect their report? 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — This, Mr. Speaker, as I understand was filed the last session of the house. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Well, I haven‘t seen one. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — The report was tabled during the special session of the house last fall. 

 

CONGRATULATIONS TO SPEERS HIGH SCHOOL BOYS CURLING TEAM 

 

Mr. D.W. Michayluk (Redberry): — In the absence of the hon. member for the Battlefords (Mr. 

Kramer) at his request, I wish to bring to the attention of the house the fact that four fine high school 

boys from the village of Speers, skipped by Mike Lukowich have, on Friday last, won the Dominion 

High School Curling Championship on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan. These boys come from 

a small village of approximately 150 people. I have personally known these boys for a number of years, 

I have also known their coach, Mr. Percy Scott for some time. He first appeared on the scene some six 

years ago when Doug Scott, Percy‘s son, won the Saskatchewan High School Curling Championship. 

However his rink was unsuccessful in the dominion championships. However, only last Friday these 

young high school students from the village of Speers won the Dominion High School Championship by 

winning ten straight games 



 

Monday, February 26, 1962 

 

3 
 

and I understand, Mr. Speaker, that these boys have gone through high school curling in Saskatchewan 

with only one loss, and that was to the high school boys from Maple Creek. On behalf of Mr. Kramer, 

the hon. member from the Battlefords, who tonight is attending a reception tendered to these curlers by 

the people of Speers, and myself, I wish to extend hearty congratulations to these boys and I am sure 

that I speak for all the members on both sides of the house, thank you. 

 

QUESTION: REPORT OF SELECT STANDING COMMITTEE ON RADIO BROADCASTING 

OF SELECTED PROCEEDINGS 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I would like to request 

verification from yourself, I must plead ignorance because it is the first opportunity I have had to sit on 

the radio committee, but I understood in committee this morning that the time for discussion for this 

particular committee‘s report would be tomorrow, and now I understand that the thing has been passed 

without discussion and I didn‘t realize that until I came into the house that we would have to have the 

discussion this afternoon or commence it, and I regret because of the fact that I wasn‘t on the committee 

before and that the other member that has been on it wasn‘t with me this morning, but I did not know the 

actual operations of the committee report. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — When Mr. Thurston moved concurrence in this report, it was by leave of the assembly. 

If members had not granted this leave then it would have had to go on the order paper and be debated at 

a later date, but there was no objection when I put the question to the assembly so accordingly the report 

was passed. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Mr. Speaker, I said ―no‖ at the time that you put the question . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — No, no. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — I did say no, I said no at the time the question was put and I think for that reason it 

should not be passed as it was and that we should be permitted to discuss this at a later date. 



 
Monday, February 26, 1962 

4 
 

Mr. Speaker: — There were some no‘s when I put the question but there were no no‘s when I asked if 

leave was granted. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Even though you could be correct on this matter, I think perhaps if the Premier and 

the government would give permission to refer to it at a later date it would be in the interest of party 

discussion. It wasn‘t realized that it was going through as rapidly as it was. Perhaps I, as Leader of the 

Opposition was asleep at the switch for a moment, I don‘t know, but if this could be reverted to 

tomorrow or another day I think it would be helpful. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — At a later date? I really don‘t know of any procedure by means of which we can 

throw the house in reverse. The Speaker quite plainly put the question as to whether or not consent was 

given, there was no objection it. I listened very carefully because I anticipated there would be. He then 

proceeded to the next proper step and put the motion and the motion was clearly carried. It seems to me 

with that we must consider that it has been dispensed with in the proper fashion. 

 

Mr. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to have a ruling on this, or a 

gentlemens‘ agreement on this very topic. If it was agreed in committee this morning that this argument 

be taken up at a further date and the members of the committee left with that understanding, I don‘t 

think it is the proper procedure to bring it into the house and have a complete reversal of words that were 

given in committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — There was no violation of the rules of the house. In the committee this morning, I was 

there, it was mentioned that it could stand over for debate tomorrow but it couldn‘t be debated today. It 

was asked, ―Could it be debated today?‖ they were informed it couldn‘t be. If they wanted a debate, it 

would have to come tomorrow or a later date. The only alternative now is, if any member wishes to 

bring in a substantive motion to discuss points arising. I think a motion may be made so that we could 

have discussion but not on this motion, at this time. This motion was passed through the house. 



 

Monday, February 26, 1962 

 

5 
 

Mr. Gardiner: — I still say, Mr. Speaker, that I did say no. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — It has been re-discussed in this house for some considerable time now it has properly 

disposed of and I think we have no alternative other than to proceed with the business of the legislature. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): — Do you mean to tell me that we have arrived at a position where 

a member has stood in his place and said that he voted against a certain motion that was put to this house 

and you say that he didn‘t. 

 

Government Members: — No, no. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, any member that stands in his place in this house, you must respect 

what he tells you is at his word and you haven‘t accepted it. If there is anybody in this house that voted 

against it then it isn‘t passed, you know that and I know that. 

 

Government Members: — You are wrong. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I am not wrong, you have got to have the consent of the house. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I rule that this portion of the debate at this time did proceed. There were no ‗nays‘ 

when I asked if leave was granted. It is true that there were one or two ‗nays‘ when I asked if the motion 

was carried but not when I asked if leave were granted. Leave was granted. If I recall right, I didn‘t 

make a note of it, some of the members were not in their seats, they were not in their chairs when the 

first part of the motion was put through and that is not the fault of the chair. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You mean you don‘t believe . . . 

 

Government Members: — No, no . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — We are on the orders of the day. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I appeal the ruling. 



 
Monday, February 26, 1962 

6 
 

Mr. Danielson: — Mr. Speaker, I don‘t know anything about this thing but I heard some . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Appeal? . . . I don‘t know what ruling. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Just a moment ago you said you gave us a ruling. I appeal that ruling. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I said that we would proceed according to the rules of the house. I rule that we proceed 

according to the rule of the house. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You did no such thing. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That is my ruling. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You just told this house that nobody voted against it. Our member has said that he 

did vote against it. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — I did so. 

 

Government Member: — Why don‘t you listen? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Why don‘t you listen? The trouble is you don‘t understand what you hear. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, at the committee meeting it was my understanding 

that this was to be debated tomorrow, that was my understanding from the committee meeting where I 

sat this morning. Now if it is not to be debated tomorrow I am only to conclude that this has been 

rammed through the house with the usual socialist steam roller method. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — On a matter of privilege, I do claim to have voted, definitely voted against the motion 

when called. 

 

Hon. R.A. Walker (Attorney General): — What question? 



 

Monday, February 26, 1962 

 

7 
 

Mr. Gardiner: — You question which one I voted against, I voted against both, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It is correct that you voted against the motion when I called a vote on the motion but 

there were no nays when I asked for leave. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — I did say no, if you didn‘t hear it I am sorry. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — I don‘t know what took place in committee this morning but I have been told that the 

committee did not agree and that they were going to have a meeting some time tomorrow or next day, to 

finalize the discussion. If that is correct this thing is wrong, and therefore if that is correct, if there was 

definite agreement in the committee this morning I don‘t think we have a great deal of complaint, but if 

there was not agreement in committee this morning then this thing should be held over until further 

meeting and a man who was absent this morning who has been present previous to this time would be 

present also, that is my idea and I think that is a matter of good faith, that‘s all. 

 

Mr. Foley: — I think we should exercise that at least for a little while, until we get into the session, but 

don‘t expect it very long. 

 

CONGRATULATIONS TO HIGH SCHOOL CURLERS 

 

Mr. Franklin E. Foley (Turtleford): — I wish to make a statement before the orders of the day are 

proceeded with but do not wish to interrupt the present debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You may proceed. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to extend hearty congratulations to the Mike Lukowich rink 

and their coach Doug Scott of Speers on winning the Dominion High School Curling Championship. I 

have watched the boys curl, I know them personally and I am confident that they were splendid 

ambassadors for Saskatchewan in the dominion playoffs. I would also like to extend very hearty 

congratulations to their high school principal who is Mr. Bernard Korchinski, a former member of this 

legislature. 



 
Monday, February 26, 1962 

8 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — It is with a mixture of pride and humility that I rise to open 

this debate. Firstly, it is my personal pleasure to congratulate you Sir, on your elevation to the high 

office of Speaker of this house. You have always been highly regarded by all members of the legislature 

because of your fairness and your understanding of parliamentary procedures and purposes, and added 

to this your practical years of experience as chairman of various committees and lately as Deputy 

Speaker, must make all of us in this legislature feel that the choice that we have made has been a very 

good one and that also as a Speaker you will guide us and counsel us in our deliberations of the future. 

 

I am very happy at this time to recognize the hon. member from Weyburn (Mr. Staveley) who just 

recently was elected and I am sure that my colleagues in this house will join me in welcoming him into 

this house, and I hope that he will actively participate in the deliberations and in making decisions of the 

future. I need to point out to the hon. member from Weyburn that he has a most difficult role to play for 

two very good reasons, Mr. Speaker. One is that he will have to endeavour to emulate his predecessor, 

Hon. Tommy Douglas, former Premier of this province, who gave his heart and soul in service to the 

people of this province of Saskatchewan and who set a high standard of representation in this legislature 

for the people of Weyburn, which I hope the hon. member will be able to do and of course the former 

Premier was excellent in debate, which is known to all. 

 

Now secondly, the hon. member from Weyburn, now being a spokesman for the Liberal party in this 

house may find it rather difficult to always go along with the Leader of the Opposition whose 

understanding of liberalism is not always that of his colleagues who sit with him in opposition. 

 

It is indeed an honour Mr. Speaker, to be chosen to move the Address in Reply to His Honour‘s Speech 

from the Throne and I am sure that the people of Cumberland and the people of the north have been 

gratified and highly honoured for such a privilege. I humbly suggest that this is probably a recognition 

of the northern part of our province, and I am sure that it pleases all of us who come from there. On the 

other hand the people from the south can take satisfaction in having a most versatile and capable 

seconder to the motion, the hon. member from 



 

Monday, February 26, 1962 

 

9 
 

Lumsden (Mr. Thurston) who I am sure will make an excellent presentation on behalf of the people of 

the prairies. 

 

At this time, I consider that it is the duty of this legislature to give consideration to the state of affairs of 

this province, to review past progress so that we may be able to make some judgment as to whether we 

have met the desires, wishes and demands of our electorate; and it is of course necessary and most 

expedient to wisely consider new legislation of any nature so that we may be able to decide if we are 

doing all possible to give good government to our people of this province. 

 

Because there are many disquieting conditions and situations in Canada and in the world today; such 

distressing things as unemployment, the farm price-cost squeeze, the inflation that we are experiencing, 

inadequate social welfare and health services that exist in Canada, the need for better security for people 

on pensions and for the needy, and above all the growing danger of war that exists today, it appears 

appropriate that some of these matters be discussed in the house as they are, I am sure, of great 

importance to all our people. 

 

I think what we require is a positive approach to every question from the point of view of how it will 

better our society and our province and our nation and the world generally. In plain words, this is not a 

time for bickering about political affiliations. Therefore, I think it is proper that I remind the hon. 

members of this house that CCF governments of the past have taken a positive approach to public needs 

and hopes and if one is not blind as some people are, they can see progress all across Saskatchewan. 

They see new schools, power, roads, industry, oil wells and parks. Much of what we have pioneered has 

spread into other provinces and across the width and breadth of Canada as we all know. The CCF 

governments have endeavoured, over the years, to enact laws that have meaning to our people such as 

the Farm Security Act, the Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act, Hours of Work Act, and many others of 

course. Such legislation, Mr. Speaker, gives hope of economic security and social justice and is a step, I 

believe, towards the goal of social justice and is a step, I believe, towards the goal of democracy which 

we are trying so hard to attain. The Throne Speech indicates that we are making progress in that 

direction of attaining democracy. We can be certain too, that under the leadership of our Premier, Hon. 

Woodrow S. Lloyd, we will not deviate from that purpose. The record of our Premier is one of 

dedication and high goals and is appreciated by our Saskatchewan people who know him and 

particularly by school teachers, who were elevated into a 



 
Monday, February 26, 1962 

10 
 

dignified profession by policies sponsored by the Department of Education while the Premier was the 

minister of that department. 

 

I may say, Mr. Speaker, at this time that I am more than proud to be associated with the Premier. He is 

not only a self-made man full of understanding of human life and its complexities but he is also sensitive 

and sympathetic to the needs of our people and to the needs of our society. I think the people of 

Saskatchewan are indeed fortunate again in having a Premier at the head of the government of 

Saskatchewan who is so conscious and so determined in having the best legislation enacted for the 

people of our province. 

 

They are fortunate indeed because as I said our Premier is not only a man of the people but he is an 

excellent administrator who watches with an eagle‘s eye over every department of government. And I 

can say this too, that we have had the best governments in Canada in the province of Saskatchewan in 

the past and I venture to say, with all confidence, that with the short experience that we have had with 

our new Premier that we will continue to have the best government in Canada under the Hon. Woodrow 

Lloyd. 

 

Once again the Throne Speech points to increased assistance to education. It was always the purpose of 

our CCF government to bring a balance and to equalize the tax load on the people of Saskatchewan in 

order that urgent services might be available to the poor as well as to the rich. It was in the Department 

of Education, I recall quite well, under Mr. Lloyd, when one of the first attempts in this direction was 

made, and without taking anything away from the hon. ministers of the crown in the past, who also 

worked hard for costs being spread across a wide base, yet it is a fact that it was in education that the 

first steps were taken in payment of building grants for schools and in building government-aided 

schools and providing of equalization grants so that teachers could be paid decent salaries and so that 

modern facilities could be provided and available in the most marginal districts of our province. I recall 

quite well that the first such schools under this government were built in such marginal districts in the 

northern areas, in my own constituency, in places like Meath Park and Weirdale, later in the Prince 

Albert constituency at MacDowall and then I understand at Sturgis and many other parts of the north. 

 

At this time I think it only right also to thank the Hon. L.F. McIntosh who was closely associated with 

the 



 

Monday, February 26, 1962 

 

11 
 

school boards in the community at the time and who was our go-between with Mr. Lloyd. I must put on 

record the appreciation of the citizens of our part of Saskatchewan to the hon. minister from Prince 

Albert, not only for his efforts but also for following the same policy of equalization when he became 

Minister of Municipal Affairs, at which time he brought into effect such policies as equalization grants 

for roads and of course the grid road grants. Now these policies, have been most popular and when I talk 

about things that have meaning for people then these equalization policies for education and for other 

services that the government has approved are something all of us understand and all of us appreciate. 

These are the reasons why the CCF party has held the confidence of the electorate in spite of the slander 

and misrepresentation that has been propagated by those who are opposed to the party. 

 

Although this government has made representations to the royal commission recently that health 

services should be a federal program, and I think we all agree, yet this government did not leave the 

people waiting for federal legislation but we enacted, last fall, a provincial plan, as you know Sir. 

 

The legislation passed last year by this house for a public health insurance plan is in line with the wishes 

of the people of this province. Once again the principle of equalization is being put into practice by the 

government, so that the poor as well as the wealthy will have access to medical care. In spite of the 

differing of opinions on this legislation I was glad to see that at least some of the members opposite last 

October voted with members on this side of the house on second reading of the bill. As a matter of fact, 

Saskatchewan has had a history of leading in the field of health care for a long time under various 

governments. Since 1929 we have led in a publicly supported tuberculosis program and have all but 

eliminated the disease that is well known to the hon. members. Since 1930, we have had a cancer 

program that became fully free when the CCF came into power in 1944. This was followed by the Air 

Ambulance Service for those in need at nominal cost and then came the big step in 1947 when the CCF 

government, against some considerable opposition, established the Saskatchewan Hospital Services 

Plan. Today there is a common understanding of its worth and we are accordingly proud of the plan. 

We, of course, should be proud because the plan became so popular that other provinces followed suit in 

accepting it and today it has spread as a service across the length and breadth of this Canadian nation. I 

would like to say that the medical plan which we have enacted will have as popular a reception here and 

elsewhere in Canada as has the hospitalization plan. 



 
Monday, February 26, 1962 

12 
 

At this moment Mr. Speaker, there is one regret that the people of Saskatchewan have and it is that our 

medical profession has failed to meet the rising expectations of our people for decent healthful 

existence. I have met with many of my constituents, some of them supporters of the party opposite and 

some belonging to other political creeds, but I can honestly and sincerely report that they are universally 

in favour of the plan which this government has enacted and which was passed last October and the 

behaviour of the College of the Physicians and Surgeons is beyond comprehension of all these people. 

 

The resistance of the medical union referred to as the college, is represented as a fear of government 

interference in the work of medical men. The college says it is in favour of a medical plan if it is 

controlled and administered by themselves or by private insurance companies. Is it not strange that the 

college has so much faith in these private companies and so little in a democratically elected government 

and the people of this province. We have repeatedly assured the doctors that any fears that exist have no 

foundation in fact or in experience with this government; as I shall illustrate this afternoon that such 

arguments are nonsensical and misleading to the nth degree as far as I am concerned. 

 

I have here a copy of a brief submitted by the Saskatchewan College of Physicians and Surgeons to the 

royal commission which very recently sat in Regina, and on Page 6, the history and progress of the 

cancer control program is illustrated. The brief says that in 1929 the medical association appointed a 

cancer commission which was to investigate the facilities and ways to treat cancer and to advise the 

Saskatchewan government of the day. It was the doctors who set up this control program initially. This 

committee recommended that a cancer commission in every way similar to the medical commission be 

appointed, and this was done in 1931 under a Conservative government. In 1945 the brief goes on to say 

the CCF government appointed an advisory committee to assist the commission with advice, the same as 

we now propose in the Medical Health Insurance Act. In 1944 the Cancer Control Act was passed 

superseding the Cancer Commission Act, and since that time, for eighteen years now, the law has 

provided free cancer diagnosis, free treatment of cancer, and free hospitalization of all Saskatchewan 

cancer patients. And since that time too the Saskatchewan government has paid the doctors‘ bills and 

there has been no loss of freedom, there has been no interference with doctor-patient relationship or the 

loss of any personal or professional liberty of medical men. 



 

Monday, February 26, 1962 

 

13 
 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — And mind you Sir, and the records will show no one has refused to submit his 

account for services to the government, and the government has not refused to pay any bills for services 

rendered. As a matter of fact if hon. members would refer to pages 326-328 of the 1961 Public 

Accounts, which were only recently, I think last Friday, turned over to us officially, you will find over 

100 names of medical practitioners and clinics who were paid for services rendered to our people who 

were struck down with cancer, and here are a few I see there — payments to certain doctors, I won‘t 

mention the names, $31,658 for one year‘s services for which bills were submitted; another, an 

association from Prince Albert $6,591; another doctor was paid $22,992; another doctor $11,498; 

another clinic from my part of the country $3,771; and it goes down the line in that way, large amounts, 

small amounts. 

 

These are a few examples of the accounts that were paid, and most interesting Mr. Speaker, the president 

of the College of Physicians and Surgeons, who so opposes the medical plan, Dr. H.D. Dalgleish, 

submitted and received $5,208.37. Now what I want to say is this Sir, these specialists undoubtedly did a 

good job. The money was well earned by them, and we have been glad to pay for our people who have 

had the benefit of treatment. Let us have no misunderstanding on that! We are glad that lives have been 

saved, but the point I want to make today is that these medical men accepted this fee from the 

government without fear of losing any rights or privileges — they have been doing it for eighteen years. 

The second point is that under the Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act we are only extending the 

same principle in exactly the same way that we applied it to the control of cancer, to the free treatment 

of all diseases and ailments which affect our people. 

 

And I say this: that any delusions, nervousness or apprehension about income or pay or freedom of 

practice or patient-doctor relationship is certainly unwarranted and unnecessary. The sooner the doctors 

shed their psychosis, if this is what affects them, and decide to co-operate with the people of this 

province then the sooner we will begin to fulfil the expectations of our demanding and deserving public. 

 

Fear, however, may not be the reason for resistance of the college. Some people say that under 

capitalism, the practice of medicine has lately been separated from the business of medicine, as is the 

case in part of the United States where they say it is cheaper 



 
Monday, February 26, 1962 

14 
 

to die than to try to cure yourself under the plans they have there. Mr. Speaker, I hope this is not the case 

in Saskatchewan. I think that we could ask ourselves, — Would we rather see our loved ones die and lie 

in silent graves because we lacked money to obtain a doctor? Would we rather be in a position where 

hundreds of dollars were owing for medical services with no hope of ever paying? Or would it not be 

best to pay co-operatively and according to our ability and save those that can be saved without the 

worry of how the medical bills would be paid? It is just as simple as that and only those who are hard 

and inhuman would try and unlawfully deny us the right to be healthy and the right to live. Surely there 

are not too many of that kind left in this richly-endowed land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we have had to face a difficult environment due to climatic conditions 

and distances from markets. Our pioneers who came from many countries faced unlimited hardships and 

it has been a condition of survival that they have had to learn to work together, and by working together 

they learned to respect each other as neighbors and they acquired a personal dignity for themselves in 

addition to considerable economic benefits that accrued to them. To survive and to see others survive 

was as imperative as it was to live decent lives. As an outcome of this kind of struggle against the forces 

of nature, against the corporate power and the wiles of greedy ambitious men, the people found they had 

to build together the best that was in them to do! That is why we developed a high sense of true values 

and naturally have fully concerned ourselves with health, education and other basic needs of humanity. 

It is not hard for us in Saskatchewan to understand that a healthy people means a healthy society. It is 

just as easy for us to have the insight that education is as important as health. It is easy for us in 

Saskatchewan to assume public responsibility for these services and when our governments have had the 

courage to implement the people‘s desire into law, our experience shows that reaction in spite of much 

opposition from a few selfish interests was usually most favourable. 

 

Yet, one reason why many of these forward steps in legislation have been popular is because the CCF 

party has always taken its direction from the people of Saskatchewan and from the grassroots as hon. 

members know, and I could enumerate a number of acts on our statutes which were suggested at local 

and provincial convention level and the medical act is one. I am sure it is not necessary for me to talk 

about it at this time. 



 

Monday, February 26, 1962 

 

15 
 

Now the field of education specifically has been a deep concern as I have said of the Saskatchewan 

people and the CCF government over the past eighteen years, and in addition to being well and healthy, 

the human mind must have an opportunity to be trained. A person must be able to think, to create, to 

plan and to work well, so that each individual may find his purpose and his happiness in his short lease 

of life. Happiness then, in my opinion, can only be found when a person finds dignity in the community 

and in his home. Of course it has a price and to achieve this destiny it requires a personal sacrifice and a 

collective sacrifice in effort and money so that a government can provide educational as well as other 

opportunities for members of its society. Because we have a social and democratic viewpoint which our 

hon. friends often refer to as socialist, we are happy to pay the price because we desire that every child 

and person gets these opportunities and advantages. Each time our programs are expanded or new ones 

brought in it is another step to a better life. New programs such as the one initiated only recently, a 

program for vocational training for people of the far north, so they could find a place in this world, are 

most commendable, and I think it is in the right direction. 

 

This is one of the ways that we can help our underprivileged to raise themselves from the depths of 

poverty, despair and underprivilege, so, we must continue to increase scholarships for the needy, not 

only for university training, we may have to do it for some of the high school students where that is the 

only way out, the same as we are doing now for vocational training programs. The loans that have been 

made available under a CCF government have made it possible for many young people from these 

underprivileged groups that I have mentioned, to become teachers, engineers, and qualified in other 

professions and such are excellent and meaningful policies which will help make our province and 

nation stronger. Yet it is no secret that it costs money and takes taxes, I say taxes, to train members of 

our society so they may find work together and that they may work together in professions and 

industries where opportunities call. But there are a few people who question this, and they say we cannot 

afford to pay taxes to provide assistance to our people and opportunities for training and for health and 

things of that nature. 

 

Such argument, Sir, is not only selfish, but in my opinion, lacks courage and vision. In plain words and 

according to a recent McLean‘s article, an editorial 



 
Monday, February 26, 1962 

16 
 

of February 10th and I advise some of the hon. members to read it, this kind of attitude is absurd. Of 

course we can afford them, the only thing we can‘t afford is to shirk the task of collecting money to pay 

for them and debase our currency instead, the editorial says, and I agree, and the Leader of the 

Opposition should take note of this editorial printed in a leading Canadian magazine, so that when he 

attacks the CCF government either here or at Creighton, concerning taxes required to provide desired 

and worthwhile services, he will take stock of the logic of his own reasoning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government should be commended for having the courage to collect taxes from those 

who can pay to provide these essential services, the facilities, the staff, as well as other needs of our 

school districts. This year the equalization policy of this government means this in our Prince Albert 

School Unit 78 cents out of every dollar that is being spent for education comes from the provincial 

treasury, and 22 cents for each dollar comes from direct taxation. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — That is not wasting tax money! That is a good way to spend money. Such a policy 

is sound and a credit to the people of this province who have co-operated and encouraged this 

government in this kind of responsibility to help those who need help, in the poor areas. 

 

In the Throne Speech it is indicated that municipal reorganization will soon be possible, and I think this 

is most desirable and certainly timely legislation. Hon. members know that there has been much thought, 

time and money spent in considering and planning for such reorganization. It is of course urgent in this 

modern age to speed and efficiency that municipal governments are efficient in their administration and 

that they are able to provide all possible services at reasonable cost, that are being demanded by our 

people. In many parts of our province this demand for decentralization of functions now performed by 

the provincial government such as the ag. rep. service and certain welfare service. I think there could be 

equalization of assessments of land and property so that we may have fair tax ratios. I think there is 

much need of integration of municipal responsibilities to take in larger areas of certain economies, such 

as for example, the maintaining of roads in winter, snow removal, and for summer maintenance of roads, 

of course. Important too, I think, is the administration 



 

Monday, February 26, 1962 

 

17 
 

costs that we carry now in small municipalities. I think they are necessarily too high and could be 

substantially reduced if counties were set up and savings certainly would be made. In many cases small 

municipalities short of funds are like isolated islands and are forced to deny their taxpayers such services 

as libraries and good side roads. I think that a larger unit of administration could provide many such 

services and more economically. So you can see, Sir, why I am pleased that we will be going forward 

another step in the direction towards municipal reorganization, and I only hope that the areas in northern 

administration districts can also be organized along these lines. 

 

Recently, I spoke at a trappers convention in Prince Albert at which time I urged the northern people 

who are in the main of Indian ancestry, to assume more personal, local and community responsibility in 

improving their lot. I recognized then as I do today, that it was very idealistic for me to speak to them in 

that manner, telling them to go home, plan their future needs, tell governments what their requirements 

were and asking their co-operation with the provincial and federal government to solve the problems 

they have to solve. Now I say this is idealistic but someone has to encourage these people to stand up 

and go forward, because it must be admitted that this government as well as the federal government 

must of necessity give the right kind of leadership to encourage these northern residents to go forward 

with community development and regional government. Some people think that northern residents are 

not mature for this forward step. I of course disagree, and I think there are other members that disagree. I 

would like to point out from personal experience that I know numbers of capable individuals all across 

the north who can assume responsibility in local government just as they have been able to manage 

stores and co-operatives in their areas for private enterprise and for co-ops. However, though the 

potential for administration is there I think these people have to be encouraged, and we have to say the 

kind of things that I said to the trappers in Prince Albert. I recall two or three years ago when I was up at 

La Ronge it was reported that Indian children were fainting from malnutrition in school, and a few days 

later the home and school meeting tried to get the Department of Indian Affairs to provide a hot noon 

lunch. It was announced by the agent, I am told, that the federal government would be glad to co-operate 

if the natives made a request in that direction. Probably the hon. member from Athabasca might recall 

the incident. To date the children from the reserve still go hungry and are victims of malnutrition 

because the natives have apparently been too shy to ask for such a program so nothing has been done. 



 
Monday, February 26, 1962 

18 
 

Lack of responsibility and involvement in local government has increased the incidence of drunkenness, 

of brawls, of rape and of course malnutrition. The provincial and federal governments must face up to 

these facts; we can‘t hide away from them. Something has to be done and has to be done fast. We must 

help and teach these people to solve their own problems, yet they cannot do it themselves nor can we do 

it for them. We must first of all give these plundered and down-trodden people some of their self-respect 

through responsibility and self-reliance. They must not only hear about and look at our complex society, 

and come in contact with it, they must become part of it and learn through experience how to tackle their 

own social problems. I would like to illustrate with a simple situation and say to hon. members, that 

those who have lived in one room shacks or tents lighted by a stove fire or a candle or a lantern, can 

hardly appreciate the merits of a frame house with electricity. These are things that people must learn to 

appreciate and to desire, and that is why northern people must be included in any plan of future 

municipal reorganization, as well as being fully involved in any program of community development. 

 

Of course in my constituency at Cumberland House and one or two other spots in Saskatchewan, as a 

result of a helping hand from this government, the people there have learned to get together and work 

together, and some of these northern people now help decide policies by attendance at trappers 

conventions as well as at meetings of fishing co-operatives, and this progress was made possible by 

work done by our anthropologists and by dedicated individuals in the government service. Organizations 

such as trappers conventions, fishing co-ops and lately the Indian-Metis friendship council have proven 

that these northern people of white and Indian ancestry can work together. Many natives today are doing 

a marvellous job and can do as much in local government if they are given a chance. If we can set up 

local administrations in the north then we will speed up the day when housing and living standards will 

be improved. We will of course have to subsidize as we have in the past and will have to give extensive 

grants as we have done in the past. The northern people will have to levy taxes and spend them in their 

own communities but they will have a better understanding and appreciation if things are done in that 

way when we give them these grants and this assistance from the people of this province of 

Saskatchewan. 



 

Monday, February 26, 1962 

 

19 
 

I think a local approach toward rehabilitation could be made which would be of inestimable value. For 

example, in northern Manitoba, at Island Lake, native fishermen have been taught to build boats for 

themselves and for resale, and it says here in this clipping that only oak ribs and hardware were 

purchased. The rest of the material was obtained from their own sawmill, and I quote this clipping from 

―Indian News‖ of January 12, 1962. Now because this government has been in the forefront in Canada 

with its welfare policies and legislation, I would welcome the enlargement of our existing programs 

along the lines taken by these natives at Island Lake. I think they are showing us the way. This of course 

would require a budget as we all know, but I think it would be worthwhile to do something like this in 

this province of Saskatchewan. CCF governments have always stood up for the underprivileged. 

 

As in health and education, this province has also led in welfare, and we have seen to it over the years 

that those who needed food and clothing and shelter and the necessities of life, but who could not 

provide for themselves, because of unemployment or disability, old age, or being widowed, were given 

all possible assistance to live a decent life. We believe that organized society must take that 

responsibility to see that no one suffers any kind of privation for reasons beyond his or her control. 

 

I am glad the government has indicated that it agrees to participate in a proposed increase for certain 

categories of our public assistance needs. Our assistance to unemployed and the needy farmers has often 

been criticized for being too generous. Mr. Speaker, I am sure there may be certain abuses one way or 

another by recipients as well as by local welfare officials, yet overall, this program too has been good 

and worthy of our Christian philosophy in our Canadian society. I have interviewed many people in 

these categories and in nearly all cases they have expressed appreciation for our welfare policies. Now 

this does not mean that we cannot do better; of course, we can, and this government is conscious of this 

fact and is working in the direction to improve our programs and make them better. This government 

recognizes that most people who are able to work would prefer to work instead of being on social aid, 

and we recognize that some people resent any kind of public assistance, and I know many of that kind, 

and I think it is true to say as John Ruskin said, if you want knowledge you must toil for it, if food you 

must toil for it, if pleasure you must toil for it, as toil is the law. Many people accept this law in principle 

with which to live. 



 
Monday, February 26, 1962 

20 
 

As further proof of my contention, however, is an incident which happened to me in Prince Albert at the 

trappers convention which I have mentioned, and I quote the report from the Prince Albert Herald at that 

time: 

 

―Trappers welcome MLA‘s proposal — Northern Saskatchewan trappers have welcomed a proposal by 

William Berezowsky, MLA for Cumberland, for a higher standard of living in northern communities 

through work projects rather than through social aid handouts.‖ 

 

What I suggested, Mr. Speaker, at that time was an alternative to present federal-provincial policies so 

that people qualified for social aid would not be denied an opportunity to progress materially and to 

raise their standard of living by doing constructive work. The report goes on to say: 

 

―Trappers interviewed Wednesday said they were in accord with Mr. Berezowsky‘s proposal and 

would return to their settlements to try to work out a program for submission to the government. 

Others interviewed said they would be glad to work on projects that would improve their communities 

and at the same time provide them with pay cheques.‖ 

 

You see, Mr. Speaker, that apparently Ruskin‘s statement is true — work is an inherent attribute or 

attitude toward life of mankind. The people that I met were of the grass roots, the base on which our 

civilization is founded, and it is obvious that we must get a clear picture of what these people desire. 

Some of us think we know the answer. We say we must have social and economic justice to have a 

strong nation. If that is so, then we must act as I suggested to the trappers. There must be different types 

of rehabilitation programs for this needy population, a program possibly talked about but never before 

attempted by governments. A program where the people will co-operate with the government and the 

government co-operate with the people. I agree with our Premier who said some time ago that carrying 

out possible work programs is an investment in people and in our community. Instead of social aid 

which has been draining the life blood of our nation we in the government must promote work and 

wages as a positive step in that direction and the suggestion I offer, Mr. Speaker, is not without 

precedent because the winter works program which is not a very large program, is a step in that 

direction, and has been accepted and approved in many parts of Canada. All we need to do is go a few 

steps further. 



 

Monday, February 26, 1962 

 

21 
 

Although I expect the seconder of the motion to discuss our agricultural progress, nevertheless there are 

certain activities of that department which are mainly carried out in the parkland and the wooded areas 

of our province, the north and northeast, particularly re-establishment programs. Hon. members know 

Mr. Speaker that for the first time in years this part of our province was hard hit by drought as a result of 

which serious hardship faced a great number of farmers, and I will say that to the everlasting credit of 

the Minister of Agriculture, the Hon. I.C. Nollet, of this province and the federal Minister of 

Agriculture, the senior and provincial governments acted promptly, as is pointed out in His Honour‘s 

speech, in providing emergency assistance for the livestock industry, and incentive payments for cutting 

cereal crops and to have the gratitude of the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Many problems were anticipated and prompt action to alleviate distress was taken 

by the Saskatchewan government in co-operation with the federal people. Now this kind of co-operation 

is welcomed by the farmers of this province and is an entirely different story from what was experienced 

20 years ago under Liberal governments. But it still is the federal government which has the major part 

to play in the field of agriculture and its economics. In situations of this kind farmers are not too 

satisfied with the PFAA payments. The farmers think these payments should be much higher if farmers 

suffering loss of crops are really to be helped. 

 

When it comes to livestock and poultry, Mr. Speaker, our farmers feel that they should not be at the 

mercy of supply and demand or a fictitious price structure set up by firms such as Canada Packers or 

Swifts Canadian who are leading monopoly packers in Canada. I can only refer at this time that the 

restrictive trade practices commission has suggested there is plenty of room for more price competition 

in livestock marketing so we could get better prices. Now there may be such an opportunity but not as 

long as the packers and other capitalists control the market as they have been doing in the past by 

holding back butter supplies or getting truckers to bypass the open market by direct deliveries and other 

tricks of their trade. If we are to double our cattle population in Saskatchewan in the next 20 years or so, 

as is anticipated by many, it will be imperative that there be some kind of price control or a free open 

market instead of the present, closed, packers‘ market only. Now we can see who the friends of the 

packers are, they sit right opposite us, Sir. 



 
Monday, February 26, 1962 

22 
 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — The Cattlemen‘s Association if you knew anything about it, don‘t want any part of 

price control. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I could answer the hon. member and I may do so on some other occasion. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well go ahead and do it. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I‘ll do it right now. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Go ahead and do it. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — When the president of Canada Packers said in the House of Commons that they 

were only interested in one thing . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Were you there? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I read the press. You were there. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Yes, I was there. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — They said they were in business to take all the market would bear and so they held 

back butter. I was in the store business at that time, Mr. Speaker, and you couldn‘t buy a pound of butter 

and yet the warehouses were filled with butter. You can‘t tell me anything about butter. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — They are still filled with butter. You fellows are using margarine in your institutions. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! You will have a chance to make your speech before the debate is over. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, getting back to the provincial government and the Department of 

Agriculture. (I am sorry for the interruption but it didn‘t come from me.) It should be recognized that 

many farmers have been able to survive the drought and the recession to date because of the 



 

Monday, February 26, 1962 

 

23 
 

policy of our government. For some years now this Department of Agriculture in Saskatchewan has 

encouraged farmers to increase the number of cattle on their farms. I am very happy about that. This was 

a direct result of the numerous pastures and forage areas that were opened up for farmers. I would like to 

point out that since 1951 there has been an increase of nearly a million head of cattle in the province of 

Saskatchewan. As a matter of fact according to the estimates that I have here 81,500 head of cattle 

increase on the average for each year. Now livestock promotion, pasture and forage expansion under the 

Saskatchewan Department of Agriculture points to a bright outlook for cattle production in spite of the 

1961 drought. There is no question but that these programs and policies will tend to expand and stabilize 

the farm income basis and will further promote the establishment of home industries in spite of the 

packers and other exploiters of the people. 

 

The Department of Agriculture has been involved in the research promotion and assistance programs for 

increased production of livestock, forage and grain. It has done a tremendous job in reclaiming farm 

land, through drainage projects, in clearing and breaking and for establishing forage and pastures. I 

could mention irrigation also. There has been farm improvement for better living. We have helped 

farmers and municipalities to find water; given assistance for sewer and water works and as a result of 

all these undertakings we‘ve had better living than would otherwise have been possible. If the federal 

government did its part as well as the Saskatchewan government has done, farmers I think would feel 

quite secure. 

 

I am quite pleased to hear the developments concerning ARDA. Nothing definite at the moment. But I 

think that there is a field that the two governments could co-operate in making the farmer secure in this 

province. There is one thing that I think this province could do and that is to provide loans you may call 

them re-establishment loans, to farmers who have nothing left — no security. I know of a number of 

farmers in my area, quarter section farmers, who refused to go on social aid. Unless there are loans that 

will be made available to them there is no chance of them getting back on their feet. Mr. Speaker, you 

know quite well that the farm improvement loans that are made available through the banks to farm 

people, are only to those who can give the necessary security. But we have great numbers of small 

farmers who have no security left due to the policies of the federal administration of the past. They have 

nothing. The only way that we can help them is by the government providing small loans with which to 

buy a 



 
Monday, February 26, 1962 

24 
 

basic herd of cattle or poultry, (Whatever it may be). Let us give those people a chance to re-establish. If 

we do not do that they will of course move to the cities and join the unemployed ranks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is much the government should be commended for in its agricultural programs. All I 

think I need to say at this time is that the Department of Agriculture is on its toes, anticipating the future 

and its opportunities and always ready to act in any emergency. I am sure too that every member of this 

house, and the people of Saskatchewan, particularly the farmers would want me to state to the minister 

and to the government that they have done an excellent job and that they appreciate the job the 

government has done. I would hope that we will do even more (if we possibly can) to expand the 

greatest industry that we still have in Saskatchewan and that is the industry of agriculture. 

 

What I have said about agriculture certainly pertains to other departments of government. One I think 

should be particularly mentioned in this debate by me, and I am glad that the Minister of Natural 

Resources is now well, recovered and on his feet, because not only has his department carried out a 

commendable program of conservation of natural resources, but has been responsible for much of the 

re-establishment of people in our northern communities. Referring to resources, I would like to 

illustrate, and I am referring to the Economic Review, what has happened with beaver. Back some 

fifteen years ago less than 200 beaver were trapped in the province of Saskatchewan. At that time the 

conservation programs were well underway as hon. members know and the beaver population increased 

by leaps and bounds. These fur animals were transplanted into many parts of our province and the 

animals multiplied under ideal environment so that by 1960, just a year ago, the figures show that 56 

thousand beaver were trapped in this province as compared to about 200, fifteen years ago. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — If hon. members will look at the record they will see that in the case of mink, 

5,831 a few years ago, there was an increase to 35 thousand in that period . . . 

 

Opposition Member: — Gone down . . . 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — From five thousand to 35 thousand? Hon. members opposite think it is going 

down? I think they had better 



 

Monday, February 26, 1962 

 

25 
 

go back to school and learn their mathematics! Other fur bearers also increased as I have pointed out and 

shown in these figures, and I would only like to say this in connection with the conservation programs. 

They have benefited, economically every man, woman and child living in these trapping communities. 

We have also had a tremendous increase in production on fur ranches and of course in other industries in 

the field of natural resources. 

 

The department has been concerned with making the angling and hunting areas easily accessible to the 

sportsmen and the best indication there of the success achieved is the number of licenses that have been 

sold in comparative years. For example angling licenses (and I have the figures here) sold in 1950 were 

26,610. But in 1960 only ten years later it increased to 95,360. These were licenses sold to residents and 

there was also about a 40 percent increase in licenses sold to non-residents. Game licenses for example 

sold in 1950 were 50 thousand. Ten years later, 100 thousand, or 100 per cent increase. 

 

Yet in spite of these increases, and I know what I am talking about, (I am not like one of the hon. 

members from the north who said there were very few moose). I would like to say this, that today we 

have more moose, more deer and even the woodland caribou which was nearly extinct is now back. 

There are herds now of over 50 in the area which I live around Candle Lake and around Montreal Lake 

and Dore Lake. (Yes, they must be all CCF because they are multiplying. Yes, we are multiplying pretty 

fast. You will be sorry in the near future.) In addition to these conservation programs in fisheries and 

wildlife, we have undertaken inventories of our forest wealth, all of which makes it possible today to 

plan harvesting programs in the province. This includes timber and includes of course wildlife and 

fisheries. I would like to point out to the hon. members, again, what has happened in the fisheries 

production — commercial fish. In 1950 — I will take the figures from 1951 to 1961 — In 1951 there 

were eleven million pounds of fish caught commercially in Saskatchewan and it has increased in 1961 to 

$2,831,000. And it is all due to the conservation programs that are being carried out by the Department 

of Natural Resources. 

 

I would also say that our Saskatchewan people have also been favoured with conservation educational 

programs so they would know something about the province. We have a Natural History Museum of 

which we are all proud and there have been other museums all across the province which students visit 

each year. Certainly I think we can be proud of many of these activities. 



 
Monday, February 26, 1962 

26 
 

Yet in addition to administering resources as I have said, the Department of Natural Resources has had 

the responsibility for municipal administration in the far north. As hon. members know townsites have 

been surveyed and settlements planned and people encouraged and helped to build according to good 

standards, as for example Uranium City, Creighton, La Ronge and other points. Local and community 

projects such as electric power have been encouraged and brought in to many of these communities. 

Something that wasn‘t dreamed a few years ago. Co-operatives of various kinds, for example such as we 

have at Co-op Point and in other parts, have come into the north. I think the most valuable policy over 

the years has been the guaranty of the minimum price to fishermen who operate in these uneconomic 

areas of the far north. Now this guaranty of a minimum has encouraged the people to work instead of 

demanding social aid. I think we should all be proud of what the department has done in that connection. 

 

There are numerous activities of the department to help the people of the north to live better lives as for 

example Saskatchewan Government Airways Service, the radio service, the roads into the north which 

have opened up the rich north country and brought thousands of tourists into the solitudes This has 

provided jobs for guides and for other people. It has provided a market for many of the northern 

handicrafts and the products of the north. 

 

I think in particular the department should be commended for its interest in the people of Cumberland 

House in my constituency. The fur lease which the hon. members know, and I have mentioned this on 

other occasions, was a deal that the former Liberal government of 1943-44 vintage made with the 

Hudson‘s Bay Company. This was recovered for the people two years ago by this government so that 

the valuable trapping and hunting area now belongs to the local people of Pemmican Portage and 

Cumberland House. And they are quite happy about it. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I wish to thank the government and the department because they have assisted in 

this project with money and technical advice. We made good progress in the development of this fur 

lease and it is becoming a very large fur and game farm. I think it has a tremendous future for the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Possibly as important as anything is the construction branch in this department. It has built roads 

through timber, through rocks and through muskegs. Thousands of miles of grid standard roads have 

opened up the rich resources 



 

Monday, February 26, 1962 

 

27 
 

and holiday areas for people as well as bringing communities closer together. I do not know of any 

government in Canada which can compare to Saskatchewan in this kind of undertaking. Certainly a new 

world came into being in the north when the CCF government was elected some years ago. Not only is 

there the Otosquen road going into the north from Hudson Bay to The Pas, but we have built roads to 

Buffalo Narrows. I have previously mentioned this one to La Ronge — that is an old one, and we 

extended a road to the Churchill River. Just the other day I made an unofficial visit to many of my 

friends on the new Hanson Lake road, which I think all of us, it doesn‘t matter where we are in the 

government, should be proud. I hope that you will all be able to come out when the minister opens the 

road officially. I hope it is next year — and see the road for yourself. Now the Leader of the Opposition, 

I noticed made his first trip recently to campaign in that part of my constituency . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I am going to tell you about it in a minute or so . . . 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I hoped you would have taken the Hanson Lake route because if you had you 

would have seen the tremendous job that these people in the department have really done. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — They didn‘t think it was very tremendous . . . 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — . . . He didn‘t have the opportunity and I do regret very much that he hasn‘t seen 

the road. But I do hope that he will come out, with other Saskatchewan citizens and see the tremendous 

job for himself. 

 

I received a letter today and I would just like to read a poem, written by a man who lives along that road, 

George Evans, and it is dedicated to the DNR. With your permission I would like to read it: 

 

THE HANSON LAKE ROAD 

 

Where the river waters wander, 

On their journey to the bay, 

And the brooks play in the sunbeams 

That are shadowed on the way, 

 

There‘s a road that goes a winding 

Through the hills of long ago; 

Where the pine-clad slopes are falling 

to the lakes that lay below. 



 
Monday, February 26, 1962 

28 
 

The road, that starts at Smeaton, 

On the path of the North Star, 

Was built through trial and trouble 

By Bob Gooding‘s D.N.R. 

 

It passes through the backwoods, 

On the slopes of Hudson Bay, 

To the mining town of Flin Flon, 

Finding Creighton on the way. 

 

Vivid scenes of woodland beauty, 

Kissed by fleeting summer breeze, 

Leave a breath of God and Nature 

Blended in the rocks and trees. 

 

In a world of hate and tension, 

That so darkens man‘s pathway, 

There‘s a wealth of consolation 

On the Hanson Lake Highway. 

 

George Evans. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I cannot leave this department without mentioning and congratulating once again 

the Minister of Natural Resources for the recent progress in developing recreational areas right across 

the province. I think that future generations will give credit to a wise government for purchasing sites 

and opening up parks particularly for the people of our urban areas. The trend of people has been lately 

to move into cities as a result of industrialization and it is only right that we plan recreational areas for 

their pleasure and enjoyment in the immediate vicinities. Roadside picnic sites too are a boon to tourists, 

campers and people who travel in trailers. They are across the province of Saskatchewan. These people 

will of course have to pay the cost of these services, but there will be no complaints about that I can 

assure you. What is important is that we have provided facilities which these people want and will be 

put into use. 

 

It is sometimes difficult to realize the tremendous changes that have come about in Saskatchewan. Hon. 

members opposite would like people to believe that nothing has happened in this province since the 

people rid themselves of the Liberal party in 1944. But what I have said is only an eye-opener and there 

is much more to come. Take our highways for example. It makes our friends opposite boil from jealousy 

to see our success in building excellent blacktop highways and dust-free highways. The previous Liberal 

trails were like cow paths in comparison. 



 

Monday, February 26, 1962 

 

29 
 

An Opposition Member: — Some of yours are like washboard. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Our municipal grid roads built by grants from the CCF government are superior to 

any highways the Liberals had when they were the government. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Oh yes, they will say they had no money. That of course Mr. Speaker is partly 

true. But they shirked their responsibility and didn‘t try to get money from those who had it and could 

have paid. It is also true that what money they did have was largely wasted as it is presently wasted in all 

private enterprise provinces where contractors are allowed to pad their bank accounts with excessive 

profits. I can tell you something about that. However, I have no time for that today, but would like to 

point out that not only have we good roads in comparison but that routes have been shortened saving 

money for the travelling public in gasoline costs and in wear and tear of vehicles. 

 

Finally Mr. Speaker, I notice the time is going by . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You have five minutes. There is a little radio time left. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I would like to say this. When we think of our success Mr. Speaker, it is because 

we have done exactly as Dean Stanley said we should do: ―Do something worth living for; do something 

to show you have a mind and a heart and a soul within you.‖ 

 

The CCF governments have succeeded in doing just that. I would like to say when our hon. friends 

opposite criticize us they should think of what I have said. As a matter of fact I think they should take a 

look at the wisdom of Shakespeare who said: ―Our doubts are our traitors, and make us lose the good we 

oft might win, by fearing to attempt.‖ 

 

So while the CCF governments have taken advantage of the current when it serves best, so we might 

gain by our ventures. Our Loyal Opposition and their party has had doubts, they will have doubts, and 

will continue to have doubts in the future as they have had in the past 



 
Monday, February 26, 1962 

30 
 

and will continue to fail the people of Canada and of Saskatchewan in the future in spite of the strays 

that they pick up along the way to help them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish now to conclude by saying this. I could say a great deal more but my time will not 

allow me. But when I look at the province of Saskatchewan and see her all lit up by the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation, and when I see the hearths warmed by the natural gas of a public utility and when I 

see the Squaw Rapids project and the South Saskatchewan Dam project promising a great future of 

industrial development and recreation for the people of this province, and when I see our people on the 

road to health and security — I can only say this: That this is a language of its own and that is all I‘m 

saying. 

 

In our ventures and in legislating there are a few mistakes we have made. I hope we continue to make 

mistakes because then we will be venturing further afield with faith in our people and determined to 

build a greater province yet with the help of an enlightened people in an enlightened age. I am therefore 

very happy to move seconded by Mr. Thurston: 

 

That an humble Address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor as follows: 

 

To His Honour The Honourable Frank Lindsay Bastedo Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

May It Please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty‘s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly, of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, in Session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious Speech which Your 

Honour has been pleased to address to us at the opening of the present Session. 

 

Mr. Cliff H. Thurston (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker in rising to second the Address in Reply to the 

Speech from the Throne I would first like to thank those responsible for me doing it. This not only is an 

honour to myself, but brings honour to Lumsden constituency. I am sure that the people of Lumsden 

appreciate this honour. 

 

I want to add my personal congratulations to you Mr. Speaker, on your elevation to your high office. 



 

Monday, February 26, 1962 

 

31 
 

I am confident that your many years of service and conduct in this legislature demonstrates your ability 

for this high position. I can assure you, Sir, of my co-operation in the carrying out of your duties and 

should I become out of order, it will be for the lack of knowledge of house rules rather than deliberate 

on my part. 

 

I also want to congratulate the mover, the member from Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) on his excellent 

presentation of his speech this afternoon. Representing one of the northern constituencies as he does and 

with his first-hand knowledge of the mining and resource developments of the forest, trapping and 

fishing industries, together with his experience as a teacher and a farmer and a municipal secretary, 

made him an excellent choice for the honour of moving the traditional Address-in-Reply. 

 

I must say Mr. Speaker, that I had prepared a speech this afternoon for part of it on the radio, but my 

time is a little bit short, but I am going to give it anyway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne, as all members know is the document forecasting government 

proposals for the coming year. To me it is always well when looking to the future to pause and look at 

the past. Only by experience can we bring forward policies that will best meet the needs of the 

Saskatchewan people. The year 1961 was by no means a good year for the farmers. We experienced one 

of the hottest and driest years on record. Precipitation in the prairie provinces from April 1st to October 

31st averaged only 7.45 inches. The lowest figure in the 77 years in which records have been kept. Crop 

failures occurred in many areas in Saskatchewan that had never had a failure before. Particularly hard hit 

were the livestock producers. Pastures quickly dried up making it necessary for the feeding of hay, 

thereby depleting fodder reserves. The seriousness of the condition was recognized early in the year by 

our provincial government. I want at this point to commend the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Nollet and 

his department for the prompt and efficient manner in which they met this situation. Every effort 

possible was taken to aid the farmer in the locating of fodder. Assistance was given him in the moving 

of machinery to where the fodder was. Also the assistance was given on free freight whether by rail or 

truck. I am not going to dwell on these programs as they are well known by the members of this house. I 

would only say that had not early action been taken our livestock industry would have suffered a severe 

blow. The success of this program is borne out by the fact that farmers have been able to maintain their 

basic 



 
Monday, February 26, 1962 

32 
 

herds, and little more than normal marketing of cattle occurred thereby maintaining stability in price. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only did we have the problem of drought, as I have just indicated, but we had a 

grasshopper cutworm outbreak, and it was a severe outbreak. I would like to take a few minutes and 

review the policy of the government regarding grasshopper control. I say control because in my opinion 

that is all we can do — control an outbreak. To me total eradication can only come about by the proper 

weather conditions. We all know that if the spring and early summer are wet and cold, the catchability is 

very low. Even those that do hatch do little or no damage. The fight with grasshoppers is not a new thing 

in this province. I can well remember the fight that we had in the thirties. In those days we used the old 

method — the sawdust method. The government provided the sawdust free. The municipalities had to 

buy the poison and provide mixing stations — this was a very unsatisfactory method. It was impossible 

to control grasshoppers. As the moisture in the sawdust quickly dried thus making the poison ineffective 

because the grasshoppers won‘t eat it when it is dried up. 

 

It was in 1949 that the grasshopper chemical came on the market. Being a new chemical it was 

expensive, costing $3.00 an acre to apply. This was too expensive for the average farmer, therefore the 

first year our government subsidized its manufacture by paying half of the cost. That reduced the cost to 

farmers to $1.50 an acre. Even this reduced price of $1.50 an acre would stop many farmers from 

putting on an effective campaign. Here again Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the Department of 

Agriculture for embarking on a policy of purchasing chemicals in bulk and supplying them to the 

farmers at cost. The wisdom of the policy is borne out by the fact that year by year since 1949 the price 

has been reduced till now it is down to the low figure of 14¢ per acre, well within the reach of any 

farmer. 

 

In the winter of 1959 the government purchased $1,155,000 worth of chemicals which were stored in the 

warehouse at Moose Jaw and ready for the outbreak in 1959. The campaigns of 1959 and 1960 only 

used about half of this supply and members will remember that in 1960 we had an outbreak of cutworms 

and we all know that the application is five to six times heavier for cutworms than it is for grasshoppers. 

In the spring of 1961 the department had on hand some 125 thousand gallons of chemicals which looked 

like an ample supply in view of the forecast, also taking into account the experiences of 1959 and 1960, 



 

Monday, February 26, 1962 

 

33 
 

This proved not to be enough. By the middle of May the fight was really on. The weather was hot and 

dry — all in favour of the grasshoppers. The supply was quickly dwindling at this time. It was at this 

point that the airlift policy was decided. I am sure that I speak for all farmers when I congratulate the 

Minister of National Defence, Mr. Harkness, for putting the air force at our disposal and for the bringing 

in of these chemicals. Secondly to the officers and air crew for their untiring efforts and their part in 

aiding in a serious situation. 

 

The cost of the 1961 outbreak was some $1,120,000. This was a lot of money Mr. Speaker, but had it 

not been spent many thousands of acres would have been destroyed. Mr. Speaker, the government is 

again laying plans for a serious outbreak in 1962. The chemical inventory is again being built up and I 

for one, Sir, hope that their forecast is wrong and that we only have to use half of these chemicals. If 

there is an outbreak, I am sure that by the co-operation of the government, the municipalities and the 

farmers themselves an effective campaign will again be fought. 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, I have dealt briefly with some of the programs on the darker side. I would like to turn 

to programs that I feel are a little brighter. It has been the aim of our provincial government ever since 

assuming power to not only develop policies that would aid the farmer in his production and marketing 

techniques but also bring to him and his family some of the modern conveniences that would aid the 

farmer in raising his standard of living. The first step, and I might say an essential step was the bringing 

of electric power to the farms. We now have over 60 thousand farms in the province that are electrified. 

This has been a tremendous task for the Power Corporation when one considers the sparsity of the farms 

and the many thousands of miles of transmission lines. Nevertheless this has been accomplished and I 

know of nothing that has brightened the rural life more than the receiving of electric power. Not only 

can the farmer have his home lightened up and the modern conveniences that go with it, but it is one of 

the cheapest chore boys that a farmer can have. I can assure you, Sir, that the farmers in my area really 

appreciate having this power. 

 

The second step in bringing of the more abundant living to the farmer is the grid road program. 

Members are familiar with this program. When it was started the estimated cost was some $50 million, 

shared 50 percent by the municipalities and 50 per cent by the government. Mr. Speaker, as we all know 

the cost of 



 
Monday, February 26, 1962 

34 
 

building roads like everything else has increased. It is estimated today that the grid road program will 

cost around $66 million. The government is assuming a larger share of these increased costs. It is 

estimated today that the share of the government be 60 per cent, leaving 40 per cent for the 

municipalities. I wonder how many of us realize that this grid road program is costing our provincial 

government over $33 hundred per mile. On the completion of the grid road program twelve thousand 

miles of all-weather roads will be added to the some eight thousand miles of provincial highways. This 

means that no farmers will be more than three or four miles from an all-weather road. This is of great 

advantage to the farmer in getting his product to market and takes away a great deal of the isolation for 

him and his family. This is a very important program when one considers that the farmers of today want 

to travel the year round on rubber. 

 

The bringing of power to the farmer and the grid road program, important as they are still left the 

majority of the farmers with a substandard living. Statistics showed that only about ten per cent of 

Saskatchewan farmers have running water. At least 90 per cent not modern homes. This situation was 

not good enough for our government and to help solve this problem the Family Farm Improvement Act 

was brought in. This program has had only two years of experience but I can say, Sir, that they have 

been very gratifying years as the summaries will show. 

 

The summary shows that 8300 applications have been received by August 31, 1961. Nine thousand are 

expected by March 31st, of this year. Seven thousand applications have been contacted by the field 

technicians by March 31st. Thirty-five hundred first orders for material had been filled by March 31st at 

a total selling price of $1.4 million, resulting in a net saving to the farmers of $600 thousand. That is in 

comparison with retail price. By March 31st twenty-three hundred farm water and sewage systems will 

have been installed in projects under Family Farm Improvement supervision, plus 1200 systems 

installed outside the project with family branch materials and technical advice provided. It is estimated 

that the public tendering for construction services has reduced the cost by about 20 per cent or $50 per 

farm, resulting in a cash savings to the farmer of $115 thousand. In addition to the savings that I have 

just stated 1900 grants were paid to farmers totalling $284 thousand or an average grant per farmer in 

1960-61 of $136 and $150 in 1961-62. Mr. Speaker, some of the farmers that I have spoken with who 

have installed sewer and water, say that the greatest single savings they have is in the technical 



 

Monday, February 26, 1962 

 

35 
 

advice they receive. I have had it estimated that this advice runs to as high as $500. So you can see that 

this is a good program and is being well received by the farmers. Not only are they able to get the 

needed technical advice but there are considerable cash savings — $600 thousand saving in materials, 

$115 thousand in construction services and grants of $284 thousand. These total just about one million 

dollars. On a per farm basis the savings average $200 for materials, $50 for construction service, $136 

for advance, totalling $386 per farm. I would suggest, Sir, that with these savings it is an incentive for 

farmers to install water and sewer and if he decides to do so this is of great assistance to him. The 

Family Farm Improvement Branch have set their sights at installing 40 to 50 thousand farm homes. I am 

sure that members will agree with me that the rural electrification program, the grid roads and now the 

installation of sewer and water certainly will make rural life more pleasant, and will help stem the flow 

of our young people from the farms. 

 

The Agricultural Machinery Administration continues to serve the Saskatchewan farm people in 

expanded ways. The Saskatchewan public farm machinery testing program has proven to be one of the 

most used of farm assistance programs on the continent. This is attested to by the fact that the 

government of Alberta is now contributing a direct operational grant to the AMA here in Saskatchewan 

for purchase of test reports for distribution in Alberta. The province of Ontario is now contemplating a 

similar act. I have here Mr. Speaker, an article appearing in the Leader-Post of December 8, 1961 under 

the heading ‗Machinery Act Urged in Ontario.‘ 

 

―Agriculture Minister, William Stewart of Ontario was asked Thursday to set up an investigating 

committee as soon as possible to study the needs for a farm machinery act. The request was passed by 

the legislature standing committee on agriculture after a meeting during which the representatives to 

farm organizations pressed for legislation to control the sale of farm machinery and the supply of parts. 

The Ontario Federation of Agriculture backed by the Ontario Farmers‘ Union asked the act control 

availability of repair parts and service, license dealers, test new equipment and parts and publish the 

test results and set up an inspection service and an agricultural machinery board to govern the act.‖ 



 
Monday, February 26, 1962 

36 
 

Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what we have in this province. These test reports are certainly being used by 

the farmers in Saskatchewan. Between January 1, 1961 and January 1, 1962, Saskatchewan farmers go 

to the AMA asking for the machinery testing reports on an average of seventeen per office day or over 

four thousand during the year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have farmers in my area who will not buy a new machine until they have the report from 

the AMA. I think this branch is doing a good job when one considers the high price that farmers have to 

pay for their machinery and for their parts. 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, I would like to deal briefly with local government reorganization. There has been 

during the last few years a great deal of study on this subject, not only by the government but also by 

people concerned with local government and the public generally. I think this has all been for the good. 

Long and detailed study was necessary on a subject as complex as this affecting all citizens as it does. 

Therefore, before any legislative changes were to be made, all aspects and effects of the changes should 

be considered. I think all members will agree that sometimes reorganization is needed. Many 

municipalities are finding it more and more difficult to give the services that are being demanded by 

their own people. To me, Sir, this is understandable. When the present nine township municipalities 

were formed no one thought, nor could they be expected to know, the demands as we know them today. 

In those days the type of road that is required today was not known. If the municipality had an old horse 

grader and a couple of scrapers they were in business. I want to say here that the municipal men of that 

day did a good job in providing the services required of them. I would add that they are still doing a 

good job. Any reason for changing the present set-up is not because these men are inefficient but rather 

the financial structure is not large enough for them to do the job that they are capable of or would like to 

do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to give an example of what I mean by the financial structure of the 

municipality. I have here the taxable assessment of the mill rate for municipalities that are fully or in 

part within Lumsden constituency. What is the situation? I find that the tax assessment goes from a low 

of just over $2¼ million to a high of just over $9 million. The mill rate for municipal purposes from a 

high of 25 mills to a low of nine. You can see that the rural municipality with the $9 million assessment 

having a nine mill rate can provide much higher 



 

Monday, February 26, 1962 

 

37 
 

service and much easier than those municipalities with the low assessment and the low mill rate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have ratepayers in my constituency who own land in two municipalities with the same 

assessment per quarter section. In one case the ratepayer pays nine mills and just across the road he pays 

20.9. This I can say adds to the confusion. The differences in assessment and mill rate that I have just 

given to you for the R.M.‘s are nothing in comparison to that of the school districts. The Regina west 

superintendency is nearly all within Lumsden constituency, this is one of the areas that is not as yet 

organized into the larger school unit. Looking at the assessments and mill rate, using the 1960 figures, 

the assessments vary from a low of $50 thousand to a high of $903 thousand. The mill rate varies from a 

low of two mills to a high of 51. I would say that the area with the 51 mill rate is on low assessment land 

but within that area, that school district, there are some quarter sections that are assessed as high as $5 

thousand per quarter and I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that a mill rate of 51 mills for a school on $5 thousand 

is a very high tax, I might say a very unfair tax. In the superintendency we have 76 schools, 47 are in 

operation, 20 are closed. The urban assessment in the superintendency are from a low of just over $68 

thousand; a high of just over $500 thousand. The mill rate varies from nine mills to 45.27. 

 

There are problems in the urban areas, Mr. Speaker, trying to operate multi-room schools on low 

assessment. As an example I take the town of Lumsden, when you take the urban assessment and the 

rural assessment and make up the total assessment for the district, we find that they have an assessment 

of $763 thousand. They are operating an eight room school providing up to and including grade 12. 

Then on the other hand, as I mentioned a moment ago, we have a rural school with an assessment of 

$903 thousand. On one hand you are trying to operate eight rooms on $763 thousand and we have 

another rural school with only $903 thousand. The same thing holds true in the school district as it does 

in the municipality. The financial structure isn‘t big enough to give the service that they are being 

demanded to give. 

 

I have just mentioned some of the problems in increased service of the municipalities and of higher 

educational costs. There are many other things that could be mentioned, health and welfare service, 

agricultural districts, all those things go to make up our modern way of life. I am pleased that the 

government is forecasting the presentation, at this session, of a bill regarding organization, or at least 

enabling legislation. I would 



 
Monday, February 26, 1962 

38 
 

like to commend the Minister of Municipal Affairs on his press release assuring the people that no 

action to set up a larger municipality would be taken without a vote from the people. I know that the 

members opposite will try and take credit for this decision but I can say, while it is true that the 

continuing committee did recommend that no vote would be taken, the government never has said that a 

vote wouldn‘t be taken. I for myself was not in favour . . . 

 

Opposition Member: — It‘s not true, it‘s not true. 

 

Mr. Thurston: — Mr. Speaker, at no time has this government said that a vote would not be taken. 

 

Opposition Member: — I will read it to you. 

 

Mr. Thurston: — Mr. Speaker, myself, I could say that I have always favoured the taking of a vote. It 

has always been my belief that if you deny the people to vote on this that you set up opposition to the 

very thing that they might otherwise support. 

 

Before I leave local government reorganization there is one matter that I would like the government to 

give consideration to, that is the basis that is used for assessment purposes. I think all members know 

that the present basis for assessment is the productivity of the land, I am thinking of agricultural land. 

This has been a pretty sound and fair way particularly if wheat production was used as the basis of it, but 

there is a feeling among a lot of farmers on the higher assessed land that livestock is playing a much 

larger part in the cash income than it did a few years ago. The thinking of many farmers is that much 

more wealth is produced on low assessed pasture land than the assessment would indicate. I know that if 

the government would consider this situation, and if a feasible change in the assessment basis could be 

brought about it would lessen to a large extent criticism to the larger unit of municipality. 

 

Now, may I turn to another subject of the Throne Speech, that may not appear to be of interest to a 

number of people, that is the proposed amendment to the British North America Act to acquire 

amending procedures. I believe that the proposed change in the BNA Act is of great importance, not 

only to the members sitting in the legislature but to other organizations, particularly farm organizations, 

labour organizations, and those organizations interested in the health and welfare programs, especially 

those of national scope. 



 

Monday, February 26, 1962 

 

39 
 

Mr. Speaker, it is not my intention this afternoon to deal at any length with this perplexing problem, and 

it is perplexing. I just wonder how many members have read the BNA Act. I can say Sir, that I had never 

read it until recently and after reading it I came to the conclusion that it would take a constitutional 

lawyer to interpret it, therefore, my remarks will be strictly that of a layman. I will deal with only one 

aspect of the proposal that does concern me and I feel concerned like the majority of Canadian people, 

that is the power of the vote or the entrenchment principle. In simple language this principle means that 

if our federal government might wish to enact legislation that would be of benefit to a large majority of 

Canadian people but under our existing constitution might be beyond its authority then any necessary 

amendment to our constitution to enable parliament to so act would not be made if one province 

objected. 

 

To me this would be disastrous. The Canadian government might want to embark on a national health 

and welfare program with benefits to all our provinces but if one province objected it would thereby be 

depriving the federal government of the constitutional possibility to obtain the right to proceed with the 

legislation. We have an example of this, the request of the Alberta government to hold up the 

Unemployment Insurance Act of 1940. 

 

As to farmers we had a glaring example of what happened to the National Products Act of 1934. This 

was an act passed in recognition of the fact that agricultural producers required active government 

assistance to meet their problems. This act consisted of two parts. The first part provided the machinery 

to constitute marketing boards with the regulations of marketing national products. The second part of 

the act authorized the minister, at the request of the board or on his own initiative to conduct an 

investigation into matters related to the production and marketing of regulated national products. In my 

opinion, Mr. Speaker, this was a good act and agriculture generally would have been in a much healthier 

position today if the principles of the act had been put into practice. The federal government referred it 

to the Supreme Court of Canada, which ruled it beyond its powers and the decision was upheld in 1937 

by the Privy Council. The experience of the provincial boards was the same way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have given you just two examples to show how our Canadian constitution effects us all. I 

would urge all people, particularly organizations whether they be urban or rural to study the proposed 

changes indicated by the federal government. 



 
Monday, February 26, 1962 

40 
 

I want to congratulate our provincial government for the stand they have taken and are taking in this 

regard. I would ask the legislation to stand behind our government in this regard. If any mistakes are 

made in the changing of our Canadian constitution it might be many decades before these mistakes are 

rectified. 

 

Resources and economic development for 1961 continued at a fair level. In spite of the crop failure that I 

have already dealt with, the level of personal income in 1961 will be better than the average for the past 

ten years. Total personal income is expected to reach $1130 billion or slightly above the $1230 per 

capita. Mineral production had a slight increase in 1961 over 1960. Manufacturing is expected to show 

about a three per cent increase over the past year. Electric energy generated in 1961 is expected to reach 

25 million kilowatts, an increase of almost ten per cent over 1960. To me, the use of electric power is 

the best yardstick that one can use in the growth and development of industry. An example of this is just 

a couple of miles from my own farm home, Interprovincial Steel uses about as much electrical energy as 

the city of Moose Jaw. If industry is expected to come into our province, the Power Corporation must be 

prepared to meet electric demands. Thus it is necessary for the Power Corporation to keep well ahead 

with their generating capacity. 

 

To me, Sir, in dealing with the growth and development that is taking place in our province it would be 

an omission on my part not to mention the role that the co-operative movement has played in this sense. 

I am not suggesting that the CCF government is responsible for the growth of the co-operative 

movement, but I do suggest that the policy of this government, the fact that they have a Department of 

Co-operatives and Co-operative Development with a minister in charge, has done a great deal to 

encourage and assist the co-operative movement of this province. Mr. Speaker, many are the reasons for 

the growth of the co-operative movement in Saskatchewan. In the early days of opening up our province 

the people learned to co-operate due to the sparse population, long distance apart and lack of ready cash. 

When a settler wanted to build a house or a barn the neighbours formed a bee and all pitched in. This 

also held true in the building of schools, churches and halls or any community enterprise. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan we have the right kind of atmosphere for co-operation, no matter what your 

religion, your race or your politics, if a job needed to be done we joined hands in doing it. To me, the 

marketing co-ops got 



 

Monday, February 26, 1962 

 

41 
 

their start back in the early days of the territorial grain. These pioneer grain buyers realized that the only 

way for them to be heard and receive any kind of economic justice was for them to unite. I am 

convinced that the influence that they had on the government was responsible in no small way to the 

beneficial acts on our statutes. I might even go so far as to say the Canadian Wheat Board. The 

consumer co-ops too have their problems, but I feel that the turning point in their favour was in 1935 

when the world‘s first co-op refinery went into production. There were those, who at that time scoffed at 

the idea of farmers able to operate such technical operations. Members know the problems of this 

refinery, of the obstacles placed in its way, the lack of crude oil, freight rates, the lack of working 

capital. Nevertheless, by sheer determination and faith the refinery stood the many problems and 

continued to grow. In 1935 this refinery had a capacity of close to 500 barrels of crude oil per day. By 

1961 this plant had a capacity of 22,500. It is hard to figure out just what this refinery has meant in 

dollars and cents to members. We do know that in 1935 it represented a member investment of only $32 

thousand. Earnings or savings in the first year reached almost $30 thousand. On this basis the Co-op 

Refinery has meant the saving of many thousands of dollars to its members. 

 

Another milestone in the co-operative movement took place on October 31, 1961, the amalgamation of 

the Alberta Co-operative Wholesale Association with the Federated Co-ops. Members know that it was 

in 1955 that the Manitoba and the Saskatchewan Co-ops joined. Now that Alberta has joined with the 

wholesale there is strong indication of British Columbia joining. 

 

With this broad financial structure the co-operatives will be able to play a more important role in our 

economy. There were some significant events that took place in 1961. I just mentioned the 

amalgamation with the Alberta Co-op. Federated Co-op opened a new warehouse in Saskatoon. The 

co-op refinery embarked on its major expansion program and has increased plant capacity to 22,500 

barrels per day. Interprovincial Co-ops plan to erect a multi-million dollar chemical plant in Saskatoon 

to manufacture actual ingredients required as well as formulate farm and other chemicals. Federated 

Co-ops did nearly $72 million worth of business in 1961, an increase of 6.9 per cent over 1960. When 

one considers that 1961 was not a good year for agriculture this 6.9 per cent was a very gratifying 

increase. I doubt if any similar business can come close to that figure. The retail Consumers Co-op has 

had a steady growth in our province. In 1953 sales amounted to $52 million by 1960 this had increased 

to nearly $84 million. 



 
Monday, February 26, 1962 

42 
 

I would like to deal briefly with another important part of the co-op, the credit union. It is a known fact 

that most businesses and a large number of individuals need credit, from time to time. It was recognized 

in the mid thirties that the then-existing loan agencies were not meeting the needs of the average person, 

whether it be urban or rural. To help solve this problem it was in 1937 that the first credit union in 

Saskatchewan was organized. The first urban was the Regina Hebrew Credit Union and the first rural 

was at LaFleche. Since the forming of each of these credit unions the growth has been tremendous. 

Today we have 277 credit unions in this province with a membership of over 140 thousand and with 

total assets as of December 31, 1961 of nearly $89 million, which is 24 per cent increase over 1959. The 

combined credit unions of Saskatchewan have over $55 million of loans in force. I suggest that the 

forming of the credit unions have been justified and they are playing their part in meeting the credit 

needs of this province. 

 

One further aspect of co-operative financing is the Saskatchewan Co-operative Credit Society. The 

credit society was incorporated in 1941 for the purpose of aiding the financing of the older producers 

and consumers co-operatives which were entering a phase of quickened growth. The credit society this 

year is 21 years old and from a very modest start of a few thousand dollars now has assets totalling over 

$32 million. With assets of this amount the society is in a position to give the financial assistance to the 

rest of the co-operative movements for which it was organized. 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, before I take my seat I would like to have a word to say about our medical care plan. 

I am not going to elaborate as the mover covered many of the things that I would like to say. I do want 

to say that since the Medical Insurance Act was brought in last fall I have honestly tried to assess 

whether or not it was popular with my constituents. I have tried on every occasion possible to discuss 

this very important question. It is my firm opinion that the majority of people are anxiously awaiting for 

this medical plan to come into force. It will be a dream come true for many people. To me, Mr. Speaker, 

when any important issue, and medical care is important, one must look to see who his friends are and 

who are his enemies. We know that the Canadian Chamber of Commerce and much of the press is in 

opposition to our plan, and also some of the doctors. I say some because I am convinced that not all the 

doctors in the province take the same stand as the College of Physicians 



 

Monday, February 26, 1962 

 

43 
 

and Surgeons. I am sure that the majority of the doctors will co-operate with the commission when the 

plan comes into effect. 

 

On the other hand we have some pretty important friends and allies of the medical plan. Provincial 

organizations have presented briefs and resolutions favouring a government comprehensive medical care 

plan — organizations, representing to a large extent a cross section of our public opinion — the 

Saskatchewan Farmers‘ Union for example, labour unions, the Saskatchewan Co-op Unions, Federated 

Co-ops, the Urban Municipal Association and others. To suggest that the organizations I have just 

mentioned are mere lackeys of the CCF would be most bitterly resented by the organizations. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Thurston: — These are groups representing a large majority of our people who are honestly 

endeavouring to raise the level of health services in this province. I am sure these organizations join with 

us in wishing the medical care commission well, and hope they are able to get their plan into effect in 

the near future. Sir, there are many other things that I can speak about but there will be opportunities for 

me to do so in future debates. In closing, Mr. Speaker, because in my opinion our CCF government 

which came to office in 1944, has developed policies that have aided the growth and expansion of our 

economic and industrial population have their standard of living raised, and because the Speech from the 

Throne indicates a continued expansion of these programs, I am indeed pleased to second the motion. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. W. Ross Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, about 2:30 when I was coming 

into the chamber I was stopped by one of the employees in this house. He said, ‗Mr. Thatcher, someone 

told me this will be a short session. I think it will.‘ I asked, ‗Why do you think that?‘ He replied ‗The 

socialists won‘t ‗argue‘ so much.‘ I don‘t know whether such a statement is true or not. Certainly the 

two speeches we‘ve heard this afternoon wouldn‘t indicate that it is going to be a particularly short 

session. The amazing part of both these speeches which we just heard from the socialist benches is that 

neither the member for Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) nor the member for Lumsden (Mr. Thurston), in 

all the two hours they spoke, even mentioned the word NDP. 



 
Monday, February 26, 1962 

44 
 

Opposition Member: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — What is wrong over there? Are they ashamed of this word? Is it a dirty word? I‘m 

beginning to wonder. We sat over on this side of the house and we couldn‘t help but compare the 

speeches we heard today with some that have been made in the past — no buoyancy — no confidence 

among the government ranks. Everyone knows that the CCF has long since been buried, but the NDP 

funeral is still two years away. Now why don‘t you boys in the meantime enjoy yourselves? Don‘t have 

such long faces. 

 

The hon. member for Lumsden (Mr. Thurston) talked for an hour. Almost everything he said was about 

the past. He didn‘t say anything about the future government program. Now reminiscing is very 

interesting, but reminiscing is usually for the old and decrepit. Yet that is about all he did this afternoon 

— reminisce. 

 

The hon. member for Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) had a speech filled with excuse and apology. He 

also was very careful not to mention the NDP anywhere in his speech and of course I didn‘t blame him. 

He boasted in his speech about the schools, about the parks, about the roads, and about the power this 

administration has built. No one in this house will deny that the government opposite has done much in 

these fields. But Mr. Speaker, they have done no more than the government of Manitoba, the 

government of Alberta and the government of British Columbia or the other provincial governments 

since 1944. Manitoba and Alberta, our sister prairie provinces have done everything that the hon. 

member for Cumberland suggested his government had done to date, but they have done it without the 

industrial stagnation which prevails in our province. The hon. member said this, ―We‘ve had since 1944, 

the best government in Canada.‖ I say we have had the worst. 

 

(Brief recording failure.) 

 

The hon. member for Cumberland has been disseminating propaganda about his constituency for many 

years in this house. He has got away with such talk because many of us have never visited this area. A 

few weeks ago I visited the town of Creighton where the majority of the population in Cumberland seat 

is located. I can tell you that every person I met, didn‘t think that the constituency of Cumberland was 

any heaven on earth under the socialists. We‘ve heard the member from Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) 

talk all about the fine roads the socialists have built. Actually, after many years, they have constructed 

one miles of pavement. It is a funny thing. The residents of 



 

Monday, February 26, 1962 

 

45 
 

Creighton think that the government has forgotten they live in Saskatchewan — that they are residents 

of Manitoba. 

 

(Brief recording failure.) 

 

What about the Saskatchewan Government Insurance that the government is so proud about? 

Saskatchewan residents have to go to Manitoba to buy it. The same applies to their motor licenses. 

 

Then my hon. friend talks about the wonderful planning they have. I heard dozens of complaints, in fact 

I think it was the biggest complaint I found up there. This socialist government set the liquor store 50 

yards over the Manitoba border, two miles from Creighton. They charge 45¢ a bottle more than in 

Manitoba. In addition my friend the Provincial Treasurer is collecting a five per cent sales tax, which 

doesn‘t exist on the Manitoba side of the border. In other words liquor is 65¢ a bottle cheaper than it is 

in the province of Saskatchewan. If the residents of Creighton have to drive two miles to buy liquor they 

might as well drive a little further and get it 65¢ cheaper. 

 

I said a moment ago that one of the great tragedies of this government has been the industrial stagnation 

which has resulted. One of the best examples of this Mr. Speaker is at Flin Flon. Just ten years ago 

Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting Company obtained 75 to 80 per cent of its ore on the Saskatchewan 

side of the border. But the socialists and my hon. friend the minister sitting beside the Premier, in all 

their wisdom substantially increased Saskatchewan royalties. Since then mining has gradually been 

reduced on the Saskatchewan side or at least percentage wise. Today a smaller percentage of the 

operation is carried on in Saskatchewan and a greater percentage in Manitoba than some years ago. This 

is one more example of socialist planning. Several hundred working men who should be in 

Saskatchewan, are now in Manitoba because of this royalty. 

 

The recent report of the Department of Mineral Resources talking about copper production said and I 

quote: 

 

―Copper production declined from a relatively weak market. Demand for the mineral had declined 

because ore was obtained from Manitoba mines for processing at the Flin Flon mill instead of 

Saskatchewan.‖ 



 
Monday, February 26, 1962 

46 
 

All of Saskatchewan‘s copper production is in the Flin Flon area. These are the kind of policies that 

result in industrial stagnation. I am going to have some more to say on that subject tomorrow. 

 

I just want to take a moment or so before I adjourn the debate to say a word about the Throne Speech 

itself. There are a lot of adjectives you could use — dull perhaps, unimaginative — it is not noteworthy 

for what it says, but for what it doesn‘t say. It is completely devoid of any new or constructive 

suggestion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — It sure makes you holler though. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — There is one comment I would like to make Mr. Speaker. I haven‘t the Throne 

Speech in front of me — but they talk about the government construction contracts that they have been 

carrying on to provide last winter works programs. If we recall the last session of the legislature, one of 

the expenditures that hon. members on this side strongly criticized was the head office building which 

my hon. friends opposite made for constructing such a head office, was that it would be a winter works 

program, providing employment for many citizens of Regina. Well now what are the facts? The contract 

was given to a firm called Commonwealth Construction — a British Columbia firm. Now I would say 

that it is unusual to give such a contract to an outside firm, although I will admit quite frankly that its 

price was the lowest as far as tenders were concerned. I am beginning to wonder if there was a reason 

why their tender was the lowest. In justifying this expense, which we still think will be about $9 million 

when the building is completed, both the Premier and the minister told us that one of the reasons it was a 

good thing for the community was that it would supply substantial employment, and that it would be a 

winter works project. 

 

I have the actual specifications here in my hand. You will find that the schedule specifically states that 

phase one must be completed not later than April 1st Phase one included structural steel to the fifth floor 

level and cement floors to the 4th floor. When the tenders were called they were told this date would 

have to be met. In order to do that in this kind of weather, you have to temporarily fill the walls in and 

have some kind of heat. Local contractors told me that such a procedure would cost between $40 and 

$50 thousand. Naturally this was taken into consideration when they estimated their costs. 



 

Monday, February 26, 1962 

 

47 
 

Well the B.C. company got the contract. Since that time they have failed to carry out the specifications 

of the contract. 

 

Opposition Member: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Instead of hiring one hundred men or more — usually about thirty and often only 

about fifteen have been on the job — and most of them working down in the basement. I think that if 

this contract had been lived up to, ten times more work could have been provided for employees in the 

city of Regina. The work is now three to four months behind schedule. I believe the minister should give 

a full report to the house on this project. It is small wonder that the Throne Speech reports there are 27 

thousand people out of work in Regina if this is the way the socialists plan in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just before I sit down, I would like to say one thing more — if I can find it here — 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Take it as read . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Oh no – I don‘t want to take it as read — 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I can guess what it is anyway. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I would like to congratulate you on your appointment as Speaker and I hope you will 

accept my remarks as being sincere. I know that being Speaker is a difficult job. Most of us are 

politicians who are prejudiced and biased perhaps, and to go into that Chair and suddenly lose your 

prejudice and your bias is something which all of us might not be able to do. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Change parties. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I will say this Mr. Speaker — well some hon. members are changing, but I am not 

sure we would want the hon. member over there if he is applying. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if hon. members will listen to me for a moment I would like to say this. We didn‘t know 

whether the appointment of the last Speaker was a good one or a bad one because we didn‘t know him 

very well. We do feel that he did a first-class and excellent job of being Speaker and being fair to both 

sides of the house. 



 
Monday, February 26, 1962 

48 
 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . and we hope that you will carry on in this tradition. If you will do that, I am sure 

we will have no trouble in getting along. I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

The debate was, on the motion of Mr. Thatcher, adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:50 o‘clock. 


