



















































Hansard: March 05, 1962


1 

 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

8th Day 

 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

ON ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

QUESTION: RE ACCESS ROADS 
 

Mr. W.R. Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I would 

like to direct a question to the Minister of Highways. In view of the extreme hardship being caused by 

business men on the new limited access road on No. 1 highway east, has the government given any 

consideration to permitting additional crossroads or access roads? 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis (Minister of Highways): — We have given consideration Mr. Speaker, but we haven‟t 

seen fit to allow any additional access roads as yet. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — In view of the minister‟s answer, I would like to ask him if he is aware 

of the fact that one international concern, who were contemplating building a $3 million spread on the 

south side of the Trans Canada Highway, if this wouldn‟t be an incentive for the minister to change his 

attitude? 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis: — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of any such development taking place here. 

 

STATEMENT: RE CONDITION OF NO. 16 HIGHWAY 

 

Mr. D.T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are called, I 

would like to direct the Minister of Highways attention to a very treacherous piece of highway and I 

refer of course to that piece of highway on No. 16 between 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

2 

the towns of Candiac and Montmartre. There have been a great many accidents there within the last two 

weeks, due to severe icing conditions. This matter was brought to my attention over the weekend and I 

would like to bring it to the attention of the Minister of Highways and ask if something couldn‟t be done 

immediately to fix up that stretch of highway. It requires sanding in the worst way and especially one 

curve has caused a great deal of trouble. 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis: — I am glad to have the information, Mr. Speaker, and we will do what we can to fix 

this stretch of highway. 

 

NEWSPAPER CORRECTION 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are 

proceeded with I would like to take the opportunity to correct the report which appeared in the Leader-

Post of, I believe, Saturday last, entitled, “The Air Will Be Blue”, and suggesting that in some way the 

license plates and the holes in the license plates had been changed in a way which would cause 

inconvenience to motorists. I have to advise the house that the plates which will be issued in the 

forthcoming year will be precisely the same in size, dimension and dimension of holes as the plates of 

the previous year and that this report and the story based upon it is wholly erroneous. 

 

 QUESTION: RE ACCESS ROADS 

 

Mr. W.R. Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to direct a 

supplementary question to one I asked earlier to the Minister of Highways, referring again to this access 

highway going east. Does the minister know that there have been a number of businesses which have 

been forced to close their doors as a result of this highway? In view of that fact, would his department 

not give consideration once again, to allowing one or two access roads so that people can get into these 

places of business? 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis: — Mr. Speaker, we know one business which has closed. We have given 

consideration to more access roads — we turned 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

3 

them down because of the safety of the travelling public. We think that the road is hazardous enough 

now, and we would hate to do anything to make it more so. In the past we have given this full 

consideration and we haven‟t been able to come up with any further accesses to No. 1 highway. 

 

 QUESTION: RE SALES TAX 

 

Mr. W.R. Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are 

called, I would like to direct a question to the Provincial Treasurer. Has the minister received any 

representations from border area merchants to the effect that the 5 per cent sales tax is causing them 

great hardship, and losing them business to other provinces? If so, what steps if any has his department 

taken to alleviate the situation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member can place his 

question on the order paper. I don‟t see that this is a matter of urgent public business, and if he will, I 

will attempt to answer it according to the rules of the house. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. Provincial Treasurer has a point well taken. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Could I speak to the point before you rule, Mr. Speaker? My point is that if this keeps 

on some of these merchants are going to be out of business. This matter is therefore urgent, I would say. 

It is a legitimate question on orders of the day. If the minister is going to do something let him tell the 

house what action he contemplates. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — On a point of order Mr. Speaker. Surely the use of this particular period of time is 

restricted to answering questions which have some degree of urgency or relevancy which means that 

they can be better asked at this time than put on the order paper at the regular time. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I have to agree that there 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

4 

are questions being asked on the orders of the day which would be better placed on the order paper, 

because the minister would have to consult his staff. He cannot give a direct answer in the house. To 

answer questions such as has been raised at this time it would be necessary, in my opinion, for the 

minister to consult his staff for a detailed record; therefore, I think that type of question should be on the 

order paper. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I agree with you, but that isn‟t such a question. He shouldn‟t need to 

consult his staff to answer that one. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

 QUESTION: RE COMMUNITY WELLS 

 

Mr. D.T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask a question before 

the orders of the day, and I would like to direct my question to the Minister of Agriculture. I feel this is 

of very great importance at the present time due to a great deal of misunderstanding and apprehension 

with regard to the winter works program insofar as it concerns community wells. Now there are a great 

many communities that have brought this to my attention over the weekend that don‟t know what the 

procedure will be from here on in. These wells are being put in and they are supposed to be developed . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The member may ask a question, but we cannot have a speech on it. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — I was just clarifying my question for the minister. What concerns them is 

developing the wells and putting in the cement work. As hon. members know the weather has been most 

adverse. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Would the hon. member state his question and not elaborate on it please. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — I am doing that right now. I was just saying that the weather has been adverse for 

cement work. In 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

5 

view of that would the minister state whether this program will be carried on after the April 1st 

deadline? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — I would suggest the hon. member ask a question 

without a speech. The federal government has ruled that the cut-off date would be March 31st. I have 

taken the matter up with Mr. Hamilton and I haven‟t had a reply yet — suggesting to him that the cut-off 

date be extended two months after April 1st to give municipalities who have got into the emergency 

program a chance to complete their well development work. I haven‟t had a reply yet. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Could I ask a supplementary question? In the event that you don‟t get a reply from 

the minister, is there not somebody in his department who could furnish this information? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I think there is Mr. Speaker, but I have been finding it very difficult to get replies 

for some reason or other, on urgent matters from the hon. minister at Ottawa. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. J.H. Staveley (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are called, I would like to 

draw to your attention and to the attention of all members of this legislature, a group of fourteen 

students, accompanied by two of their teachers from Western Christian College. Western Christian 

College is situated approximately four miles from the city of Weyburn, at the Weyburn airport. The 

objective of Western Christian is to make a contribution to our nation and to the church by instituting a 

program which offers our youth academic excellence enriched with social and spiritual education. 

Emphasis is placed on the high ideals of Christian living, Mr. Speaker, the objective being to produce 

individuals of character and integrity and with the edicts of the Bible as the basis of good citizenship. 

Students come from all over the North American continent and I am sure that you and the members of 

the legislature would like to join with me today in extending best wishes to this fine group of young 

people and express the hope that their experience today will be very enjoyable and fruitful. 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

6 

ANNOUNCEMENT: RE ESTEVAN BRICK PLANT 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all hon. 

members of the house will be very pleased to know that the brick plant at Estevan has commenced 

operations today and they are making goods and they will be in operation from now on. 

 

Although some hon. members were very prompt on bringing other kind of information to the house . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You told us they never closed Brock. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . I was afraid that I would have to bring this myself. 

 

An Hon. Member: — How long will it be open Brock? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — There is a lot else you don‟t know too. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — It would make a big book. 

 

DEBATE ON ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Berezowsky, seconded by 

Mr. Thurston. 

 

Mr. Arthur Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to join with the members who 

preceded me in congratulating you on your appointment to your high office. The people of your 

constituency have every reason to be proud of your appointment to this office. I am personally proud 

because you were my first seat-mate in this house. 

 

At this time I would like to join my colleagues to welcome the new member from Weyburn (Mr. 

Staveley) into this chamber. I also take great pleasure in congratulating my seat-mate the hon. member 

for Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) and my colleague the hon. member for Lumsden 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

7 

(Mr. Thurston) for the excellent job they did in moving and seconding the Address in Reply. 

 

I must also congratulate the Premier for the magnificent way in which he is managing the affairs of our 

province. Mr. Speaker, because this is the first opportunity that I have had to speak on radio time since 

my election, I would like to thank the people of my constituency for placing their confidence in me to 

represent them in this legislature for the present term. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I was reeve of my municipality, it was always my practice to keep in close contact 

with the people and to learn about their problems, and this way I could do the best job helping them, 

regardless of their political affiliations. I have always applied the same principle since I have been 

elected a member of the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the municipal councils of towns and villages have co-operated very closely with me, as 

well as other groups in matters of public need. Words cannot express my pleasure and gratitude for this 

attitude of co-operation. The resolutions and suggestions that have come to me from local governments, 

going on record in favour of the medical plan as proposed by the provincial government have given me 

much encouragement. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Mr. Speaker, as one who has always been interested in the youth of our country and 

the welfare of youth — and I consider young people as our most precious resource, I want to 

congratulate the Domremy high school girls, in being successful in bringing the high school 

championship in curling for Saskatchewan. The team is composed of Maureen McGrath, skip, Therese 

Blerot, second Collette Marsechal, third, Lucille Beauchane lead. Another team in my constituency 

which I have not mentioned on air time, which I want to name now, and which I am most happy to 

congratulate is the Yellow Creek high school boys, who took the soccer championship for 1961 in this 

province. Kinistino, as you well see, Mr. Speaker, is a constituency of champions. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Mr. Speaker, I think my people should know that 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

8 

I have had wonderful co-operation with the ministers of this government. Particularly, I want to thank 

the Hon. L.F. McIntosh, the former Minister of Municipal Affairs for his favourable consideration which 

brought sewer and water to the towns of Kinistino, Birch Hills, Wakaw and the village of St. Louis. The 

financial assistance from the same department has given us many miles of grid road at a cost of many 

thousands of dollars, most of which came from the province. I must say that this was done only by the 

co-operation of both levels of government and I want to remind the opposition that according to the 

Leader-Post of March 8th, 1956, their stand was that the CCF grid road program was only a mirage to 

win an election. They said it was something like shaking a carrot in front of a balky donkey to get him 

going. Apparently they did not have the foresight to see that what they thought could not be done, could 

be done by this government. 

 

I was reeve of the municipality of Invergordon when this program was approved by the S.A.R.M. and 

the provincial government, and I can assure you, sir, that I was one of the delegates who voted in favour 

of it. I could almost say that the grid road program was the downfall of the president of the S.A.R.M. at 

that time, because there was some inclination by him to use the grid road program for political purposes 

and municipal men are not interested in politics at the local government level. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now I would like to say to the Minister of Highways, that my people are pleased with the 

highway program and on behalf of my people I want to thank the Minister of Highways for the 

completion of No. 3 highway, the oiling job, and the completion of No. 20 highway to the junction of 

No. 2. I hope that as soon as conditions permit that No. 44 trail will be included in the highway system. I 

am warning the minister with all good grace that I shall continue to make representations for this project 

as long as I am here. 

 

One other problem that I would like to get the government to pay attention to, that is common in the 

northern parts of Saskatchewan, is the excessive snowfall. This creates a problem for municipalities and 

snow plow clubs, and I think that the department should give further study to assist the regions that have 

this problem. 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

9 

I would also thank the Minister of Telephones for bringing dial telephones to Birch Hills, Kinistino and 

Wakaw, and if the minister visits my constituency, I can assure him that he will be most welcome. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Mr. Speaker, our people are most happy to have experienced the completion of rural 

electrification and much of the credit should go to the minister in charge. We have also been fortunate to 

obtain natural gas for a number of communities — Wakaw, Domremy, Hoey, St. Louis, Birch Hills, 

Kinistino and Beatty, and I would like to see the same service extended to the village of Hagen and 

Weldon, at an early date. 

 

Another amenity that is coming to our area is the sewer and water program for farm homes. We should 

never forget that the Hon. I.C. Nollet, Minister of Agriculture, worked long and hard to get this program 

for farm home underway in Saskatchewan. My people appreciate this program because it means so 

much to them to make life more abundant. Farm people, Mr. Speaker, are just as entitled to these 

services as are the people in the cities and towns. This department has also given every possible 

assistance to the communities to obtain water, as was the case in Birch Hills, where the water was 

pumped from the Saskatchewan River to fill the community dugout. These services will go a long way 

in keeping the families of the communities together. 

 

Last and not least, I want to thank the former Minister of Public Health in the wonderful work that he 

has done in my constituency in improving hospitals by valuable extensions and additions. You will 

recall Mr. Speaker, that a year ago, I brought a resolution suggesting driver training promotion. I am 

pleased to report, Sir, that this suggestion received wonderful co-operation from my constituency and 

that the towns of Birch Hills and Kinistino have taken the first step to providing such training. I am sure 

that their efforts will bear much good fruit. 

 

Having said a few words that are of interest to my constituency in particular, I now would like to touch 

upon more general matters. The behaviour of the opposition is amusing and sometimes tragic. Some 

vote one way and some vote the other — with that I have no quarrel. But Mr. Speaker, what nauseated 

me last year was when one 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

10 

member in the opposition got up and intimated that his job was to sabotage everything this government 

was trying to do. Mr. Speaker, my life would be meaningless if I came here to sabotage anything a 

government was trying to do in the interests of the people, no matter what side of the house I sat. I will 

contribute all I can to my constituency, to Saskatchewan and to Canada to make this land a better and 

happier place to live in. 

 

The people of my constituency do not look at matters — whether they are left or right, but they judge 

them whether they are right or wrong. You will recall that in the fall session last year the opposition 

howled about the fact that the backbenchers did not take much time in debating the medical care plan. 

Mr. Speaker, the medical care plan was decided at the election and our job was to come here and put it 

into effect. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — It was not up to us to hold it up and for the delaying tactics of the opposition in trying 

to stop this plan, they are the ones who will have to answer to our people. Some say that the doctors are 

going to leave Saskatchewan, but I will say this, that in my constituency a large area has had municipal 

doctors for many years. I haven‟t heard any complaints against these plans, and I have every reason to 

believe that they will be just as satisfied with the provincial plan. I hope that the medical plan will be 

there for those who need it, and for the glory of those who don‟t need it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words about local government reorganization. Prior to the 

holding of the meetings by the continuing committee, I was asked many times by my constituents what I 

thought of reorganization. My advice in all cases was that they should attend the meetings of the 

continuing committee. There they could ask questions and also voice their opinion. I attended the 

meetings in my area in order to be well acquainted with the whole situation so that when the question 

came before us as members of the legislature, we would be in a position to make sound decisions. I 

thought that it was wrong for a member of the legislature to voice an opinion at a time when the 

committee had representations from all local governing groups and was holding meetings in order to 

present their report to the government. I think that members of the legislature 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

11 

should have been keeping their nose out of the whole affair until the committee had completed its work 

and presented its case to the government. Then I felt it would be the proper time for members to speak 

up. I know that some members opposite were trying to make a political football out of the whole affair. I 

label these tactics as just cheap politics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as one who has spent many years with local government, I know that the grassroots of 

democracy are in local government. If we want democracy to survive we must have strong local 

government. I have no time for a member who thinks only of his personal pride and has absolutely no 

regard for the welfare of the country as a whole. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Who is that? 

 

Mr. McDonald: — The member for Kinistino (Mr. Thibault)? 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Mr. Speaker, I have been interrupted many times but I think I should remind the 

members — may I say that these interruptions are an abuse of radio broadcasting. It is a disrespect to the 

listening public and an interference with the purpose for which radio broadcasting was established. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — It is a disrespect to read your speech. 

 

Mr. Thibault: — I am not reading. May I point out that the purpose of broadcasting is to give the 

people of a constituency a chance to hear their member. It also gives a chance to learn about the 

questions before the legislature and to hear the issues from both sides. For this reason I strongly object 

to interference by the members, especially when we are on the air. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now that I have been interrupted, my time is slipping on, I want to point this out that now 

that the report of the continuing committee has been handed in to the government, I want to make this 

abundantly clear — and I can say this, that legislation should be brought in, that we have enabling 

legislation so that any area that wants to form a different type of local government can do so after a vote 

has been taken . . . 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

12 

Mr. Thibault: — . . . and that the towns and villages be given a choice to stay in or to stay out. Those 

are some of the principles that I would like brought into the legislation at this session. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You have had a change of heart. 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Not me. 

 

Mr. MacDougall: — You are on the wrong side of the house then. 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot sit down without taking a few minutes to talk about our new 

national leader. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Who is that? 

 

Mr. Thibault: — I cannot take my seat without mentioning the Mr. T.C. Douglas, who in spite of what 

the members opposite say, did not abandon the ship. Mr. Speaker, we are living at a time when the 

world has reached the crossroads, where it has to choose between living together in peace or blowing 

itself into eternity. We in our constituency executive meeting decided that we would be very selfish 

indeed to hold this man in Saskatchewan, recognizing him as we did as not only a provincial leader, but 

a national leader, and even a world figure. It is with these thoughts in mind Mr. Speaker, that I take great 

pleasure in supporting the motion. 

 

Mr. H.A. Broten (Watrous): — Mr. Speaker, first I would like to join other hon. members in 

congratulating you on your election to your high position. May I say you have fully earned and deserve 

this appointment. 

 

I too, would like to congratulate the mover and the seconder of the motion, who both made a good 

presentation on behalf of the government, a government led by a new Premier, who proved himself a 

good administrator and was unanimously elected leader by the members of our party. I wish him well 

and congratulate him at this time. 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

13 

As this has been my first opportunity to speak on the air to the electors of the Watrous constituency 

since my election I would like to thank them for their support at election time and also for their co-

operation since that time. I am proud, Mr. Speaker, to be associated with this side of the house for 

several reasons. First because we have the necessary freedom of expression for political action, and 

second the desire to put into effect adequate social legislation, a desire which some people on the other 

side of the house may have also, but because they are so closely associated with big business and party 

organization and the involvement of campaign funds, they do not have the necessary freedom to propose 

and implement humane social legislation which demonstrates a social consciousness such as hospitals 

and medical insurance legislation etc. 

 

The Liberal governments have one by one disappeared from power throughout Canada, except in one 

province, and before they were voted out of power not one of them had demonstrated the social 

consciousness required to put in even as much as a supplemental allowance for old age before they went 

out of office. They have also talked of health insurance for 40 years. Twenty-two of those years they had 

the power to act and did not and this proves, Mr. Speaker, they were not free to do so because of being 

tied to the interests of big business and associates, who could well look after their own. 

 

This freedom to act on behalf of our people, Mr. Speaker, is fundamental in our ideas in a free society, 

as was demonstrated by our Saskatchewan government in putting through the necessary legislation, after 

making the medical plan an issue in the last provincial election. I submit, as I mentioned before, that the 

Liberals and Tories do not have the necessary freedom, hence we have had to lead in this type of 

legislation and they have had to follow because of its popularity. May I also say, Mr. Speaker, that this 

has been demonstrated throughout the whole of Europe where Social Democrats and Labour parties 

have had to be in power before this type of legislation was brought forth. Do you realize sir, it is only in 

North America in all this old free world that this type of legislation is not in the statute books now. 

 

Our government of Saskatchewan has proven by its action in the social sphere that we desire medical 

care, not for only 70 per cent of our people, but 100 per cent, hence the comprehensive compulsory plan 

for medical insurance. 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

14 

We do not desire only 70 per cent of our people to have medical coverage. We want 100 per cent to be 

covered. We do not want 30 per cent of our people who do not have medical coverage now to have to go 

on a means test to see if their medical expenses will be paid. This is our chief reason for opposing the 

arguments that our Liberal friends are putting up. We want coverage for everyone as a right, and we are 

in good company Mr. Speaker. Harry S. Truman, former president of the U.S.A. says in his memoirs: 

 

“On November 19, 1945, I sent congress a message recommending a national compulsory health 

insurance by payroll and other deductions. Under this plan all citizens would be able to get medical 

and hospital services regardless of ability to pay.” 

 

But here Mr. Speaker, it is 1962 and they can‟t even get a bill passed to aid the aged with medical 

coverage in their society. May I also say here neither have they got a government such as ours to lead 

the way in any of the states. Mr. Truman goes on to say regarding his bitter disappointment and I quote: 

 

“I have had some stormy times and have engaged in many vigorous controversies. Democracy thrives 

on debate and political differences, but I have no patience with the reactionary, selfish people and 

politicians who fought year after year every proposal made to improve the people‟s health. I have had 

some bitter disappointments as President, but the one that has troubled me most in a personal way has 

been the failure to defeat the organized opposition for a national compulsory health insurance program, 

but this opposition has only delayed, and cannot stop the adoption of indispensable federal health 

insurance plan.” 

 

May I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that Canada is fortunate that we on this side, being a free people and a free 

party, can put on the statute books legislation which President Truman could not, and other parties can‟t 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

15 

because of a lack of desire and because of not being free agents of the people but part of special 

interests. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my opinion, it is not a question of socialism versus free enterprises, but it is a question 

of a free party. When in power we must be free enough to inaugurate the necessary legislation to help a 

minority group, such as farmers, and 30 per cent of our population who have not medical coverage at 

this time. It is also a question of helping our unemployed, etc. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have been speaking on the necessity of a free independent party such as the New 

Democratic Party. In order to carry through the necessary social and economic legislation on behalf of 

the citizens of Saskatchewan, I would like to bring to your attention what our former premier, Mr. T.C. 

Douglas, said on a broadcast to Saskatchewan on October 23, 1961, regarding the necessity of an 

independent broadly based party, and how important it is to Saskatchewan and to Canada, especially to 

farmers, and why he left provincial politics to again enter the federal field, and I quote: 

 

“During the past year I have been increasingly concerned about the fact that the Canadian economy has 

ceased to expand at a time that the economies of other countries are forging ahead. I have also been 

concerned about the international situation, the threat of nuclear war hangs over our heads, and each 

day it seems to come a little closer. While no nation can avert war it seems to me that Canada has 

failed to promote a positive program for peace.” 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

“What has influenced me most, however, has been the steady decline in farm income in relation to 

farm costs. As you know I went into politics 26 years ago and because I was convinced that the 

farmers were the most exploited group in our society. I came back to Saskatchewan in 1944 because I 

believed we could do something to improve the lot of the farming population and I believe we have 

achieved a measure of success. However, helping the farmer get electrical power, better roads, schools 

and hospitals, does 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

16 

“not meet their basic problems of declining income. At the present time the farmers of Canada 

represent 12 per cent of the working force, but they receive less than a per cent of the total income. The 

reasons for this is not hard to find. At the turn of the century over 50 per cent of Canada‟s population 

lived on the farm. They were a powerful voting group and we were courted by the old line party, 

provincial party. By 1941 the farmers represented only 31 per cent of the population, and in 1956 the 

Gordon Commission estimated that this had dropped to less than 14 per cent. Furthermore, the 

prediction is that by 1980 the farmers will constitute less than 8 per cent of our total population. This 

means that the farmer is no longer able to control a large block of seats in the House of Commons, and 

even if we could win every rural seat on the prairies, we could not hope to push an adequate 

agricultural program through parliament. Today the farmers must have economic allies if they are to 

get economic justice. Where would he find such an ally. Certainly not in the manufacturers‟ 

associations, the mortgage companies‟ associations, or the national chambers of commerce. I believe 

the time has come when the farmer must, with the industrial worker, the small business man, the 

professional white collar worker, attempt to get a fair share of the national income. That is why the 

New Democratic Party was formed and I am glad to say this party has pledged itself to a program of 

parity prices which will bear a fair relationship to the farmers . . . “ 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

“I agreed to lead the New Democratic party because for the first time in the last quarter of a century we 

have a political movement which is sufficiently broad-based that it can get a square deal for the 

farmers in general and for the prairie farmers in particular. However, I believe that by increasing farm 

income we can give a stimulus to Canadian economy, thereby cure unemployment and promote 

economic growth.” 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

17 

These words of our former premier say in a clear and ringing tone why we have a New Democratic 

Party and why our premier left to carry on in the federal field, and why we cannot expect to obtain from 

the Liberals and Conservatives the social and economic legislation necessary for the welfare of the 

farmers and hence the rest of the people in Saskatchewan. The small town business man and our cities 

are very dependent on the farmers, if they are to get an even break, will have to back the New 

Democratic Party with sufficient strength to gain power to get parity prices. Parity prices, sir, a hollow 

sound when it comes from the lips of Liberals and Conservatives, because they both had the opportunity 

to inaugurate it and reneged. All we get is a $200 bribe in order to buy our vote. Mr. Speaker, what is 

$200 when our production costs, inclusive of living, have gone up from 123.6 in 1945, according to the 

Dominion Bureau of Statistics figures, to 256.3 in 1960, or a little more than doubled, and our price of 

the cereal grain are about the same all through that period? Is it any wonder Mr. Douglas felt he would 

have to re-enter the federal field so that the farmers‟ voice could be heard inside a party that in the 

provincial field has dedicated itself against social justice to all segments of our population. But this 

philosophy of benefits for all and they be put to use in the provincial field the same idea of a fair break 

to all which follows in the economic field as well regarding federal legislation. Therefore the farmers 

only hope is in the New Democratic Party which believes in righting the wrongs for minority groups. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Twelve hundred new taxes too, Hans. 

 

Mr. Broten: — As a well rounded and responsible administration for all segments of our country. Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to take a moment to express my thanks to the government for their consideration 

given to Watrous constituency, especially for the oiling of No. 2 the main street of Saskatchewan from 

No. 11 to the town of Watrous, and may I also urge attention to No. 2A to Manitou Beach. I wish also, 

to thank you for the hardtop of No. 5 from the No. 2 to Humboldt, which I believe will be finished this 

year. The oiling of No. 14 from Lanigan to Wolverine was appreciated, also I do urge that the oiling past 

the town of Plunkett, Viscount and Colonsay on No. 14 be extended this year. They also say that federal 

grants and other 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

18 

grants are much appreciated, especially we do need some consideration in the Bruno area. 

 

The Wardley Brine Shrimp Company which I announced last year in the house was started at Watrous, 

completed their construction and have started operations and will be in full production in May this year. 

The products are sold through the parent company, Wardley Products of New York. The Brine Shrimp is 

used for fish food. We wish the company well in their endeavour. 

 

Also may I say, come to Manitou Beach. There are over 300 cottages, a fine recreation centre, served by 

a fine shopping centre in Watrous, and again may I add it is on No. 2 the mainstreet of Saskatchewan. 

 

May I say Mr. Speaker, I do support the motion. 

 

Hon. W.G. Davies (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, in beginning today to join this debate, 

may I add to what others have already said, my most sincere congratulations on your accession to the 

honored position to which you have been appointed. The long years of service, Mr. Speaker, that you 

have rendered to the people of Saskatchewan, and to of course the people of your own constituency, 

have undoubtedly supplied you with the most suitable background for these duties. I think too it is a 

fitting and a proper reward for the commendable fashion in which you have discharged your very many 

responsibilities throughout this whole period. I am very sure, sir, that you will fulfil your obligations and 

your work in the post of Speaker of this house, as faithfully and as well as you have performed in the 

past. I wish you, sir, the utmost success in this distinguished position. 

 

I should also in the beginning offer my compliments to the mover and the seconder of the Address in 

Reply. I think they did a splendid job of outlining the basic questions that confront the people of this 

province, and I think the two are a credit to this house as well as to their own constituency. 

 

The speech from the throne, Mr. Speaker, began by mentioning the adverse conditions created in the 

province by reason of the short crop in 1961. It pointed out the difficulties for the government, the 

difficulties for the people of Saskatchewan. At the same time it seems to me that it illustrated very well 

the fact that in spite 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

19 

of these circumstances Saskatchewan has seen continued development and that there has been a forward 

move in many aspects of our amenities and the general provincial economy. A betterment of our road 

systems, further advances in the expansion of natural gas and electric power, growth of the rural sewer 

and water system, as well as a rise in money spent on education and health, are only a few examples of 

this very beneficial forward movement. 

 

I would just briefly like to refer to my own constituency of Moose Jaw City, and I think Mr. Speaker 

you will know that the people of the friendly city, as we call it, and those in the area, have been very 

pleased to see the improvements of this last year that have taken place in the region. The widening and 

resurfacing of No. 2 highway north to Tuxford, the oiling of No. 39 highway to Corrine, have been I 

think significant changes. The decision to go ahead with a $1.4 million expansion at the technical 

institute in my city is equally promising. Another major item has been the purchase of the government of 

an additional parcel of land at Buffalo Lake so as to provide a total of 950 acres for a public park 

development. I am sure this is going to do much for the public enjoyment, not only for the people of 

Moose Jaw, but in the surrounding districts, and to provide something they can use for their leisure 

hours. In respect of this last matter I am hoping it will be possible, Mr. Speaker, to secure further 

advantages that will supplement those that have already been granted. 

 

Now during the past year the work of the Saskatchewan Department of Public Health has continued to 

increase, in keeping with the programs which are supplied and offered to the end of getting the best 

standard of health for the people of the province, and therefore I suggest, Sir, increasing the 

opportunities of Saskatchewan people for happiness, because it seems to me it is not possible to have 

one without having the other. The 13 health regions, or perhaps more properly the 13 health areas in the 

province which operate under the over-all supervision of the department, have I think without doubt 

supplied a tremendous impetus to this desirable state of healthiness. The network of services that come 

within these regions and within this program, using the skill and the knowledge and the capabilities of 

hundreds of devoted public health workers, have unquestionably reduced sickness and disability and 

death, in addition, of course, to making more hours available for many worthwhile activities at the 

discretion of our citizens. 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

20 

I want to point out here that one of the desirable side effects is, of course, augmenting production by 

making possible more opportunities for work because of reduced sickness. 

 

I think Sir, that the importance of a public health apparatus, especially of a continuing and a functioning 

one, is not always realized, nor does it seem to me that we always recognize what this means to 

producing a high standard of healthiness in our communities. I should like to provide this one single 

example of what I think is important in this respect, and I am going to refer to immunization procedures 

as they have been applied during the course of the last several years. In 1923, Mr. Speaker, there had 

been in Canada up to that time about 60,000 cases of diphtheria and a very, very high rate of mortality, 

about 10 per cent. In that year a diphtheria toxoid was discovered. Now theoretically it should have been 

possible after 1923 to within an extremely short space of time eradicated this dread scourge so feared by 

all the mothers of Canada. Yet in 1944, 21 years after the discovery of this toxoid, there were 3223 

recorded cases of diphtheria in Canada, with an accompanying 350 deaths. This I suggest was as a result 

of neglect in the use of the means of prevention and because we had not used the appropriate means of 

carrying serum and vaccine to the people of all areas in this country. 

 

I think it will be seen from this example that it is not enough to discover the serum and the vaccines that 

are so helpful in combatting communicable diseases, it is not enough to have often extremely able 

professional people that individually pursue their professions. A well organized public health service on 

the other hand has proved to be absolutely indispensable in educating people to take preventive means 

and in taking these preventive means to the largest part of the population. 

 

Now Sir, I don‟t wish to imply here that we have by any means achieved the ultimate with respect to the 

prevention of communicable diseases, but I do say that we have just pride to be very glad of the 

enormous strides that have been taken and that have had an effect for good on our people generally. Our 

department I may say, looks to further steps that will better these services, and improve these programs. 

 

I was going to make this afternoon a rather extensive reference to the new Sabin vaccine for 

poliomyelitis. 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

21 

As you know Saskatchewan has in the last several years achieved a very high standard of immunization 

among a large part of the population through the use of Salk vaccine. This vaccine is considered to be 85 

to 90 per cent effective for those who are vaccinated, but with the remaining number of persons it has 

been found that it does not build up the necessary antibodies to provide protection. There is, however, 

coming to Canada the Sabin oral vaccine. One dose only of this vaccine is necessary, taken by mouth as 

I have suggested, and it is proposed, as soon as this is licensed by the federal authorities, to initiate a full 

program in Saskatchewan that will take advantage of what we think is an even better means of 

combatting poliomyelitis, and in the long run I think creating a situation where the bad effects of polio 

would be almost negligible for the entire population and that the incidence of the disease would become 

very rare. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the speech from the throne mentioned the advantages that have been made over the years 

in the provincial mental health program, which cites among other things the important research that is 

being carried on in the province. The hon. Premier, in his very impressive speech last week, has already 

mentioned there will be sums spent in planning a provincial research centre for mental health. Now the 

government is very naturally anxious to proceed with the institution of new measures and all advances 

that will combat mental disorders. I think the record of this province shows that this course has been 

pursued most sincerely. Much more of course needs to be done and I want to say the government intends 

to consider further moves ahead as these seem to be possible within the framework of the total 

responsibilities of this government. 

 

I do regret to say Mr. Speaker, that there have sometimes been some rather irresponsible statements 

made about the mental health program and some of these have emanated from the ranks of the Liberal 

party of Saskatchewan, and for the sake of the facts I want to look at a few comparisons between the 

Saskatchewan record and that of other provinces. 

 

First of all, taking into consideration mental health budgets, I am now talking about operating costs, and 

this is for the provinces in the fiscal year 1961-62 as we have them. We find that Saskatchewan has 

again led the field in the per capita expenditure on this item. Per resident we spent in the fiscal year that 

ended in March 31, 1961, $11.47 for each resident of the province. This involves a total sum of 

$10,479,620.00. Now Mr. Speaker, this sum almost exactly equals the combined spending of these 

purposes of Manitoba, Newfoundland and 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

22 

Nova Scotia. 

 

Per capita spending of each of the provinces can be given, I think it might be useful and I think I can do 

that now with your permission, Mr. Speaker, with the over-all figure for Canada. The per capita figure 

for Newfoundland is $4.69, Prince Edward Island $7.13, Nova Scotia $4.39, New Brunswick $5.84, 

Quebec $3.27, Ontario $8.92, Manitoba $5.75, I gave for Saskatchewan already $11.47, Alberta $7.63, 

British Columbia $9.18, the average for Canada being $6.77 per capita. I think that these sums alone are 

enough to constitute an effective answer to what I suggested as being extremely irresponsible criticism 

by some people who I think should know better. As well as these comparisons, I would like to refer to 

the very considerable sums of money that we have spent on renovations to our mental hospitals, 

including of course our latest changeover, the converted facilities at Prince Albert. I want to refer too to 

the new Mental Health Clinics that have been established in a number of centres in Saskatchewan so as 

to bring psychiatric services closer to the people. I think that these developments are most significant 

and they reflect themselves in lowering the number of persons in our mental hospitals over recent years, 

and the length of stay for the people that are unfortunate enough to go to the mental hospitals has been 

likewise decreased. In short the active treatment program that has been developed has improved the 

likelihood of returning the mentally ill person to his family circle and to productive society. I want to 

make it clear that I am citing these examples in no boastful spirit, as I know, Sir, that there are areas 

where we all want to see improvements, and which I have already said we will improve as soon as we 

have the financial ability to do so. 

 

I did think it was necessary today to cast a little light on places where there has been a great deal of 

loose talk and criticism. We do need more space, but the fact remains that we have a thousand or so 

fewer patients in our mental institutions at North Battleford and Weyburn, than when this government 

took office. We want to improve our treatment facilities but the fact is that we have an incomparably 

better trained work force in our institutions than we had in the earlier years and we have been able, 

because of the increased knowledge and the vastly improved capacity, to return many of those who were 

suffering from mental sickness to normal and useful lives. 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

23 

Before leaving this section of my talk Mr. Speaker, may I inform the house that work on the regional 

psychiatric hospital at Yorkton will continue this year. The initial job of making provision for basic 

facilities is now fairly well completed. This work has cost the province about half a million dollars to 

this time, with an additional amount committed. I am sure that the house will be as pleased to receive 

this information, as I am. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the throne speech has commented on our work towards the introduction of a provincial 

medical care plan. It states properly that it will represent an important social advance for our people. 

Throughout this session, and of course the last special session, we have heard from our friends in the 

opposition the most extreme criticism, often rife with inconsistency, about our approach to this whole 

problem. At public meetings members of the Liberal party have continued their efforts to discredit the 

government in its efforts to carry out this plan. It is impossible, Sir, to escape the conviction that the 

Liberal party in Saskatchewan in line with the record of Liberals everywhere in Canada, is 

fundamentally opposed to a public medical care program. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — I expect to hear a chorus of negatives after this from the members of the 

opposition, but it is hard to get away, Mr. Speaker, from appearances. In the midst of this corrosive 

attack the Liberal party has yet to say in any detail what it would do on a medical care program. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You just resign and we‟ll show what we‟ll do Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — Yes, indeed Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Just resign and we will show you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — If indeed it would do anything at all . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We‟ll get a medical plan. You fellows can‟t. 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — Mr. Speaker, that isn‟t true. 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

24 

Mr. Speaker: — Will the hon. members please stop interrupting so the speaker can finish his speech. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — If you would quit speaking such nonsense . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — I want to say Mr. Speaker, that a public medical care plan is coming to 

Saskatchewan just as surely as it is coming eventually everywhere in Canada. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — Because the people want that program. We have been urged by our friends 

opposite, I believe in the last session, to wait until a national plan comes along. What National Plan? 

What national plan Mr. Speaker? We have a national commission . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Where is your plan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — . . . which is now going around the country accepting reports from different 

organizations and to get their opinions on this matter. I understand it will not be reported until the next 

federal election. Certainly this is the most shadowy of indications. We‟ve had over the years many more 

specific indications than this, if you can call them specific. After all it is almost 42 years since we had 

the first promise from the Liberal government for a national health plan and this promise of a program 

that would give 60% of the cost of the health program and the Liberal party of the day went out of office 

without having done anything about it. I say, Mr. Speaker, that we have had these promises but well we 

know that these have gone with the wind with many, many other unredeemed Liberal promises in the 

past. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — What about your sales tax promise? 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — In my honest opinion . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Five per cent tax. How about that Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — . . . the best way that we can 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

25 

work toward the health plan for all Canadians is to get one going in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We‟ve got the taxes, but no plan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — That‟s the way we got a hospital plan and I say that if we hadn‟t started one here 

they probably wouldn‟t have one in effect anywhere in Canada. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — What one have you started here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — I say that the same thing goes for the medical care plan. 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word about our activities toward the plan in Saskatchewan. You know 

that up to the present we have not been successful in getting a meeting with the College of Physicians 

and Surgeons to discuss satisfactory arrangements that will meet the wishes of those who give and those 

who receive services under the plan. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You wouldn‟t meet them when they wanted to meet you. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Would the hon. member of the opposition please be quiet. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I wish all members would comply with the rules of the house and not interrupt the 

hon. members as they are speaking. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out that applies to the Premier just as much as it 

does to the Leader of the Opposition. He was on his haunches about 15 times when the Leader of the 

Opposition was making his address. If it is going to come from that side of the house I am sure it will 

come from this side. 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — Mr. Speaker, I will have something to say about that in a little while. 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

26 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Typical lies. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I demand that the Minister of Agriculture withdraw that statement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, on that point there is no member in this house that sat quieter in his 

seat without interrupting when the hon. Premier spoke and the hon. member from Moosomin (Mr. 

McDonald) knows that. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I ask that the member withdraw his statement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I will withdraw it if it will make him feel better, but it‟s a fact Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I just want to tell you that you will feel a lot better having withdrawn it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I will withdraw it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — The Leader of the Opposition will hear more about the point he raised in a few 

minutes. Meanwhile I want to say that it is my hope and my expectation that meetings will finally take 

place. The Medical Care Commission appointed early in the month of January is undertaking some very 

careful and efficient preparations along the many lines that are indicated in a plan of this sort. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Mr. Speaker, on the Speaker‟s ruling of reading speeches in this house, I don‟t mind 

the odd private member doing so but when a minister of the crown stands up and reads his entire speech, 

I think that the Speaker should take the action that was promised by the Speaker last year and end this 

habit of reading speeches in the house. 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — Mr. Speaker, this comes very strangely from the members of the opposition and I 

don‟t want to say any more about it except to say that I have my speech here Mr. Speaker, I have my 

notes written as you see on the side and I am referring largely to these. Now may I proceed? 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

27 

Mr. Speaker: — . . . I do not think he is guilty of that offense. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — I think that we should abide by the rules of this house and no reading of speeches. 

That is something that we would like to have cleared up now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — It is very evident to me Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — What about this one . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Do you make a distinction as to who speaks on the floor of this house? Is each 

one on individual merit or is it the rule . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — . . . later, Order! 

 

An Hon. Member: — You also said that . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the rest of this speech won‟t be any more palatable 

to the members than what I have already said. 

 

Opposition Members: — I hope it is more truthful. 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — Mr. Speaker, they are going to sit there and listen to it just as I have had to listen 

to a lot of nonsense coming from that side of the house. Mr. Speaker, the government as I have already 

made clear has offered to meet the college. In the statements that I have made during the course of the 

last several months I think that this has been evident. The commission, on its appointment, has 

approached the College of Physicians and Surgeons in the same way. Both the government and the 

commission have been refused a meeting by the college. I would point out that there is no doubt that the 

council of the college has been granted the authority of the last convention to enter into negotiations 

with this government. The refusal to meet this time is very apparently to me the result of the decision 

made by the officials of the college, not to meet with the government or the commission. I am going to 

refer later to a resolution which was passed by the last meeting of the college and this certainly bears out 

everything that I have just said. 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

28 

Now Mr. Speaker, it has also been said and said on frequent occasions that the Medical Care Insurance 

Act was drafted without reference to the medical profession and that there was also a suggestion that 

there was no opportunity for the college to convey its feelings to the government. Now this I say, Mr. 

Speaker, is not so and the record is very obviously to the contrary. Ever since the Medical Care 

Advisory Committee was set up in 1960 the representatives on the committee of the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons have conveyed their viewpoints and conveyed their opinions. This is over a 

period of over sixteen months, Mr. Speaker. They were aware of the feelings of other members of the 

committee; they were made aware of the opinions of all the organizations that came before the 

committee and they themselves quite exhaustively made their own opinions known when their 

representatives came before the committee, and I say that the structure of the present act is very largely 

patterned on the final proposal of the majority of the advisory committee. It is utterly fallacious to 

suggest that the government, in coming to the conclusion that it did in drafting the bill last fall, decided 

on recommendations from its own staff and did not look at the recommendations of organizations other 

than the advisory committee. I say again that the act was largely passed on the recommendations made 

by the advisory body which met over 16 months and had drafted interim report for the consideration of 

the government. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, would the minister permit a question at this juncture? 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — Mr. Speaker, at this point, having been interrupted I consider so unfairly and so 

often I will wait until I have finished my speech and answer questions then. 

 

The act as it now stands, Mr. Speaker, makes it possible for the medical profession to enter into 

arrangements to supply medical care without in any way, any genuine way, hurting their status. 

Sensational language such as has been used that this act means civil conscription of doctors in the 

province is just so much unalloyed fiction. There is no reason to believe that the thousands of fine 

doctors that are now working for the public in many areas are conscripted or are not able to express their 

opinions or have lost their professional status simply because they are receiving their remunerations 

from public funds. 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

29 

I want to say this, that I have no intention and no desire to talk of anything now or in the future that 

would savour of threats or pressure on the doctors of this province and I have consistently tried to state 

the exact contrary. I have some confidence that the doctors of the province are now beginning to think 

that the authorization that was given to their members at their convention last October in a second 

resolution should be acted upon and that negotiations should be entered into with the government and 

the commission concurrently or separately. I don‟t care how they proceed as long as it is in the spirit of 

getting a solution to the problem that we have found. 

 

I know that there has been a great deal of partisan feeling expressed in this house. I know that we have 

had some pretty hot debates on the matters before the house and in my view the interest of every 

member of this house would be best served by supporting action toward a settlement. If this is not 

forthcoming, I want to predict to the members that are sitting opposite me that they will some day regret 

the decision that they have taken in opposing the act and opposing the setting up of a commission. 

 

I want to say something about a number of remarks that were said in this house on Friday, by the hon. 

member from Melville (Mr. Gardiner). In my opinion these remarks were a disservice to the cause of 

getting an effective arrangement in Saskatchewan on medical care. It was so full of inaccuracies, Mr. 

Speaker, and irrelevancies that one hardly knows where to begin in trying to answer. However, I am 

going to make reference to only a few. We were accused on this side of the house of spreading hate and 

dissension about the doctors of this province. Now I want to emphatically deny that any member on this 

side of the house has in any way attempted to spread hate and dissension about the doctors and the same 

goes for this nonsense about — what was the expression? “Planning a breach of the freedom of the 

people of this province” or similar remarks about the medical care plan striking at the freedom and well-

being of every man, woman and child in the province. I say that this is just unmitigated balderdash, Mr. 

Speaker, and certainly is not true. 

 

We were told the other day that doctors had never asked to be placed on salaries by this government by 

the hon. member from Melville and I might say that this government has never asked or demanded that 

doctors accept this basis of payment under a medical care plan. 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

30 

The member said on Friday that doctors could go anywhere in Canada and make double the money that 

they are making in Saskatchewan. Now this is more of the talk, I suggest Mr. Speaker, designed to 

intimidate the people of this province against the participation in a medical care plan. 

 

I think it is a sad thing to hear these remarks from the member from Melville (Mr. Gardiner). I want to 

say that over the weekend I took the trouble to look up some of these figures on this question, and you 

may be interested to know that the average income of doctors in Saskatchewan is at the highest level of 

any province in Canada. This is on net taxable income for the year 1959. It is after deduction for 

expenses of practice but before income tax. The average shown for that year for doctors in practice 

reporting was $18,393.35. I won‟t run over all of the other provinces Mr. Speaker, I have said that the 

Saskatchewan average is the highest, the Canadian average in the same figures is $15,757.31. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — After paying all their expenses? 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — This is after the payment of business expense but before income tax. The same 

way in which a person would get paid a salary or wage today and have income tax deducted after. Of 

course if the hon. member from Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. McFarlane) said that the chairman of the 

medical care commission gets his salary and has no income tax deducted, then he is quite wrong about 

that. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Plus expenses . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — Well anyone, Mr. Speaker, in this country that moves around and does any 

travelling gets his expenses paid and I am sure that the member knows about that. 

 

I want to get to perhaps what may be a more pertinent topic and that is the statement of the hon. member 

for Melville (Mr. Gardiner), that the government should take the responsibility of asking doctors for a 

meeting should have been not only to discuss legislation but on how changes could be made to protect 

the freedom of the doctors. As the hon. member was making this statement there was already in the mail 

under my signature an additional letter to the College of Physicians and Surgeons and I am going to 

quote the text of that this afternoon, but I would like the hon. member to know and 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

31 

the members of the Liberal party that for three months we have been doing precisely this, and as early as 

late November and by a written communication on December 4th we had asked the college to come to a 

meeting with us, not to discuss only the question of a medical care commission, but to discuss 

additionally the matter of general subjects on which the doctors felt some concern and felt that there 

should be some discussion. I am sure that if the members had been following the events, they would 

have noticed that we had asked for this type of discussion and would have noticed that we had been 

consistently refused. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Not originally. 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — I don‟t know what the hon. member means by not originally, but I say this and I 

say it categorically, Mr. Speaker, that for a matter of three months we have been asking for the type of 

meeting that the member for Melville said that we have refused. I have shown that this is not so. I want 

to . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I just want one thing clarified, he said we, is that the commission or 

the government? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — When you used the word we, who are you referring to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — When I use the word „we‟ in respect of a body trying to get a meeting with the 

college, I am naturally referring to the government, Sir. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Would you answer my question Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — I would like to proceed. The reply of the college said this, and I am quoting a 

letter that is dated December 22nd, that we did not receive until December 28th, post marked, by the 

way, the day before. This letter in refusing said. 

 

“Council agrees with and will accept the direction of its membership as indicated by this resolution.” 

 

They are referring to a resolution that denied the medical 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

32 

care insurance act as being the kind of framework they could co-operate in and then went on to say: 

 

“It would therefore be pointless to meet for the purpose of discussing a medical care bill which has 

been enacted in a form incompatible with the professions‟ standards.” 

 

I want to point out again that we had initially asked in our letter for a meeting that embraced all kinds of 

topics and would certainly not have excluded any of the general topics that might have had to do with 

the fears or doubts of the doctors. 

 

In my letter of January 5th, in replying to this communication, I made it quite clear again that we 

initially had not asked for a meeting solely on the question of a medical care plan and solely to 

implement the plan itself, but that we had been prepared to discuss all general subjects that had to do 

with the things that they were complaining about. I would say that the people of the province know that 

the government is doing everything humanly possible to talk to the doctors and any suggestion that the 

hon. member has made, and which I think has been repeated elsewhere, that we haven‟t done our best to 

do this is just not so. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Definitely. 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — Now I want to quote this other resolution about which I spoke a few minutes ago 

and which no one seems to have heard very much about. This was passed with even a greater majority 

than the first resolution opposing the medical care plan at the October meeting of the Saskatchewan 

College of Physicians and Surgeons and with your permission Mr. Speaker, I would like to read this into 

the records. 

 

“Resolved that this annual general meeting of the College of Physicians and Surgeons and the 

Saskatchewan Division of the Canadian Medical Association authorize the council of the college to 

proceed on our behalf in all negotiations relating to all matters in respect to any government plan or 

plans of medical services.” 

 

It went on to say: 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

33 

“We further recognize and authorize the officers, executive, council and committees of the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons as the duly constituted and recognized officers, council executive and 

committees of the Saskatchewan division of the C.M.A. to negotiate on our behalf.” 

 

I would just like to repeat these words, because I think they are most important in their context. 

 

“to negotiate on our behalf.” 

 

And the final paragraph of the resolution: 

 

“We further authorize the same officers council, executive and committees to negotiate on our behalf 

as the Saskatchewan Medical Association, if they deem advisable.” 

 

I say that all powers are present with the college to negotiate in terms of that resolution. I suggest that it 

was clearly the feeling of the members there that in endorsing this resolution they were giving to the 

council or the executive, if you will, of the college, the powers to deal on their behalf. 

 

Now I refer Mr. Speaker, to a communication that I wrote again to Dr. Dalgleish last Friday and I think 

it wouldn‟t be amiss if I read this letter, a letter of three short paragraphs, this letter written to Dr. 

Dalgleish said: 

 

“Mr. D.D. Tansley, the chairman of the Medical Insurance Commission, has forwarded to me a copy 

of the letter which he received from you on February 23rd. I regret that council has once again refused 

to enter into discussion on the medical care plan. It is my government‟s firm belief that the differences 

which separate the government and the college can be met in negotiations. In this spirit, I wish now to 

renew my request for an early meeting between representatives of the college and representatives of 

the government to discuss the medical care plan and its implementation. 

 

“You have indicated general dissatisfaction 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

34 

“with The Medical Care Insurance Act itself. I wish to make clear that we are not prepared to entertain 

any proposals, as you have suggested, to repeal the act. Nevertheless, the government is willing to 

discuss the act and to consider specific changes, if it can be demonstrated that they are required to 

protect the medical profession‟s legitimate interests. At the same time may I impress upon you the 

urgency which time places on this request. The legislature is now sitting and if any amendments to the 

act are contemplated, they would need to be speedily introduced.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest that the door to negotiations has been and is now open. I suggest that there is no 

reason why the medical profession of this province should not enter it. 

 

There have been a number of rather unkind and I think unfair things said about the new medical care 

commission. I say this, that whatever is said about the commission, it cannot be said that these are not a 

very capable, a very knowledgeable and experienced group of men. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — I am really appalled Mr. Speaker, at the attitude of the Leader of the Opposition in 

discussing the commission members, and I am suggesting that at least he could have made some 

recognition to the fact that these people are obviously of a type that can do the job. I am sure that every 

fair-minded person, every person in this legislature that wants to acknowledge capacities, want to 

acknowledge ability, would perhaps agree with me that Dr. W.P. Thompson, the chairman of the 

Advisory Committee on medical care, is a person whose opinion cannot be taken lightly. I received from 

him in January, after the appointment of the commission, an unsolicited letter. I think that these 

comments might be reported here. He said to me in this letter written on January 10th. 

 

“Dear Sir: I wish to compliment you and the government on the personnel of the medical care 

insurance commission. I know them all, several of them very well, and I have worked closely with 

some of them. I have great respect 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

35 

“for them, not only from the standpoint of ability, but also from that of integrity and public-spirit, and 

they have all had experience which should be useful in the work of the commission. You have done a 

fine job. Yours sincerely, W.P. Thompson.” 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — I venture to suggest Mr. Speaker, that this is the kind of appraisal which will meet 

with the general agreement of the people of the province, rather than the narrow and partisan judgment 

of the hon. Leader of the Liberal party, and the Liberal party generally in Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to turn for a few moments, Mr. Speaker, to some of the programs of the Department of 

Public Health. It seems to me that it might be useful to report on these now, since I think they are of 

considerable interest to the public. I think, as well as to give you information on these, it will indicate 

how the demand on health services have grown and the effective way in which the department has 

moved to assume responsibility for what I think is its proper share in meeting these demands. I‟m sure 

that it must be evident to all of the members of this house that expenditures on health consume a 

considerable share of the productive resources of this country. As the technological development of 

public health and health of all kinds proceeds, and I think it has been proceeding at a very rapid rate 

during the last 10 or 15 years, it becomes evident that the cost increase, because each of these facilities, 

each of these services cost a little more money. I think at the same time that there is public recognition 

that this is a pretty good thing, that these services are good, these facilities are desirable and they are 

prepared to pay for them. It is interesting however to note that in general the percentage that has been 

spent on health services in the whole of the western world, and of course including Canada, has not 

really changed appreciably in the last 10 or 15 years. This is again concerned and related to the 

production capacity of the country. We are spending a great deal more in terms of dollars on health 

services today, but the percentage of our gross national product has not varied very much over that 

period of time. Now, I think too, that from time to time it is useful for us to re-evaluate the 

developments that have taken place in the province in the 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

36 

health field, and to make some comments on the kind of program that we have had and their worth and 

desirability. 

 

I would first of all suggest that we could put our public health services into four principle categories. 

They are first of all (1) the services for the maintenance of health and the prevention of disease. 

Secondly, the services for the direct provision of health treatment. (3) the financial assistance programs 

to provide health services, and finally, the service programs that are rendered by various departments of 

the government for the people. I want to point out that in this last group there are included all of the 

consultative and the technical services, such as are provided in the provincial laboratories. I want to 

point out too that a key requirement in the provision of health services is the participation in evolving 

the programs. I am going to mention later on that this seems to be becoming a fact and more and more of 

the health regions are taking part in this participation and in this suggesting of policy. 

 

We now, Mr. Speaker, have the 12 health regions plus the northern health district, under the purview of 

the department, and the public health services provided by the cities of Regina and Saskatoon, which for 

the first time provide the province of Saskatchewan with a complete public health coverage. I think that 

Saskatchewan is probably one of the few major jurisdictions in Canada or the United States that has 

provided for full-time health services on this scale. I also suggest that the future framework of health 

services will be established on this local framework. 

 

I indicated that I was very happy with the kind of reception given to programs by the regional boards of 

health, who are not only taking a keen interest in the development of the preventive programs, but they 

are expanding their interests in the provision of treatment services for the people of the area that they are 

in. Members of my department and members of the regional health boards have spent a considerable 

amount of time in the past year discussing the whole problem of the development of the regional 

patterns of public health, and I am going to quote one paragraph of the document prepared jointly by the 

regional boards. It stresses the basic importance of the concept of regional development of health 

services and they have defined it in this way and I am quoting: 

 

“The organization and co-ordination of all 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

37 

“health resources and services within a defined area for the purpose of maintaining the highest possible 

level of medical care in adapting a comprehensive health program to the needs of the area.” 

 

I intimated, Mr. Speaker, a few minutes ago that the health services and needs are becoming more and 

more complex. Twenty years ago it was possible for us to put health services into neat little packages, 

often separate one from the other. You could talk about the need for a hospital service or about the need 

for preventive or treatment facilities, but this is really no longer possible. The tremendous degree of 

knowledge that needs to be accumulated by professional people, the coverage of each program that 

effects the people of the province, and is conducted either through the health regions or through the 

department, has really brought us to a point where the only fashion in which we can provide the best 

health services is by taking a co-ordinated and a public approach to each of these problems. As time 

goes on and one considers special cases, as to persons who are afflicted with rheumatism or arthritis or 

with any one of a dozen typical diseases, one realizes that it is not only a question of treating people, but 

of following the case right from the time he visits his doctor to the time that he is effectively 

rehabilitated. Therefore, as the appropriate department of government, we see the need to provide 

leadership necessary to make services available on this co-ordinated basis so that our interest proceeds 

from this in the provision of preventive services, of hospital care, of medical care, and rehabilitation. It 

is my view, and I am glad to say the view of the regional boards of health, that we must similarly 

develop a concern about the whole constellation of health services, whatever and wherever they may be, 

and that we must look as far as we can to the local bodies for the desirable co-ordination and co-

operation in these programs. I think again, that the regional boards have recognized with the government 

that services can and must be made available without consideration of ability to pay and must reflect 

need rather than some artificial demand that is based on the economics of supply and demand. 

 

I want to refer briefly, Mr. Speaker, without taking too much of the time of the house, to a number of 

difficulties that the department is experiencing in the incidence of infectious and communicable disease. 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

38 

But there are situations which are causing us some difficulty and I think probably for apparent reasons, 

they may also be causing the same type of trouble elsewhere in other parts of Canada. I refer first of all 

to infectious hepatitis which as I think members know, is a disease characterized by an inflammation of 

the liver cells. It is characterized in convalescence by a very long period of recovery, and the chief 

measures of control that we are able to apply are measures that have to do with cleanliness and the use 

of gamma globulin. However, in spite of the very assiduous effort on the part of regional boards of 

health and health workers everywhere, we can say that we are just barely holding our own in controlling 

this disease. Streptococcal infections are similarly of some problem. We do think however that the 

administering of the penicillin packages to children in any situation where outbreaks of this infection are 

threatening have been effective in reducing the size of outbreaks and that in the future this disease can 

be minimized. I would like to say a word about the Type B influenza that we all became, unfortunately, 

familiar with last fall, and which prostrated a good many of our citizens and also, I am unhappy to say, 

caused several deaths. This Type B influenza was identified very quickly by our provincial laboratory, 

and I want to pay tribute here to the splendid work that was done by the staff of this branch. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — Identification of the specific type of virus that caused this type of influenza put us 

in a position where we were able to get supplies of vaccine to use in the cases of those persons in the 

province who were particular risks — referring to the people in hospitals, older people and those more 

likely to come down with influenza and so on. We think that this is the most suitable way of coping with 

future outbreaks of influenza, that is, the identification of the particular virus and then getting as many 

doses as possible of the remedial vaccine. I want to say again that the good work that was done here was 

in finding the particular bug that caused this influenza, and by finding it we were able to cope with the 

disease much better than we would otherwise have been able to do. 

 

Venereal diseases pose some problem in the province. The number of new cases is not large, and there is 

nothing to be alarmed about in that connection. We haven‟t been able to reduce, as we would like to, the 

number of cases in the last several years. The chief 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

39 

concern here is with younger people, in certain social economic groups, who are not sufficiently aware 

of the dangers of the disease, nor the dangers indeed of promiscuity. We think the handling of this 

question again, is one of increased education and so far as medication is concerned, the program of 

providing the free drugs and the free treatment continues, and we see no difficulties in that direction. 

 

The cancer program, Mr. Speaker, continues to provide effective care for persons who contract the 

disease. The scope of direct services that are provided by clinics in the province is being steadily 

expanded. I think I can assure the members of this house that the most effective diagnostic and radio-

therapeutic measures are being used in this province for the control of cancer. I would like to add here 

that the Cancer Commission has served as a very important example of the way in which a commission 

can have real responsibility in the development and administering of a public health program within a 

general framework of responsibility to the government and the legislature. It is our contention, Mr. 

Speaker, that the medical care commission would work in an equally effective fashion. 

 

I would like to say just a little bit on the subject of tuberculosis. This of course is one of the areas where 

the government provides financial assistance. I think it was with a great deal of pride that the people of 

this province, certainly the Saskatchewan government, recognized last year the 50th anniversary of the 

founding of the Saskatchewan Anti-Tuberculosis League. This event, coming as it did on the heels of a 

demonstration of the effectiveness of tuberculosis control, was a very heartening and encouraging thing 

for the people of the province. Besides, I think it was a fine example of the way in which the 

municipalities, the provincial government, the people of the province, the board of the league and their 

staff, and indeed many other agencies, all working together to provide the means for control of what was 

once called, if my recollection is correct, the disease which was “Captain of the Men of Death”. I think 

that was the term used for the scourge of tuberculosis not so many years ago. The closing of the Prince 

Albert Sanatorium and the subsequent marked reduction of cases down at Fort Qu‟Appelle Sanatorium 

are again indicative of the fact that tuberculosis is now substantially controlled and that we are on our 

way to the eradication of the disease. 

 

Just a word, Mr. Speaker, about the general hospitals in the province. The hospitals have continued 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

40 

to make improvements in their general plans and their general services The hospitals, Mr. Speaker, are 

modernizing and they are doing this of course with the assistance of the government — by very 

generous grants — and of course to a lesser extent the grant from the federal government. Some of the 

examples of what has been done in the field of new construction projects would be the Holy Family 

Hospital in Prince Albert, the Yorkton Union Hospital, St. Paul‟s Hospital in Saskatoon, and a very 

extensive program of modernization and the provision of new facilities elsewhere. I think this might be 

the point for me to comment on something that the Leader of the Opposition said the other day about the 

astronomical costs of hospital care in Saskatchewan. I took the trouble to look this up and I find that our 

cost per patient day Mr. Speaker, in 1959 — this is the last year for which I can find figures — was 

$19.86 per day as against an average for the provinces with plans at that time of $19.77. Nineteen 

dollars and eight-six cents against $19.77, and I suggest that those figures don‟t reveal a too 

astronomical cost and that on the whole this has been a fine service. With the escalation of costs in other 

areas of the economy the increase has simply come about for that reason. Certainly there is nothing to 

indicate that the administration of our hospital plan is any more expensive because it happens to be a 

plan in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I made mention of course to the fluctuation in the provincial economy which has brought about the need 

for similar economies in this province and by the hospitals. This last year has had its impact on 

hospitals, just the same as it has had its impact on every department of this government. In spite of 

difficulties, in spite of all these difficulties Mr. Speaker, it is interesting to see that the hospitals have 

operated efficiently and in fact have even in some respects improved their standards within the 

budgetary limitations set. I would like here again to acknowledge with gratitude the co-operation that we 

have had from the Saskatchewan Hospital Associations. The fact is that from the beginning of last year, 

the association acknowledged that in view of the short crop they would need to co-operate with us in 

finding ways in which money could be saved and that it is largely because of this co-operation that we 

have encountered the easiest adjustment in a most difficult period. 

 

At the beginning of 1962 Mr. Speaker, we have been able to extend some further assistance to the 

hospitals by removing restrictions on the purposes for which the retained portions of earnings from 

preferred accommodations 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

41 

may be used. Previous to January 1, 1962 hospitals were required to maintain a separate bank account 

for the 50 per cent of the net proceeds from preferred accommodation and any sum that was earned here 

could be spent only in deferring expenses on capital costs. After January 1st, this sum may be used for 

either operating or capital purposes, in any fashion that is deemed suitable by the individual hospital. 

Respecting the use of funds that have been accumulated up to the end of 1961, they also may use this in 

a discretionary way, after having prior approval from the division of hospital administration and 

standards. As I say, the removal of these restrictions will provide more flexibility in hospital 

expenditures and I think in general that this should make for a more efficient use of the funds by 

individual hospital expenditures and I think in general that this should make for a more efficient use of 

the funds by individual hospitals. 

 

I spoke about a wide variety of services that are provided by the Department of Public Health in the 

form of consultations, direct services, inspectional, regulatory services and so on. These are all defined 

in the regulations and in legislation and I am going to comment on them only very briefly. I won‟t say 

anything about the air ambulance nor the sanitary engineering division because I think we know a fair 

amount about these. I would like though to say something more about the provincial laboratories. This 

has been, I think, one of the least well-understood areas of government. It is now equipped and it is now 

staffed to handle the widest range of laboratory tests, ranging from clinical chemistry to the 

identification of viruses and bacteria, and also to the elimination of toxic substances of all kinds in 

almost any product. The demand, Mr. Speaker, on the provincial laboratory have been increasing very 

steadily over the past decade, and the staff have been able to provide tests which cannot be effectively 

provided anywhere else in the province. Indeed, in some fields of investigation, a considerable volume 

of work comes from as far away as the Lakehead in Ontario in the east and to the Okanagan Valley in 

British Columbia on the west. This work of course is done on a custom basis for a fee. For residents of 

Saskatchewan, or for physicians of the province, the great bulk of testing is done without any charge at 

all. Perhaps some idea of the extent of this operation can be gleaned by looking at the figure for 1960-61 

of tests carried out on specimens submitted. This totalled 189 thousand. I think from this, Mr. Speaker, it 

will be seen that there is a very large amount of work 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

42 

being done here and one which could not be duplicated by any other private concern in the province. 

 

I made just a few remarks about the occupational health branch. This is a new branch of the Department 

of Public Health. It is concerned mainly with providing skilled assistance to industry in coping with 

occupational hazards of all kinds, thereby reducing the number of days that are lost because of accidents, 

hazards, or anything that is akin to these problems. As an example there are very detailed studies now 

being carried out in the uranium mines of the province to try and reduce the hazards that are a result 

from radiation. As well, industries where toxic materials are used are the subject of study in this branch 

and already some excellent work has been done by this branch in that regard. A detailed study is now 

underway in respect to the condition known as grain handlers‟ cough — which is a recurrent condition 

with many persons that work in the grain elevators — and we had no studies up to this time on this and 

we are therefore seeing that this is done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are some of the programs that I think provide an over-all look at the activities of the 

department and which may be some interest to this house and to the general public. 

 

In closing, may I make these few remarks. When we met the Hall Commission in early January we 

quoted in that brief the definition of the World Health Organization on “What is Health?” In the short 

form that definition says that “Health is a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being, and 

not merely the absence of disease or infirmity.” Mr. Speaker, I want to suggest that the activities of this 

department and the Saskatchewan government have been geared to match this ideal state and to reach 

for it. As we said in our submission at that time: 

 

“Many will urge upon you, no doubt, that there is a limited roll for government to play in the provision 

of health services. These advocates view health care as a commodity to be purchased in the 

competitive economy of the market place. Many of our problems of mal-distribution of personnel and 

services, our shortages and our grave financial problems of health care arise from this type of thinking. 

We hold that the nature of health needs, the consequences of their neglect and the need to provide a 

balanced 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

43 

“and equitably financed program to remove the threat of illness costs to family security all argue 

against such a point of view.” 

 

We pointed out Mr. Speaker, that the examination of the complex problems of health and disease lead to 

the conclusion that society can best solve these problems by organized collective action, through their 

governments working in co-operation with all agencies and all elements of the social order. 

 

Mr. Speaker, whether we talk about the present activities of my department or the medical care program, 

we seek to enlarge and to enhance and to improve these activities and therefore finally the health and 

happiness of the people. That is why, Mr. Speaker, I shall support the motion moved by the hon. 

member for Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) and seconded by the hon. member for Lumsden (Mr. 

Thurston.) 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder before the minister takes his seat, if he would now permit the 

question that he wouldn‟t permit in the middle of his remarks? May I ask that question now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — Go ahead. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — He made during his speech, a plea that the doctors should immediately meet with the 

government. Is it not correct that the medical profession or the college, repeatedly asked to meet with 

the cabinet to discuss the bill, before it was passed? And supplementary to that question, is it not correct 

that such a meeting was just as frequently turned down before the bill was passed? In other words, the 

minister says the door is open, but it wasn‟t open last October. 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say first of all in explanation that the remarks that I made 

had to do with the remarks made by the hon. member for Melville (Mr. Gardiner) about myself failing to 

reach an understanding with the doctors. What I did was to deal with the time that I have been minister 

of this department, and I think that I have effectually rebutted anything that was said about that. Now 

with respect to the former period, I say this, that the College of Physicians and Surgeons had every 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

44 

opportunity during the sixteen months previous to make their ideas and their formulations known to the 

Advisory Committee on Medical Care, and did that, in fact. Moreover they did meet, sometime prior to 

the session, with the government of this province. What I am saying is that there is no doubt that the 

feelings of the college, that the presentation of the college had been made known, not simply in the 

month or two before December, but in the sixteen months previous to that time, through the submissions 

they made and through the numerous statements that they had made. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Would you not, Mr. Minister, answer my question? Didn‟t the profession ask to meet 

the cabinet before this bill was passed, and did the cabinet refuse to meet with them? It is only after the 

bill is passed that the socialists say, “Let‟s get together”. I repeat you refused to meet with them before 

the bill became law. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — . . . I can say that the government did not refuse any request of the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I say they did and I can give proof that they did. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Go ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I cannot permit remarks across the floor in this way. 

 

Mr. J.E. Snedker (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, first I wish to congratulate you Sir upon your election to 

the office of Speaker of the legislature. I also wish to express to the Minister of Health, appreciation for 

the recent announcement he just made to the effect that the Yorkton Mental Institution would be 

proceeded with. Having helped in some measure to talk him into it, I think I will say no more for fear I 

might talk him out of it, but we appreciate it anyway. 

 

In connection with a few of the remarks that have just been made by the gentleman who just took his 

seat, Mr. Speaker, if I understood him correctly, the statement he made was this. That the Liberal party 

is fundamentally opposed to a medical care program. 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

45 

I think if I heard him correctly he said that we had done everything to prevent it or something along that 

line. The statement which I heard was that we were fundamentally opposed to a medical care program. 

Now, the word fundamentally means entirely — altogether, and this included every member on this side 

of the house, and possibly some outside of it for all I know, but all of us that are here. Now I would like 

to draw to the attention of the hon. gentleman who has just taken his seat certain things which were said 

in this legislature at the last special session of the house when we were gathered here together, called 

into a special session for the purpose primarily of passing a bill in connection with medical care for the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I have here on my desk, volume No. 4 of the Debates and Proceedings of this house of that special 

session. I turn to page No. 94 and I sincerely hope that the minister will pay some attention to me now 

because he obviously wasn‟t paying any attention then. These are remarks which I made in connection 

with the medical care program, in this house at that time. I am not going to quote too voluminously, but 

sufficiently to convince the hon. gentleman on the other side that he was incorrect when he made that 

statement. I proceed and I quote — Volume 4, Page 94: 

 

“Now having said that Mr. Speaker, and having mentioned the recommendations of the committee, 

which is that this plan should be administered by a commission, and I think I have made it reasonably 

clear that I oppose any administration by a commission appointed by the government. I would oppose 

it regardless of what government it was. I believe in the alternative of regional administration, as they 

have it in Swift Current, “and I quoted the report and gave you a pretty fair description as to how that 

area is administered. 

 

“I believe that the region should be established by a vote of the people — in or out — if the people 

vote they are out — then they are out. If they vote they are in — then they are in, and if they vote they 

are in the region, then they administer their own region and elect their own people to do it.” 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

46 

Now that statement could hardly have been made by anybody who is fundamentally opposed to any type 

of medical care plan for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — I continue the quotation Mr. Speaker: 

 

“I believe each region should be administered by an elected board. Whether it should be entirely 

elected by the people or whether it should be elected half by the people, and half appointed by the 

municipality in the area, as is done in the administration of union hospitals, under the Union Hospital 

Act, I haven‟t quite made up my mind, but in one form or another.” 

 

In other words, it was to be done. That statement could hardly have been made by someone who didn‟t 

believe in medical care. I quote further: 

 

“You would have people administering their own affairs in their own way. You would have 

representatives of the people, available to the people. When the people need somebody to turn to they 

would not have to come all the way to Regina and chase some cabinet minister up and down the 

corridors until they found him, or be shuffled from one to the other down the assembly line of civil 

servants. The obligations of the regional board, in my opinion, (I‟m continuing to quote) should be to 

provide complete medical care, diagnostic treatment, surgery, specialists. The method of payment to 

doctors, in my opinion, should be at the option of the board. I want to make that very clear. It would be 

up to them — if they put the doctors on a salary as the present municipal doctors are, or whether they 

paid them fee-for-service as they do in Swift Current, or whether they should use a combination of 

both.” 

 

That statement could hardly have been made by somebody that didn‟t believe in medical care for this 

province. I continue to quote. 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

47 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Go right ahead. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — I quote: 

 

“It would similarly be up to the regionally elected board as to whether they would operate the 

organization themselves directly, or make a deal with M.S.I. or Group Medical, which is possibly what 

a regional board would do in the city, as opposed to what boards in the country would do. The 

provision of dental, optical and pharmaceutical supplies would be at the option of the board. They 

would do what they thought they could afford to do and what they thought was right. The financing 

whether it would be by capitation or by property tax would be at the option of the board or by a 

combination of both, supplemented by grants from the provincial government which would certainly 

not cost the people any more than what this scheme is going to cost. It would probably be a lot less 

because the board would cut out a whale of a lot of red tape and employees.” 

 

That was hardly said by a person who doesn‟t believe in medical care. I continue to quote: 

 

“The position of the government in relation to the regions would be to assist and to advise them in 

every way. A vote would be conducted by the Department of Municipal Affairs. A supervisory audit 

would have to be conducted by the local government board, or the Department of Health. Grants would 

be payable by the provincial government, but one region would not be favoured as opposed to the 

other. Government would not be limited in any way, except that grants that would be available to one 

must be available to all. Any scheme such as that would dovetail into a federal scheme by reason of the 

fact that any federal scheme would probably be on the basis of grants from the provinces. What we are 

faced with is that the commission recommends a medical plan administered by a commission, plus the 

cost of patronage.” 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

48 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Is the hon. member reading? 

 

Mr. Snedker: — “What we need is a medical plan administered by the people themselves, less the cost 

of patronage.” I will read a lot more of this before I am through. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — And I am going to repeat the last sentence. I quote: 

 

“What we are faced with is that the commission recommends a medical plan administered by a 

commission, plus the cost of patronage. What I believe in is a medical plan administered by people 

themselves, less the cost of patronage.” 

 

You have the gall and audacity to get up in your seat and say that we all oppose medical care. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Give it to them Jim. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — No wonder your face is red. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Is there a doctor in the house? 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Now Mr. Speaker, I turn to Volume No. 9 of the Debates and Proceedings, and this 

was a speech that I made on second reading of the bill. I will just tune my hon. friend‟s memory up a 

little more in this respect. Just a minute I don‟t want to misplace these notes, or I will have to read the 

whole thing, and I don‟t want to take too much time. But I have got lots of it. Now I quote from page 

No. 76 of the speech which I made on second reading of the medical care bill: 

 

“For that reason I oppose most wholeheartedly administration by a commission. I won‟t oppose it and 

not express what I think is a suitable alternative.” 

 

Now would a person who didn‟t believe in medical care make a statement of that nature? Well I hardly 

think so. I proceed to quote: 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

49 

“I won‟t oppose it and not express what I think is a suitable alternative because I don‟t think a person 

should just oppose for the sake of opposing. If you can‟t produce a better alternative and you think 

there is any value in the scheme, then you shouldn‟t say anything.” 

 

Well I did think we had a better alternative. I did think there was value in the scheme, and I did propose 

the alternative we all did on this side of the house. Now I continue from page 80 Mr. Speaker: 

 

“I believe Mr. Speaker, most firmly that the administration of this plan should be on a regional basis. I 

believe that here is a God-given chance for the people and the government of this province to 

strengthen self-government.” 

 

I will have a little more to say about that later on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Go ahead and talk to yourself. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Well I would much prefer to talk to myself than to talk to you. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — I would rather talk to myself and the hon. gentlemen on this side of the house, who 

believe in freedom and democracy, than to talk to you who believe in its destruction. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Now I continue to quote from page 81 of the Debates, Mr. Speaker. Yes, his face is 

still red. 

 

“I propose Mr. Speaker, to submit an amendment to this bill an amendment which if it is accepted will 

cause the redrafting of this bill and its resubmission to this house with the objectionable clauses taken 

out. Those with regard to administration by a commission. My amendment would replace 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

50 

“administration by a commission with administration on a regional basis.” 

 

Now my hon. friend on the other side of the house says that we are fundamentally opposed to a medical 

care plan. I went through a whole campaign in the 1960 election on the basis of a medical care plan for 

the province of Saskatchewan that would be operated by regional administration, and I suggest that he 

get up on his feet and apologize for having insinuated that we are liars. He wasn‟t telling the truth and he 

knows it. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — I will read it back to you if I haven‟t got you convinced. This small group in this house 

and they all supported the amendment and they all supported me — what do you think they were doing 

sitting here. Of course they supported me. Every one of them. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Every one of them. I suggest that not only do you owe me an apology, I don‟t care 

about myself, but you owe everybody on this side of the house an apology. All of us. 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . Dr. Lang. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — What did he say? 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . Dr. Lang, who is he or where is he? 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Now don‟t you try and get off the hook by bringing in extraneous material. 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. member a question? 

 

Mr. Snedker: — No. He can give me an apology before he asks me anything. Otherwise he can sit 

down and keep his mouth shut. He can‟t tell the truth when it is open, and I have demonstrated that for 

the benefit of everybody. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You are being unparliamentary. 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

51 

Mr. Snedker: — Now I have said that Mr. Speaker, and if the hon. gentleman chooses to make an 

apology at the end of my speech it will be quite all right, if not I shall just naturally conclude that this is 

typical socialist misrepresentation, typical of the campaign of smear sarcasm and vilification that they 

carry on against the members of the opposition at all times. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — They would stoop to anything for self-justification. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What is this Liberal distortion? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Now is the time for a question. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Now having said that and I think possibly cleared the matter up to the satisfaction of 

all and sundry and made brief reference to the remarks that were made on the other side of the house this 

afternoon, I would like to say a few words, Mr. Speaker, in regard to the attitude of this government, in 

this house, and this province, to self government in the province. May I draw your attention to the fact 

that in the early days when the province was formed, the government that was in power at that time 

followed the procedure of delegating wherever it was possible powers to lower bodies, or to other 

bodies, clothing them with elective authority to elect their own people to run their own affairs in their 

own way. They set up municipal councils in our rural municipalities with elected councils to run our 

municipalities. They set up our town councils with elected councils to run our towns. Similarly members 

of our hospital boards were appointed by these very authorities within the regions in which they served, 

appointed by the municipalities by the towns by the cities as the case might be, but wherever it was 

possible in the formative days of this province, the government at the time followed the principle of the 

delegation of power to another authority; wherever it was possible. Now it seems we have had quite a 

change in the last 17 years — we have had a government in the last 17 years that doesn‟t believe in 

those things. They believe in the centralization of government here in Regina. Being socialists they 

would naturally believe in centralization. They would naturally believe 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

52 

in bureaucracy, and they have carried on for 17 or 18 years a vicious campaign for the destruction of 

local self government. They have endeavoured to introduce a socialistic dictatorship in a democratic 

country. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Wherever it was possible Mr. Speaker they have endeavoured to whittle away the 

rights and privileges of the elected representatives of the people at the lower levels of government. By 

this means, by that means, by using the mailed fist within the velvet glove — by using any means that 

was available — infiltration or anything — endeavouring to replace local government by centralized 

government, local officials by centralized officials, bureaucracy and patronage. That is the socialist 

creed, because it has always been the creed of the socialist to destroy that which he cannot control, and 

they have never been able to control our rural municipalities. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I draw your attention to an article which appeared in the Leader-Post quoting Mr. C.R. 

Elliott of Humboldt, chairman of the Saskatchewan Hospital Organization and Alumni Association. The 

statement which he made he said applies particularly to rural hospitals: 

 

“Hospital administrators in Saskatchewan are faced with so much red tape they often don‟t know 

whether or not they are adhering to the law.” 

 

The demands by the government that hospitals should do this and that hospitals shall do that, and I read 

in the newspaper the other day that increased services were to be given. The Minister of Health, I think, 

made the announcement, and I think they were services that should be given. Now don‟t let him get up 

in his place and say I said it shouldn‟t be given. I think they should be given. But he didn‟t announce at 

the same time where the hospitals were to get the money from to pay for the services. That goes all 

through the whole scheme of socialist administration, endeavouring to destroy and embarrass our locally 

controlled institutions, and destroy our local elected boards — here you have the boards of our union 

hospital districts in between the rate board on the one hand 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

53 

and the trade unions on the other. I can only conclude by the actions of the government that what they 

would like to do is eliminate all local union hospital boards and run the whole thing directly from 

Regina, as a straight line — Department of Health project. That is the conclusion I have come to. Let me 

add this, taking a good look at the gentlemen opposite and their recent affiliations in eastern Canada, I 

would also conclude that in all possibility with the local union commissar pulling the strings and telling 

them the hospitals who to hire and fire. 

 

The frontal attack which was conducted on our rural municipalities last year in an endeavor to liquidate 

all local self-government at the rural municipal level — local government in this province, an attempt at 

extension of the patronage system from Regina into the municipalities. Fortunately some of the people 

out in the country decided they were going to hold a vote on the matter and the government had to bow 

before the wrath of the people. They didn‟t like doing it and they didn‟t do it too graciously but did it 

nevertheless. I want to pay tribute to all the municipal officials and all the people out in the country. 

They took the action of conducting that vote when they knew very well that they laid themselves wide 

open to vicious victimization by this government. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — The attitude of the government to local self government and to rural municipalities in 

particular, was most aptly summed up by the Minister of Mineral Resources in his famous statement, 

when Mr. Brockelbank said and I quote from the newspaper, 

 

“ineffective local government groups were a nuisance and a trouble to the government all the time.” 

 

Of course he thinks all municipal governments are a nuisance . . . 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Would the hon. member . . . 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Yes, I can give the chapter and verse . . . December 2nd . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . where that quotation was printed, and I would 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

54 

like to hear him read it so I can understand it. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — I will be quite happy to read it as many times as he likes. I am quoting from the 

Leader-Post of December 2nd, 1960. Mr. Brockelbank said: 

 

“Ineffective local government groups were a nuisance and a trouble to the government at all times.” 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Ineffective. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — And the same thing last year in this house. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — I will read it again if you like. Do you want it again? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes, read it again, I didn‟t hear it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege . . . 

 

Mr. Snedker: — If I read it again, I may have him apologizing for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! There is a point of privilege . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I understand that he quotes me as saying „ineffective local government” . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — It is all ineffective to them . . . 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Certainly that is what I said. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I didn‟t say that any governments were ineffective. I didn‟t say that our 

present governments were ineffective. I did not say that. I said “Ineffective governments are a nuisance” 

just the same as ineffective oppositions are a nuisance. 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

55 

Mr. Snedker: — Yes Mr. Speaker, and I said that he thinks that all local governments are ineffective. I 

said that at the last session of the house and I say it in this session of the house. I think that he believes 

that they are all ineffective. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, I want to say that the attitude which 

the hon. member is ascribing to me is entirely wrong. I didn‟t say, and I don‟t believe that all local 

governments, or very many of them for that matter, are ineffective. He isn‟t on very many of them. If he 

were on a lot of them there would be a lot more that were. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Mr. Speaker, I may think what I please. These people stopped brain-washing me 15 

years ago. 

 

Now I quote Mr. Speaker, from the report of the Department of Municipal Affairs. The report just tabled 

in the legislature said results of operations show a large number of rural municipalities incurred deficits 

of sizeable amounts in 1960. Just in case anybody happens to get any derogatory ideas about that, and in 

case they happen to think they should use that to criticize our rural municipalities, our lower forms of 

government that they have incurred a deficit last year, and it is possible they will incur an even larger 

one this year. That is symptomatic of the times. The report stated, “It was apparent some councils were 

carrying out public works programs too ambitious for the size of their budgets.” Well, you know there is 

a good reason for that. One bureaucrat goes down to the rural municipality and yells, „spend‟. The next 

week the other bureaucrat comes along and says, „retrench‟. It is a case of those behind crying, „forward‟ 

and those in front crying, „back‟. I have all the sympathy in the world for the poor bedevilled municipal 

officials, the reeves, the councillors and the secretaries. They are trying to do the best they can to 

administer the municipalities — with farmers suffering from the cost price squeeze, suffering from poor 

crops, suffering from drought, suffering from grasshoppers and socialist bureaucrats. It is a wonder they 

are not all driven crazy. 

 

Then they go on to talk about the net debt of some of our municipalities. 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

56 

“The net debenture debt of municipalities continued to grow, chiefly as a result of borrowings by larger 

urban centres.” Now I hope when this is debated and discussed that the members of the government 

opposite are not going to visit on our rural municipalities the sins of the cities. And also that they will 

bear in mind when they are talking about the debenture debt of our rural municipalities and our other 

municipal bodies, I hope they will bear in mind that the gross debt of this province is in excess of a half 

billion dollars and so they are not in a very good position to talk about anyone else. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Excess of a billion, did he say? 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Half a billion. The Leader-Post of March 3, 1962, reported the Department of 

Municipal Affairs as saying, “that where the electorate, and I am quoting them, failed to exercise its duty 

in electing a conscientious and capable council, it is inviting the senior government to participate to a 

greater extent in its affairs.” Now there is a veiled threat if ever I saw one. This is just one more move 

towards the liquidation of our local self government, threatened by centralization, ridden by socialist 

bureaucrats, no wonder they are in trouble plagued by snoopers roaming all over the country. 

 

Why, why do the members of this government, why do the socialists so thoroughly dislike local self 

government? Well I‟ll tell you the reason Mr. Speaker, it is because of the S.A.R.M. convention, that 

little parliament of the province of Saskatchewan that meets once a year . . . 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — They stand in mortal fear of that group. There at that convention are gathered together, 

members of all political parties, doing the best they can for the people back home and their own 

institutions, regardless of politics and they just won‟t be pushed around by a socialist government or by 

any other government and rightly so, and that is why the gentlemen opposite seek to liquidate the rural 

municipalities, why they seek to liquidate our elected officials, why they seek to destroy democracy at 

the local level, that is why they have been doing it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — You are touched . . . 

 

Mr. Snedker: — This can continue. We may 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

57 

expect a further rise in taxes which this government has encouraged by their stinginess with municipal 

grants. This has caused the rise in taxation. You know, Mr. Speaker, there is such a thing in this world as 

expropriation by taxation, and I think this is exactly what these fellows are striving for. That is exactly 

what they are trying to do. They are endeavouring to see that the tax rate in the country is raised to the 

point where later on, after they have the counties organized and everything else, they will be able to 

expropriate our land for non-payment of taxes, and we will have expropriation by taxation, that is 

exactly what they believe in because they have never given up their dream of collectivized farming — 

never. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Never have I heard a retraction by any of the hon. members opposite or by the Leader 

of the CCF-New Democratic Party or any other NDP official that they do not believe in collectivized 

farming. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Come, come, come. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Oh, come, come, come — how well I remember the words of Mr. M.J. Coldwell, past 

leader of the CCF in Saskatoon when I was attending a school for the purpose of indoctrination of 

building young CCFers. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — . . . and I said to Mr. Coldwell . . . the land use deal or land lease deal hasn‟t gone over 

very well. Now I said you are proposing collectivized farming and I don‟t think that will go over very 

well with the people either. I don‟t see that that is going to get many votes. Now I said if you get to be 

the government in Ottawa what are you going to do? Are you going to introduce collectivized farming 

or aren‟t you? Well, Mr. Coldwell‟s reply to me was this — I never heard him refute or say anything 

differently — Mr. Coldwell‟s reply to me was this . . . he said, “If we control the government in Ottawa, 

we control the armed service and the police force, and we won‟t hesitate to use them.” 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Well I came to the point 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

58 

in my political career when I either had to believe in freedom or believe in socialism, and I chose 

freedom and I got out of the socialist group, and I would recommend that action to all hon. members 

sitting on the other side who believe in freedom, democracy and self government. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — I would suggest they do what some of my co-patriots did and my other two colleagues 

. . . 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — dream . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis: — . . . time for a question — take it as read . . . 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Now, Mr. Speaker, in connection with what I said recently, in regard to the 

administration of the medical care program I believe now as I believed then, I am firmly convinced that 

this program would have been much better administered by locally elected groups at the local level. The 

government did not see fit to accept that recommendation, that is their business — but I still believe we 

were correct in taking that stand, but I would like to draw to your attention one more thing — and I 

quote from volume 2 of the 2nd session of the legislature — October 25, 1961, this is a statement made 

by Mr. Douglas: 

 

“I come back to point Mr. Speaker, that I agree in principle with this idea of regional administration.” 

(It is quite remarkable that after I had spoken on it he had to get around to pay lip service to it). “And 

certainly it is the government‟s hope and intention that a large part of the administration, the assessing 

of accounts and the dealing with complaints will be handled on a regional basis, making use of a 

regional board and a regional staff and regional committee.” 

 

Just in connection with that I would say this, that I think his conception of regional administration was a 

group of locally elected officials administrating the region, but I gather from this that what his 

conception was, was something in the nature of the present type of administration in the social welfare 

department. I think what he had in mind was possibly a regional group of people who were hired or 

appointed by the government who 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

59 

were no more or less than a bunch of government socialist propagandists placed here and there in this 

centre and that centre. That was possibly his idea of regional administration. I don‟t know whether it 

was or not, but if that is the type of regional administration this government has in mind Mr. Speaker, I 

think it is a very poor idea and a very poor substitute for the plan which we proposed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — No one has ever suggested that. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Well, I am just saying that and I am also quoting your leader directly. 

 

Just in connection with what I said about socialists believing in the destruction of self-government. They 

are just following in the natural path of all socialistic parties. It is significant that the Labor party in 

Australia in 1920 endeavored to destroy every provincial government in that country. They didn‟t get 

away with it. So they have a precedent there in destroying local government and I predict if the NDP 

ever get control in Ottawa they will destroy every government in every province in this country, because 

that is what they seek to do, for they believe in centralization. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — . . . never make it . . . 

 

Mr. Snedker: — That is not the point. Now I quote here from the Saskatchewan Commonwealth, 

December 20, 1961 — this little gem: 

 

“We find it a little difficult to be gracious about congratulating J.H. Staveley upon his victory in the 

Weyburn by-election after the scurrilous campaign of misrepresentation that was carried on by the 

Liberals.” 

 

Well, we have seen a scurrilous campaign of misrepresentation carried on in this house just about an 

hour ago, and I would draw your attention, and the attention of hon. members in this house, to the fact 

that I took part in that campaign and was happy to do so, and at every place where I spoke and wherever 

I held a meeting I explained the regional administration of a medical care plan precisely and exactly as I 

explained it to this house 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

60 

at the special session, as I have endeavored to re-explain it to you now, and I object to the campaign of 

slander that is being conducted against members of the opposition. 

 

Let me also say that I am very pleased and proud to see that our campaign of truth bore fruit and we 

have here with us Mr. Staveley, member from Weyburn. He not only represents to me one more member 

in the Liberal ranks, one more member on the opposition side of the house; to me this man at the other 

end of the line, the member from Weyburn, represents a victory for freedom as opposed to socialist 

dictatorship. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — And I am proud and happy to have assisted him here. I have here an amendment, Mr. 

Speaker, which I propose to move — seconded by Mr. Coderre. 

 

That the following words be added to the Address: 

 

“but in view of the fact that heavy taxes are presently being collected for medical services insurance, 

this Assembly deplores the failure of the Government to adopt a workable plan of medical services 

insurance.” 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is there any other member who wants to make a comment on this before I give my 

ruling on it. I believe this amendment, now as it is worded, adapts to the address, which was my 

objection the other day, that the amendment could not be a separate motion. It has to do with the 

address, so I believe this amendment is in order. I rule this amendment in order and the debate, as is the 

custom in this house is on the motion and the amendment. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Now, Mr. Speaker, further to what I was saying a few moments ago I have been struck 

by the change in the cast of this government. In the last 2 years and more especially in the last few 

months, we have seen a definite leftward swing — here we have the key positions in the government in 

this province controlled by what I always have thought and believed to be and what I still believe to be 

the left wingers of he CCF movement — The Department 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

61 

of Education, the Department of Health, the Treasury Department, the Premier of the province, these are 

the key positions. These people since they have been in power have lost a deferred election, they have 

lost a by-election in Turtleford, they have lost a by-election in Weyburn, and I am certainly convinced 

they have lost the confidence of the people in the country. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Now let me suggest in all sincerity that I believe a government of this nature 

controlled as I believe it to be more by eastern labor union interests than by the people of this province, 

that there is only one alternative open — the correct thing for them to do is to resign and face the 

country and let the people settle the issue. That is my personal opinion. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Well you can make the issue what you choose but I will make the issue as far as I am 

concerned — freedom versus socialist dictatorship. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis — What issue. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — I shall not support the motion Mr. Speaker, I shall support the amendment, and I 

would also, if he chooses to give it, be willing to accept the apology of the hon. Minister of Health at 

this time. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams (Minister of Labour): — Have I got the green light Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You may proceed — you have the floor. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — I am glad the house is in such good humour. First, may I congratulate you on 

your elevation to the high office, Mr. Speaker. I also want to congratulate my seat mate, the member 

from Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) on being appointed Deputy Speaker. 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

62 

I want to congratulate the mover and seconder of the Address in Reply and those who have taken part in 

the debate. 

 

While I am on my feet may I also include the member for Weyburn (Mr. Staveley) and welcome him to 

this legislature and finally, congratulate the member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy) on the addition to his 

family and I hope both of them are doing well. Thanks for the cigar. 

 

About one year ago the Saskatchewan Government Telephones launched a ten year program to provide 

dial service to all points in the province, and to eliminate all manually operated exchanges. Following 

are the points we plan on leaving as control centres in the handling of long distance calls. Members 

might like to watch for their own constituency — Meadow Lake, North Battleford, Prince Albert, 

Melfort, Saskatoon, Humboldt, Rosetown, Outlook, Yorkton, Regina, Moosomin, Moose Jaw, Swift 

Current, Assiniboia, Weyburn, Estevan, Canora, Wadena, Kindersley and Shaunavon. Those last four, 

Canora, Wadena, Kindersley and Shaunavon, are expected to be converted to C.D.O‟s in from 5 to 8 

years. The closing of the other 353 offices throughout the province will of course be gradual. The 

exchanges to be converted this year, in 1962, are as follows: It won‟t take a minute to run through them. 

Aberdeen, Alsask, Balcarres, Bienfait, Cabri, Carlyle, Davidson, Herbert, Hudson Bay, Kelvington, 

Kerrobert, Lanigan, Lake Lenore, Leroy, Lumsden, Luseland, Northbank, Oxbow, Preeceville, 

Radisson, Stoughton, Strasbourg, Sturgis, Wakaw, Watson and Whitewood . . . total of 26. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — You forgot Biggar. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — I am just coming to Biggar. We have found that such changes have generally 

speaking met with the approval of the towns converted in the past year. Exchanges in Biggar, Maple 

Creek, Unity, Wilkie, Wynyard, Battleford, Rouleau, Birch Hills and Fort Qu‟Appelle, have been 

closed, and any employees who wished to remain in Saskatchewan Government Telephones have been 

moved elsewhere. 

 

We met some opposition from the mayor and town council in Biggar but after one of the officials went 

in with maps and data etc. we heard no more about it. Long distance calls to and from the town of 

Biggar, (you will realize that is the home of the Premier), are being handled by the operators in 

Saskatoon. 

 

Some citizens in Melville, however, have opposed 



62A 

 

such a move and feel that city should be made one of the 21 toll centres. Unfortunately Melville is not in 

the proper location and to leave it open would be quite expensive, even extravagant. First $30,000 would 

be required to build an addition to the building. Second, the switchboard, valued at $30,000 can be 

moved elsewhere and similar expenditures made unnecessary. Third it will not be necessary to spend 

$50,000 in a few years on equipment which would be required for customers‟ distance dialing if the 

office was to be left open. Because of technological changes the Melville switchboard is not being used 

to capacity and a partial use is uneconomical. There are six sections to this switchboard, Mr. Speaker, 

and at the present time only two of them are being used. Fourth a study has indicated a saving of 

approximately $17,000 per year can be made by operating Melville as a community-style office rather 

than a staff office. It is cheaper to centralize long distance switchboards than to maintain so many staffed 

offices. The amounts just referred to total up to a capital saving of $110,000 and an amount of between 

$17,000 and $18,000 yearly. 

 

However, a group of Melville citizens have opposed the move and have sent either three or four 

delegations to Regina to interview myself or officials of the system. With one or two exceptions these 

men have realized that such a policy was justified and modern progress cannot be stopped. However, the 

secretary of the Melville Board of Trade has been quite active in opposing the move, and has circulated 

a petition signed allegedly by over 2,000 people. A glance through the sheets has shown that at least one 

of these long sheets had been signed by school children in Grades X and XI. Another was signed by an 

official of a rural company along with 123 subscribers. This man, the secretary of the Board of Trade, 

recently applied for an interview with Premier Lloyd and myself and some of the officials of S.G.T. but 

in view of the approaching session and the policy of not meeting delegations unless for a real urgency, 

after January 1st, the Premier asked me and any other members of the Board of Directors to go to 

Melville and meet the Board of Trade, taking some of our staff with us. The Attorney General, Mr. 

Walker, who is vice-chairman of the board, together with the general manager, the assistant general 

manager, the chief engineer, went to Melville on February 21st. All of us were extremely busy people at 

that time, but we welcomed the opportunity of explaining the situation to the people of Melville as to 

why we wanted to close the office next August. 



63 

 

 

We were guests of the Board of Trade at noon and afterwards had an amicable meeting where I outlined 

the reasons we felt justified in the closing of the exchange, the same reasons I referred to here just a few 

moments ago. The general manager and the chief engineer filled in some of the details. 

 

In view of the claim that the petition contained 2,000 names we felt it would be proper also to have a 

public meeting in the city hall, where reasons could be given to as many people as would turn out. 

Between 50 and 60 were interested enough to come. I started off and spent some time again explaining 

our reasons to these Melville citizens. After I was through, Mr. Medhurst, general manager spoke and 

further explained details which he thought would be of interest, mostly technical matters. There were 

some suggestions that the exchange in Canora should be closed and the Melville exchange left open, but 

in view of the location of our heavy wire circuits this was not feasible. There are now 4,044 telephones 

that come into the Canora exchange in comparison with a little over 3,000 into the Melville exchange. 

The number of long distance calls in and out, or the number of local telephones in the towns of Canora 

and Melville, has nothing to do with where the toll stations should be located. Melville has grown 

enough to be called a city, but is in the wrong place geographically to be made a toll centre. I recall five 

or six years ago Mr. Muirhead who was general manager at that time, explaining the future status of 

Canora which was decided at the time to be the toll centre for the area north and east. This situation has 

now arrived. I was quite pleased to see the M.L.A. for Melville constituency (Mr. Gardiner) enter the 

hall a little late — he looked real sharp in his new spring suit. He has every right to know what goes on 

in his area and I welcomed the opportunity to provide him with this information. He had not heard what 

I had said and if I remember correctly either the Attorney General or the general manager was speaking 

when he same in. Other persons in the audience expressed their views, their points of view, or asked 

questions which were answered by either myself or the general manager, or the chief engineer. Suddenly 

Mr. Gardiner left his seat, hurried to the front, and without asking permission, commenced a tirade 

against me for bringing the general manager. I might say here Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Medhurst is a 

valued official of S.G.T. with over 43 years of service. He is cautious, meticulous and has a flair for 

details. Mr. Gardiner‟s suggestion that I had jeopardized his job by having him present is pure nonsense. 

He will be with me 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

64 

again when we come to crown corporations, sometime this month, as will all other general managers be 

with their ministers. The same goes for deputy ministers and others who will be with their ministers 

during the budget period or public accounts. 

 

While we had been very careful to keep politics out of the discussions, Mr. Gardiner claimed it was a 

political meeting, although how anyone could be expected to gain any political kudos by taking a $17 

thousand or $18 thousand payroll out of the city is beyond me. He made no reference as I recall to the 

matter under discussion, but attacked the telephone system for spending huge sums of money to house 

its employees in the city of Regina. Naturally I was quite upset over the sudden switch from an orderly 

meeting where we had not had any rowdyism to a violent attack on me personally, and on the 

government. In spite of a number of interruptions from myself, the Attorney General, and members of 

the audience telling him to keep politics out of it, and to sit down, he kept right on talking in a loud 

voice. I have an expression I use, perhaps unfortunately when annoyed or disgusted and I made this 

remark to my colleague the Attorney General, in reference to the sudden switch from an orderly meeting 

to a roughhouse political meeting. The member heard the remark and thinking it referred to him dashed 

across to where I was seated in a threatening manner. One newspaper indicated he seemed about to hit 

me — well if he had he would have got one right back. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — Then there was an exchange between the member and the Attorney General, 

who referred to him as my “loud mouthed friend” — the member the other day said it was blabber 

mouth but it is about the same thing. 

 

Mr. Grotsky, a very gentlemanly person, who had presented a brief a little earlier, sitting in the front 

row, got up and asked Mr. Gardiner to sit down, which he did. The meeting then continued with certain 

citizens again making their views known and then asking questions. 

 

After the meeting adjourned I approached the member with a view of talking things over without any 

heat, but he was still furious and claimed the telephone system spent too much money on advertising and 

turned away. 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

65 

when he spoke in this house on Friday he was quite cool and gave little cause for offense, although some 

of his statements were not too accurate. However, ten days ago in the city hall in Melville he appeared to 

be excited — his face was red, he perspired and shouted at the top of his voice. 

 

Mr. Gardiner on Friday said he apologized to the people who attended the meeting for the action of two 

cabinet ministers. He might consider apologizing to them for his own actions. The whole incident, Mr. 

Speaker, was a tempest in a teapot and I regret taking up the time of the house with it, but in view of 

certain press reports I feel it should be properly explained to the legislature and to the public, 

particularly to the citizens of Melville for whom I have a very high regard. 

 

I wrote Mr. Gardiner a week ago expressing my regrets that the whole thing ever happened and that is as 

far as I care to go, and as far as I am concerned the matter is closed. Back in the twenties I lived in 

Melville, then a town, for about three years. Phil Walters who is well known in known in that part of the 

country was mayor, and the present mayor, Mr. Bailey, was a call boy on the railway at that time. They 

were both present at this meeting and strongly opposed the proposal, the closing of the exchange but 

came up and shook hands with me afterwards as did many others. 

 

We may be making ourselves unpopular in some quarters by this move but I cannot in all good 

conscience see where we have any other choice. One hundred and ten thousand capital cost and a saving 

between $17 and $18 thousand yearly is entirely too high a price to pay for goodwill. Back in 1946 or 

1947 I attended the opening of a new theatre in Melville and afterwards was approached by a group of 

business men requesting the town be provided with dial telephones to replace the old ringing of the 

operator type. I was later informed that the telephone system had wished to do this back in the 20‟s but 

due to the opposition of one prominent citizen, who had a niece working as an operator, the project was 

dropped. However, I immediately took steps to initiate the improvement and Melville got its dial service 

in 1949. I have every reason to believe that the citizens there appreciated the change. 

 

In closing Mr. Speaker, may I say that the Board of Directors and the officials of Saskatchewan 

Government Telephones wish to provide the people of this province with the highest quality of 

telephone service obtainable. 



 

Monday, March 5, 1962 

 

 

66 

It is perhaps unfortunate that in doing so many positions of operators will gradually disappear. However, 

we must step with modern times and technological changes which are rapidly taking place in all 

provinces and all states to the south. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, with a minute left to me I wish first of all 

to congratulate you sir on your elevation to your high office as Speaker of this legislature. Your 

background and record of attention to duty and responsibility and the hours of service that you have 

given in your capacity as chairman of the various committees gives us a good knowledge of your 

fairness and impartiality. I wish also to congratulate you because you represent a constituency that has 

an outstanding record of support for the progressive movement, initiated by the man who started the 

farm movement in its political action stage back in the thirties in the person of George Williams. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I wish also to congratulate and very sincerely, the hon. member for Cumberland 

(Mr. Berezowsky) and the hon. member for Lumsden (Mr. Thurston) both of whom gave very valuable 

contributions to the debate in this house. 

 

Before adjourning Mr. Speaker, I would say a few words apropos to the words in the speech made by 

the hon. member for Regina (Mr. Williams). We all know the hon. member for Regina as a gentleman of 

the first order. I have never yet in all my experience heard the hon. member say as much as “gee whiz” 

about anyone and trying to suggest that the hon. member for Regina would use the kind of words that 

were suggested by the hon. member for Melville (Mr. Gardiner) that were directed to him, would be like 

accusing St. Francis of the Assissi of throwing stones at birds. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — On a point of order Mr. Speaker, I am just going to say that the minister admitted 

using those words but they weren‟t against me, so I would appreciate it . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — That‟s true but the hon. 



 
March 5, 1962 

 

 

67 

member for Melville suggested that they were, and I am glad to know that he has accepted the fact that 

the hon. member for Regina would not use that kind of language. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I did not say that I was prepared to accept the 

minister‟s statement. I said that the minister now speaking intimated that the minister wouldn‟t say those 

words and he admitted saying them. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! that is not a point of order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — If the hon. member for Melville attributes these words as directed to him. May I 

suggest Mr. Speaker, that would be like suggesting that St. Francis of Assissi would throw stones at 

birds. I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — The minister did a good job on his own Toby. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Keep your big mouth shut. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:35 o‟clock p.m. 


