



















































Hansard: March 16, 1962


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

17th Day 

 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

 

ON ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT: EASTER SEALS 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day there are two announcements that I would 

like to make. The first is a very pleasant one, and I am pleased that there are a number of visitors from 

some of our schools in the gallery to hear the announcement. Hon. members will all be aware of the 

activities of Camp Easter Seal and of the facilities which it provides for a number of young people who 

are handicapped with some kind of physical disability. You will know too of the activities of 

organizations in the province, chief among them I think, the Council for Crippled Children and Adults, 

in raising funds to support this and other activities. It is the custom each year to select one of these 

young people as representative of the group. We owe a great deal to this group Mr. Speaker, and we 

have a reason to exert a considerable amount of activity on behalf of them. 

 

The youngster selected as Timmy for this year is Gerald (Gerry) Bryce, who is age 11. He comes from 

Saskatoon and he is in Grade VI. I wanted to introduce ―Timmy‖ to the members of the legislature this 

afternoon, I knew they would want to meet him. He is in the gallery, may all of us say how pleased we 

are to have him with us and how much we wish him and all his fellows well. 

 

I think if Timmy would just wave to us. He is accompanied by Mr. Milton Orris of Saskatoon who is the 

provincial secretary of the Easter Seal Fund. 

 

CONDOLENCE 

 

Premier Lloyd: — The second announcement to which I refer Mr. Speaker, is one which is not at all a 

happy one, it is the sort of announcement which has to be drawn to the attention of members of the 

legislature from time to time. 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

2 

 

Hon. members will all learn with great regret and sadness of the death last evening of the father of the 

Leader of the Opposition. 

 

He was, as I understand it, 72 or 73 years of age and died as a result of a heart attack while travelling 

along with Mrs. Thatcher outside of Canada. This is complicated the matter considerably of course and 

it will be appreciated that the hon. Leader of the Opposition will of necessity be absent from the house 

for several days. I know that the assembly would want to join me in expressing to Mr. Thatcher and the 

members of the bereaved family our very sincere sympathy at this very sudden loss of their father. 

 

Consequently, Mr. Speaker, I should like to move, seconded by Mr. McDonald: 

 

―That this assembly learns with profound regret of the loss suffered by the Leader of the Opposition, 

the hon. member for Morse, Mr. Thatcher, by the death of his father, Mr. Wilbur Thatcher and extends 

to him and to members of his family the sincerest condolences, praying that divine providence can 

sustain them in their bereavement.‖ 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, before the motion is passed I would like to take this 

opportunity in associating myself and my colleagues with the remarks of the Premier in regard to 

Timmy and also with regard to the motion that we are now dealing with. 

 

Mr. Thatcher has asked me to convey to the house his apologies for not being present for the next two 

days. As the Premier mentioned to you, Mr. Thatcher‘s father passed away while on a world cruise and 

he died while Mr. and Mrs. Thatcher, Sr. were on the Indian Ocean, which has certainly complicated 

matters as you all realize the difficulties communicating to anyone aboard ship. I understand that 

arrangements have been made to fly the body home and I expect the funeral will be held in the city of 

Moose Jaw as soon as it is possible to have the body returned to that city. In the meantime I expect that 

Mr. Thatcher will not be in the house and I know that you all will agree with me that he would like to be 

with us but on this occasion he feels that he should remain at his home in Moose Jaw. 

 

Motion agreed to. 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

3 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day I would like to, on behalf of 

you Mr. Speaker, welcome and draw the attention of this legislature to a group of high school students, 

twenty-four of them, from Grade XII class at Quill Lake. This, the house will realize, is from Mr. 

Speaker‘s constituency. They are accompanied by their principal Mr. Gabriel and the bus driver Mr. 

Walters and Mr. Payton. 

 

I am sure that all members of this house will agree with me and wish them a very pleasant and 

informative afternoon, and we wish them a good trip on their way home. 

 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day I would like to introduce a 

fine group of students from the Kinistino High School, sitting in the galleries on your left. They are led 

by their teacher, Mr. Geotz and their bus driver Mr. Bland and his wife. 

 

I hope that their trip here this afternoon will be both educational and a pleasant one. 

 

TRIBUTE TO ST. PATRICK 

 

Mr. R.A. McCarthy (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I beg your indulgence while I pay tribute to that 

vulnerable patron saint of Ireland, St. Patrick. I had intended to give you quite a little talk, but owing to 

the fact of our recent loss in the person of Mr. Thatcher‘s father, I don‘t feel like being frivolous at the 

moment, so I think I will leave it at that. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Blakeney: 

 

That Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair (the house to go into Committee of Supply) 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

4 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Regina City): — Mr. Speaker, may I first draw your attention to the last part of 

the statement in the ‗Banks of the Wascana‘ in this mornings Leader-Post which refers to a statement I 

made yesterday to the effect that $361,000 had been paid by this government to the city of Regina in 

grants in lieu of taxes during 1961, and which I said amounted to about 4 mills. 

 

Speaking to someone just the other day, a few weeks ago perhaps it was, I indicated that 1 mill in 

Regina was now worth approximately $80 thousand, I didn‘t check the figure but apparently it is up 

around $156 thousand so I wish to thank the column ‗The Banks of the Wascana‘ for that correction. 

 

I notice that almost everyone in the legislature is wearing a green tie or a green ribbon in honour of St. 

Patrick‘s Day with the exception of myself. While I am not following example of the provincial 

treasurer, I am wearing a special tie in appreciation of the fact that I have received $47,700 more in my 

estimates this year than I did last year. I appreciate it very much. It is a tie that I got 10 or 12 years ago. 

Some enterprising manufacturer in the east one year got out ties with all the provincial coats of arms on 

and mine as you will notice has the Saskatchewan coat of arms, the lion rampant, the three wheat 

sheaves. When my children were small they used to refer to this as the kitten with three brushes, which 

is a fair description at that. Well so much for haberdashery Mr. Chairman, I will get along with my 

speech and I have as I see just exactly 30 minutes. 

 

On Monday, the member for Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) claimed that the assistance policy of the 

Department of Telephones, rural branch was not workable, he used that very term, not workable. He 

further stated that the rural companies, big enough, were provided with grants but none for the smaller 

companies. His own company could not qualify, so he said and also, that hundreds of companies in 

Saskatchewan could not qualify. He concluded by urging that we correct our mistakes and make grants 

to all companies, these are quite serious charges Mr. Speaker, and must be corrected. 

 

In the first place, all companies regardless of size, receive these pole grants. Only last Tuesday I had an 

order in council passed totalling $41,170 for 97 companies the largest amount was $2,447 for the 

Watson Rural Telephone Company of Englefeld and the smallest was 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

5 

$8.48 for the Lockwood Company. So there is absolutely nothing to the claim that small companies do 

not receive this grant, which is one-third the cost of the poles. 

 

I have taken the trouble to check the area where the member from Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) lives and 

find that some years ago there were twelve rural companies connected to the Moosomin exchange. 

Between 1950-55 eleven of these companies amalgamated to form the Moosomin Rural Telephone 

Company, this company has taken advantage of both the construction and maintenance grants and I am 

very pleased that they have done so. One small company, the Moosomin East Company with nine 

subscribers has not as yet amalgamated with the local larger company although the department hopes 

that this will be accomplished in the future. This company has not applied at any time for either grant. 

There are two rural companies connected to Fleming, the Fleming South and the Fleming North Rural 

Companies. Neither of these companies have applied at any time for either grant. 

 

The department pays a minimum grant of $2.50 per subscriber to any rural company which brings its 

system up to a certain standard or will agree to bring it up to a certain standard. This is necessary in 

order to ensure that the subscribers receive good service. Obviously smaller companies should go in 

with neighbouring companies in order to hire a maintenance man between them, but this is not 

absolutely necessary. A total of approximately 400 subscribers is about right. Last year 73 companies 

did not get this grant, the only reason being that their systems were not up to reasonable standards, some 

of which were, broken or missing poles, poor anchors, broken or missing guy wires, excessive sag of 

wiring spans, inadequate clearance over roads, highways and railways and a number of others that I have 

not time to enumerate. The charge that hundreds of companies in Saskatchewan could not qualify is 

simply not correct. 

 

The department in 1961 paid out in maintenance grants to 206 companies the sum of $56 thousand. We 

have in our budget for next year the sum of $225 thousand for pole and maintenance grants to rural 

companies and an additional $141 thousand for other assistance to rural companies. I might say at this 

time that I am going to devote a few moments to matters pertaining to telephones and then I will turn to 

labour legislation in perhaps four or five minutes. 

 

Last Monday the member for Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) and I see he is now in his seat, claimed that 

the treasury 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

6 

 

had taken the profits made by Saskatchewan Government Telephones away from me. Poor Charlie 

Williams, I think he said — left the impression that I was left bleeding by the roadside with my wallet 

gone. He made the same crack last year and got away with it but not this time. There are always two 

sides to these stories and the true one has been explained several times. S.G.T. is a member of the Trans 

Canada system as are all other telephone companies, eight of them altogether, from coast to coast. The 

interprovincial long distance revenue which accumulates in the head office in Montreal is divided 

among these eight companies by a rather complicated procedure which I will not endeavour to explain 

here. The privately-owned companies like the Bell in Ontario and Quebec, the Maritime Telephone 

Company in the eastern provinces, the B.C. Company are allowed to deduct income taxes as an expense 

and therefore receive a larger share from the ‗pooled‘ revenues, but government owned systems do not 

pay income tax. For many years the Saskatchewan system felt that we were not getting our just due. In 

1958 we presented our case to a special meeting in Regina at which Mr. Eady, at that time president of 

the Trans Canada System, was present. We worked out a method whereby we could by turning our 

profits over to the provincial treasury, corresponding with income tax paid by the privately owned 

companies, show it as an expense, and thereby receive a larger share of the trans Canada melon, 

amounting to well over $100 thousand a year. 

 

During the past 3½ years we have therefore received $453,214 we would have otherwise never have 

received. It is merely in another pocket of government, and used somewhere for the benefit of the people 

of Saskatchewan. The member for Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) may not think this is worth bothering 

about but we do. The situation has been explained a number of times but each year some opposition 

member tries to make something out of it. Treasury never put the squeeze on the Telephone System for 

these profits, the board of directors voluntarily offered to turn the money over for the reasons just stated. 

This money has been put to good use for citizens of the province. It may be used for roads in the 

Moosomin constituency (I notice the Department of Highways has a program there this year) or up near 

Meadow Lake, or perhaps to build a mental hospital in Yorkton. Personally I would rather have seen this 

hospital built in the city of Melville where payrolls over the years have been reduced for one reason or 

another. Also if a technical school is to be built in that area at some future time, I would prefer to see it 

built in the city of Melville. The city of Yorkton should not get 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

7 

everything in that part of the province. 

 

It is a number of years Mr. Speaker, since I made a resume of labour legislation in this house and in that 

time a new generation has grown up and entered the labour force. These young people have no 

recollection of the various situations under which people worked previous to 1944, and are inclined to 

take advantages they now enjoy as a matter of course. It should be understood that the province of 

Saskatchewan provides the highest minimum wage rates in the dominion of Canada, namely, $32 per 

week for persons over 18 years of age and $30 per week for those under 18. These rates apply in every 

city, village, town and hamlet and are the same for male and female employees. Other provinces have 

lower rates for girls and women and lower rates in the smaller centres. The rates I have just quoted, $32 

and $30 which obviously do not seem very big but do however provide a base for higher rates and a 

floor below which wages cannot fall. We have an excellent Hours of Work Act which provides a 44 

hour week in the cities and larger towns and 48 hour week over the balance of the province. No other 

province, with the exception of British Columbia has as favourable hours of work protection for the 

wage earner. 

 

We pioneered the two weeks holiday with pay in 1944 and other provinces have one by one followed 

suit. We also provide three weeks holidays for employees with over five years service with the same 

employer. Also eight statutory holidays per year, the employee who does not work on these days cannot 

have his wages docked. If she or he does work they are paid at the rate of time and a half. No other 

province protects the wage earner on these last two provisions. unions usually provide in their contracts 

for such matters just referred to but we have legislation to ensure this protection to wage earners who do 

not have unions with reasonable work standards and benefits. 

 

Saskatchewan has the most advantageous Workmens‘ Compensation Act in Canada. It is favourable to 

the injured employee or his family in the case of a fatal accident. I am pleased to be able to say that the 

farmer members on the government side have supported the legislation referred to over the years. I 

regret Mr. Speaker, that there is insufficient time to go into other legislation but will leave that for a 

future occasion. 

 

Out of the $174 million budget, the Department 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

8 

 

of Labour will spend $1,272,000 made up as follows. Administration — 21 employees, $98 thousand, 

research and planning — $27 thousand, labour relations conciliation services, industrial standards the 

cost is $51 thousand. 

 

It should be understood here that the seven members of the Labour Relations Board are not employees 

of this department or of this government but are private citizens who receive so much per meeting plus 

expenses. The same applies to the chairman and members of conciliation boards, set up from time to 

time at the request of either the employee or the employer. There were 17 of these boards last year. Over 

the years I have appointed a number of well-known citizens of this province to act as chairmen of these 

boards when the two parties, the employer and the employee, could not agree on one. For a few years we 

were able to get judges to act as chairmen, with considerable success. Judge McPhee acted a number of 

times, so did Judge Graham. Judge Harold Thomson handled some very difficult boards for us. 

However, about four years ago the Department of Justice at Ottawa indicated that members of the 

judiciary were not to act in this capacity any longer. Other well-known persons appointed were Dean 

Cronkite, Professor Muir, Professor McLeod, Professor Fowke, Dr. Norman Ward of the University, Mr. 

F.B. Bagshaw, Q.C. of Regina, Gordon Grant, Mr. Pollard, principal of Sheldon-Williams and others 

have acted as chairmen from time to time. 

 

The Labour Standards branch Mr. Speaker, which administrates the Minimum Wage Act, Hours of 

Work Act, Holidays with Pay Act, One Days Rest in Seven Act, and so forth, is one of the most 

important branches in the department. Ten inspectors located in various centres throughout the province 

make routine inspections of business places in their territories to see that employees are receiving what 

they are entitled to according to our legislation. They also investigate individual complaints and are 

doing an excellent job diplomatically, and with very little offence to the business people. There are a 

total of 16 employees in this branch and the budget amounts to $104 thousand. Last year a little over 

$201 thousand was collected for 3,495 wage earners by the department itself and $4,200 through the 

courts. I am not being critical of the employer group, most of whom wish to treat their employees fairly, 

but are not aware of the governing legislation. However, this $200 thousand would never have been 

received by these 3,500 employees had our department not taken some action. 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

9 

It also may be of interest to note that a provision in the Employees Wage Act which came into force on 

July 1, 1961 has had the distinct effect of making the work of our inspectors much more effective. There 

is a provision in the Act which holds the prime contractor on any project responsible for the payment of 

wages to the employees of any sub-contractor employed on the project. The prime contractors have been 

most co-operative in insisting the sub-contractor maintain strict compliance with our various pieces of 

legislation. This is a marked improvement over the past experience and the benefits to employees has 

been most evident. 

 

Now let us turn for a moment to the Safety Services, Boilers and Pressure Vessels Branch, the Electrical 

and Elevator Branch, Gas Inspection Branch, fire prevention and in theatres, apprenticeship and 

tradesmen qualifications, I have left out the number of employees and amounts in the interest of saving 

time Mr. Speaker. The total number of employees in the department is 172 all of whom are hard 

working and dedicated. A number of them were in the government service previous to 1944. I wish to 

publicly thank them for the work they have done and are doing. While an occasional mistake may creep 

in, these are kept to a minimum and the department is operating efficiently with an excellent reputation 

for good public relations. I do not go along with a suggestion made a few days ago that the Department 

of Labour needs an overhauling. No such report appeared in the Leader-Post although it was on the radio 

a few minutes later and was also on several times through the afternoon. I suggest the employees of the 

Department of Labour need not be alarmed. 

 

The Fire Commissioner‘s office and theatre‘s division continue to perform in the field of inspection by 

eliminating fire hazards through inspection, education, advertisement and the dissemination of fire 

prevention knowledge generally. The fire inspectors in 1960-61 made 6700 inspections and in the course 

of those inspections required 1,666 improvements be made. I have no doubt that these inspections 

through personal contacts had a good deal to do with the reduced number of fires occurring in 1961 and 

in the previous year. 

 

I am sure we all deplore the loss of life that occurs from year to year, in this respect the 10 year average 

is 25 persons, a large number of whom are women and children. I regret that the 1961 report which has 

not been formally presented to me will include 37 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

10 

 

lives lost, nine of them being children. Every effort is being made by the Fire Commission Branch, fire 

chiefs and fire officials throughout the province by lectures and providing other information to parents, 

adults and children. 

 

In this respect I am happy to report that a 9 year old boy in Regina recently saved his own life and the 

lives of several other children by acting on his own initiative and behaving properly in an emergency, 

because of information he had seen in a fire safety film supplied by the Fire Commission in his school. 

 

Fire schools are being held in towns and villages at an average of 25 per year. Many towns and villages 

are requiring equipment and are having the volunteer firemen train in an effort to reduce loss. Over 20 

rural fire protection districts have been organized in the past several years with a view to providing 

equipment to extinguish fires on farms and isolated communities. The improvement of access roads, grid 

road plans help tremendously in this respect, especially during winter months and in inclement weather. 

 

It is my belief that most fires can be prevented and even when fires do occur that pre-planning and 

forethought especially with regard to children and their tendencies that fire fatalities and property loss 

could be greatly reduced. Smoking continues to be the main cause of fire and several persons have lost 

their lives during last year by smoking in bed and asleep on a chesterfield — a dangerous practice. 

 

I want now to refer for a moment to telephone rates, and I am pleased to inform this house that 

Saskatchewan has the lowest telephone rates in Canada, telephone residence rates, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — Excepting Calgary and Edmonton which are a little lower than Regina and 

Saskatoon rates, considerably less than British Columbia and eastern provinces. Business rates in 

Saskatchewan compare favourably to the other prairie provinces. 

 

There has been two general increases during the past number of years Mr. Speaker. In 1953 the average 

residence rate increased 14¢ a month, business rates 79¢ a month. 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

11 

In 1960 the average residence telephone rate was increased 17¢ a month, the business rate 66¢ per 

month. 

 

For years the mayor of Saskatoon, good naturedly of course, poked fun at Regina for its narrow streets, 

the dried up lake, the flat prairie and so forth, but one story that has passed through a succession of 

mayors is that the dogs in Regina had to wag their tails up and down instead of sideways because of the 

narrow streets. 

 

We of course have come to realize the importance of the city of Saskatoon and a few weeks ago we 

increased the telephone rates to the same level as they are in Regina. I am sure the people of that city 

will appreciate being brought up to the equal of that of the capital city insofar as telephone rates are 

concerned. Actually what has happened Mr. Speaker, is that the city of Saskatoon recently came into the 

40 thousand station group which automatically raised the rate slightly. The Star-Phoenix wrote an 

editorial about it. I am sure many subscribers in the four larger cities will remember in 1960 we did 

away with the excess distance from head office charge, which reduced many residential rates. 

 

There is every justification for these occasional increases. Here are some of the reasons. In 1944 

telephone operators in Regina and Saskatoon had a starting rate of $50.50 per month and a maximum up 

to $95.50 a month. Now the same positions have a starting rate of $180 and a maximum of $289 per 

month. A cableman in 1944 started with $75 per month, he could go up to $200. Now he starts at $260 

and the maximum is $488. A stenographer in 1944 started at $67.50 per month and could get up as high 

as $122.50. Now she starts at $216 and can go up to $303. Our warehousemen started at $100 per month 

in 1944 and could get up to $150. Now he starts at $265 per month and can go up to $341. 

 

I am glad that these employees are now receiving a decent wage, which enables them to purchase better 

homes, raise and educate their children more comfortably and improve their standard of living to a 

greater degree. 

 

I might just add here that in 1944 the cost of installing a telephone was $2.80 now the cost is $7.50. The 

cost of materials is a way up and I can give two or three examples. A 15 pair cable in 1944 cost $9.24 

per 100 feet, now it is $20.63 per 100 feet; an increase of 123%. A 50 pair cable $19.30 per 100 feet in 

1944; now 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

12 

 

it is $42.63 per 100 feet an increase of 121%. Cable terminals, 15 pair $11.07 each in 1944, now $19.41 

each, an increase of 75.4%. Obviously these small rate increases can be justified. We lose money on 

many exchanges throughout the province but make up for it on our portion of trans Canada revenue, 

long distance from other provinces that go through the equipment of our province. 

 

I am pleased to be able to report that we plan on starting a new telephone building on the property on the 

northwest corner of College Avenue and Albert Street extending back to Angus Street. Our staff is badly 

scattered over the city and the new building will get us all under one roof. We will build with anticipated 

space requirements projected for the next 50 to 75 years. During this period some government agencies 

will occupy the extra space on a rental basis. 

 

We bought this piece of property seven years ago knowing we had to have a larger office building but 

actual construction has been deferred from year to year. I am very pleased that we are now in a position 

to proceed sometime this year and that it is expected the building will be opened sometime during the 

end of 1963 or the beginning of 1964. We plan on the type of building to complement the museum and 

once it is up will be a credit to this city and to the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Rural Telephone Act is due for re-enactment this year to be brought up to date. Over 

the years many companies have adopted practices outside the provision of the act which we wish to 

correct and get all companies back on a proper basis. 

 

Many years ago the department had a superintendent who perhaps adopting the line of least resistance 

would when requested by a certain company, say in effect, what you wish to do is not in accordance 

with regulations but go ahead and do it and I will not say anything about it — neither will I put it in 

writing. Obviously then many practices grew up which could have been legally questioned. I do not 

intend to discuss the contents of the bill, which has had its first reading, but may I express on behalf of 

the Department of Telephones and the government thanks and appreciation to the officers and members 

of all rural telephone companies for the time and energy they have given in order to provide the greater 

part of the inhabited part of the province with telephone service on the farms. Many companies today 

have good boards of directors, well-built lines, good 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

13 

equipment and provide their subscribers with excellent service at reasonable rates. Where these 

situations do not exist it is usually because of the financial situation of that area. May I say here that we 

have consulted the Saskatchewan Association of rural Telephone Companies on several occasions. The 

officers of the Department of Telephones and myself have attended their annual convention held in 

Saskatoon for a number of years. In December last we met their board of directors, ten out of twelve 

members were present, in Regina and went into all proposals of the new act with them. They were in 

wholehearted agreement with our proposals and in fact recommended some changes which we accepted. 

 

Well, I had promised to stop when I got to approximately 3:15 so rather than start on a new tack I will 

take my seat, but before I do I wish to say that I will not support the amendment but will support the 

main motion. 

 

Mr. M. Semchuk (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Treasurer has brought down a 

realistic and a forward looking budget and I certainly want to congratulate him. This government, as 

always is aware of the needs of the people, the needs of good health and welfare services of the best 

education facilities and opportunities for our children and of course have the courage to budget 

accordingly. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Semchuk: — I want to point out what proper educational facilities and opportunities should mean 

to our young people. Sir Richard Livingstone said that there are three aims of education: first, training 

for life‘s work; second, a sense of the place of science in civilization; third, and most important, a 

philosophy of life in a sense of value by which to judge and use the gift of material civilization. 

 

Sometime ago sir, I had occasion to be present at the opening of a new school at Goodsoil, this is in the 

Meadow Lake constituency. It is a very modern school and the people are very proud of these facilities. 

One of the speakers at the opening of this school was Father Bermel and what he said impressed me 

very much. He spoke about education of course and he spoke about the need of closer co-operation of 

the home and the school and the church and the government. He said, give our children a complete 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

14 

 

education. Educate the whole man. What impressed me most was what he said in respect to what is 

happening to our young people today. He said, what would it profit us to teach our children to read if 

what we read is the comics and the trash that normally appears in the news stands today? What would it 

profit us to teach our children arithmetic, yes and even the arts and the sciences if they used this 

knowledge to exploit and defraud our fellow men? What would it profit us if our young people‘s minds 

are cluttered up with ideas that they must keep up to the Joneses, that they must drive a bigger and better 

car? What would it profit us if they worshipped the almighty dollar and showed no concern for our 

fellow men? 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, many of our young people today are bewildered and concerned. They are fearful 

because they are not sure there is a real place for them, a positive purpose in life, in this mixed up and 

materialistic world. Why shouldn‘t they be fearful? Even if they do complete their high school 

education, what can they do? Sure, they can get some technical training, some trade training, that is 

provided to a limited degree by the federal and provincial governments but this does not mean that when 

they do get this training they will find work and a useful place in today‘s society. This indeed, I say Sir, 

must appear strange to our young people, because wherever they look they see unlimited work needing 

to be done — development work, maintenance work, services to be rendered public buildings to be built 

and beautification to be undertaken. There is more work needing to be done than Canada‘s existing 

population can accomplish. And yet Canada‘s limited population amidst rich natural resources is 

suffering from serious unemployment. The material losses to our country are tremendous, but even more 

important than the great financial losses that our country must experience are the heartaches and 

frustrations of thousands of families who must depend on welfare and on unemployment insurance for a 

minimum standard of living. This age-old weakness sir, in a profit-motivated society, can be corrected 

by a truly democratic government at Ottawa . . . 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Semchuk: — . . . a government willing to acknowledge the motivating power of people and 

prepared to legislate a greater measure of economic security for all people. The federal governments of 

the past and the present have failed to 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

15 

live up to these responsibilities, and until the time that we have a government at Ottawa that is in tune 

with the needs and the hopes and the aspirations and yes the rights of the average man little will be done 

to secure for our people their rightful place in this world of accelerated technical change. I submit sir, 

that 17th-century ideas and concepts of politics and economics should not be expected to work 

effectively in a 20th century world. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Semchuk: — I say Mr. Speaker, we must guard against the weaknesses in our way of life if we are 

to remain strong and free, and I am gravely concerned Sir, that the Canadian Chamber of Commerce 

instead of pointing to these weaknesses and the way and means to correct them, has taken the lead from 

the ultra-rightists, the John Birch Society of the United States, and under the pretext of fighting 

communism are striving to deprive the lower income people of the small measure of social and 

economic justice that has been won through the democratic processes of government. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Semchuk: — I would like to say Sir, if I may I would like to quote rather, from an article that I read 

in the Canadian Commentator of February this year. It is entitled ‗Operation Freedom For What‘ and I 

quote: 

 

―The basic fault of the program however is its narrow archaic outlook on such matters as social 

welfare. People have always looked to the state for aid. The chamber itself is constantly appealing to 

the government for support, social welfare represents the conscience of the body politic and in this 

enlightened age only Canute-like creatures living in the age of the Industrial revolution can believe that 

social welfare is socialism. Like many closely-knit patriotic groups the chamber alienates many of its 

potential supporters by its wild hyperbole. Thus under need for Operation Freedom the Canadian 

Chamber of Commerce say, the communist sells communist newspapers and communist agents are 

working harder than ever to bring about the eventual goal of communism.‖ 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

16 

 

This sounds like a typical John Birch bull, although it is obviously meant to be taken seriously. What 

communist newspaper (if there are any) have the slightest influence on the political thinking of 

Canadians. Certainly the Tribune has no such influence. 

 

Hon. Mr. Guy: — The Commonwealth. 

 

Mr. Semchuk: — Has the number of communist candidates in provincial or federal elections increased 

within the past ten years? The answer can only be a categorical, no. Communist influence in Canada is 

barely in the order of a political whisper. There is in fact less need to fear communism than there is to 

fear the awakening monster that is right-wingism. 

 

I might say Sir, that under the guise of fighting communism the Chamber of Commerce is simply 

confusing people. I feel this is unfortunate because of the fact that this organization has done much good 

work in the past on behalf of the business community. I know, I have been a member of a Board of 

Trade for over 20 years and president for almost half of that time. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Semchuk: — However, in this campaign they are definitely and completely ignoring the average 

person, they are ignoring the farmer, the contractor, the retailer, and the workers, these people are 

finding it more and more difficult to make a living and to stay in business. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Are you going to resign from the Chamber of Commerce? 

 

Mr. Semchuk: — This is due to the ever increasing concentration of economic power in our country in 

fewer and fewer hands, I submit sir, that corporations and monopolies in our country are not helping the 

situation in the least. 

 

I think that the drug industry and sections of our food industry are prime examples and of course there 

are many others. These monopolies and corporations keep telling the small business man that 

competition is the life blood of business. They say, it is good for you, it is good for business, but of 

course for them there is none of that; they want freedom to exploit, freedom 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

17 

to fix prices and freedom to eliminate competition as quickly as possible. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Semchuk: — Investigations into the sugar industry, the brewing industry, the meat packing 

industry are just a few examples and there are many, many more. You see evidence of this in the press 

quite frequently Sir. 

 

Just how fair is this competitive enterprise to the average retailer, be he a hardware merchant, a furniture 

dealer, a clothing store or a food merchant, the average grocer today must try to compete with the 

corporation which usually owns and operates a grocery store in his community, owns and operates the 

wholesale house from which he must buy and probably owns and has full control of much of the 

packaging and processing of the food that he must sell in order to make a living. I submit that this type 

of competition is not fair, and is like expecting the hon. member from Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) to go 

into a foot race with the world champion miler and to say that by putting a 50 pound weight on the hon. 

member‘s back that this would give him added momentum and thus make it a fair race. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the retail merchant helped build our communities. It is the grocer, the druggist, the 

hardware merchant and others who are usually active on the local board of trade, of the chamber of 

commerce and the town council and in the service of organizations with other people. They take an 

active part in building the community in the interests of all people, and I certainly give them credit for it, 

but when this community is built to a reasonable service centre, in come the food chains, and hardware 

chain and the mail order house, and the independent merchant is often time forced out of business. He is 

forced to go out and start building another community or try and find employment if he can. Now, the 

Canadian Chamber of Commerce attacks government action and in its introductory pamphlet state, I 

quote: 

 

―The unwarranted and arbitrary exercise of power by government often influenced by collectiveness 

theories, destroys initiative and curtails the dynamic qualities which are essential to the productive 

operation of private enterprise.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, I submit, that only through government 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

18 

 

action can an ordinary working individual achieve any freedom of opportunity. The chamber says, that 

as the power and influence of government grows the power and influence of the individual shrinks, this 

is what they say, and they go on to say, the extent of government interference must be measured against 

the loss of personal liberties. Now, how much personal liberty does the average person earning less than 

$4 thousand a year have by himself, and there are many millions in our country. At the present time 

government spends over $5,600 on each student during elementary and high school, does the chamber 

suggest that the persons freedom would be greater if each parent had to spend this $5,600 himself? What 

happens in fact is that the government by acting in everyone‘s interest insures that all children rich or 

poor will receive at least a basic educational opportunity. It seems that personal freedom as defined by 

the chamber means freedom only for the wealthy. 

 

Many government aids for industry are available, does the chamber feel that businesses that take 

advantage of these services are losing their freedom. Such aids are loans to small business men and 

advisory services, the Industrial Development Bank and provisions of extensive information on foreign 

trade opportunities. 

 

The comments of Walter Young, instructor in political science at the University of Toronto are worth 

noting and I quote from the Toronto Globe and Mail of February 19th, of this year. 

 

―The Chamber has equated freedom to compete with liberty, and democracy with open and unabashed 

competition. Economically there is no equality in our society and no liberty. To defend the existing 

system is to take a position far closer to the attitude adopted by the 17th-century political theorists. The 

Chamber of Commerce does itself and the Canadian community a disservice when it displays what 

must be described as a completely selfish and narrow approach to the problems of democracy.‖ 

 

In its pamphlet the chamber says that Canadians must beware of looking to the state to provide security 

to the extent that the individual loses incentive to provide for himself. In its brief to the federal 

government in February 1962, the chamber says it would be unwise 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

19 

to make further extensions of the present welfare program. The chamber attacks welfare legislation 

indirectly by labelling it socialist, communist or collectivist, ideas which it describes as being violations 

of competitive free enterprise. I might say that an even more straight forward condemnation of welfare 

legislation appears in the booklet ‗Fallacies of Socialism‘, this will be found on page 1, 4 and 5, and here 

they say that the extent that social welfare benefits are provided by the state there is indeed a 

redistribution of wealth, and I say yes. They go on to state, to gear our taxation objectives towards the 

redistribution of wealth would snap the main spring of a dynamic system which offers an ever-rising 

standard of living for all, and that is not right. It is legitimate of course to ask whether the chamber 

favours abolition of our present welfare measures such s hospital insurance, family allowances, and 

pensions. Are these redistributions of wealth endangering our standard of living? Definitely not. 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, just recently I enjoyed discussions with a number of business men who had been in 

the audience during one of Mr. Kirpatrick‘s western appearances, it was pointed out to me by several of 

these men that many within the Chamber of Commerce group hearing Mr. Kirpatrick believed 

fundamentally in the honoured traditions of free speech and fair play. Within a few short hours after Mr. 

Kirpatrick‘s presentation they were expressing deep concern over the chamber‘s chosen method of 

operation. One is reminded of the fact that even President Kennedy has accused the John Birch Society 

of being too fast on the draw in its search for communists. 

 

This sort of program inspires in society the deadly game of look again and more closely at your 

neighbours. Surely the new whip of the Canadian Chamber of Commerce is not going to become the late 

Senator Joseph R. McCarthy, the lamented prophet of communist witch-hunting Mr. Speaker. 

 

Canadians have no need for any program which is organized to whip up unrest and suspicions on the 

Canadian political scene. To foment vicious suspicion of our neighbours in Canada I say, is to sabotage 

our Canadian morale. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Semchuk: — And in summary Sir, it seems to me that the chamber‘s 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

20 

 

program confuses the struggle for civil rights. When we talk about political freedom within our North 

American democratic tradition, then we speak also of the freedom of the communist and the socialist, 

yes sir, we speak even of the freedom of the Canadian Chamber of Commerce. These kind of programs 

represent a form of irritation but Sir, that is part of the price . . . 

 

Mr. Foley: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — What is your point of order? 

 

Mr. Foley: — Why doesn‘t he tell us something about the infringement on political . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! That is out of order, that is just an interruption. 

 

Mr. Semchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I wanted to end up, before I was interrupted, that this is part of the price 

that we must pay for freedom itself. Now Sir, I will not support the amendment, and am very pleased to 

support the motion. 

 

Mr. J.W. Horsman (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate I would like to 

congratulate you on your appointment to the Speaker‘s chair in this legislature. I am quite confident that 

you will be able to carry out your duties with honour to yourself and with fairness and impartiality to all 

members of this legislature. 

 

I also wish to congratulate some of the people who have spoken before me, especially the Leader of the 

Opposition, our financial critic and some others, and I would also like to mention our new member from 

Weyburn (Mr. Staveley). I thought he did a very masterful job when he addressed the house in his 

maiden speech. 

 

I would also like to say a few words to some of the people in my constituency who may be listening this 

afternoon. You all know where my constituency is, I call it God‘s country. I think it is the best 

constituency in the province, I suppose every member takes that attitude about his own constituency. 

What makes me proud of my constituency, it is the wonderful 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

21 

class of people that live there — and I am very proud to represent them. 

 

I am pretty well hemmed in you know, although I have some very important neighbours too. On the east 

I am bounded by the constituency of Biggar, represented by the present Premier, and on the north by Cut 

Knife, represented by the Minister of Agriculture, and on the south Kerrobert-Kindersley, represented by 

Eldon Johnson — he is not a cabinet minister but I think probably they should find a place for him in the 

cabinet. I think he would probably be an improvement on what they have. On the west I am bound by 

the Alberta border — Social Credit. I am pretty well hemmed in on all sides. I don‘t know how I stay 

there — some people wonder, but we seem to get along somehow. 

 

I have been a member of this assembly for a long time — 14 years in fact, and I have seen many 

changes here since the first year I sat in this house. I remember the many people that have come and 

gone, after every election, new faces, and there aren‘t too many of the old gang left on either side of the 

house. 

 

I have seen other changes besides that too. I have seen many changes in the attitude of the present 

government. When we first came to this assembly, or when I first came here, I thought the group to your 

right Mr. Speaker were pretty far to the left. They condemned free enterprise, capitalism, large 

corporations, and everything else except socialism. They had a favorite whipping boy in those days — it 

was the United States. They talked about the great capitalistic, imperialistic United States, almost as 

though they were an evil, an evil thing to have in the world. During those years as I remember I never 

heard any of them criticize Russia, I don‘t think I heard one of them do it, but speaker after speaker 

would denounce the United States, and I often thought, even at that time, how fortunate we were that we 

had a great friendly nation like the United States across the imaginary boundary instead of a nation like 

Russia. I wonder how long we would have survived in that case. 

 

As time went on and when the great oil boom started in Alberta, then the government here wanted the 

oil drillers to come in and search for oil in Saskatchewan. I saw a change in their attitude, I saw it swing 

to the right. I remember Tommy Douglas, when he was Premier, standing here and telling all and sundry 

that there was lot of room in Saskatchewan for private enterprise, 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

22 

 

let them work right along with government enterprise and co-operative enterprise, and we would get 

along just fine. They did have some success — they got quite a few people attracted who came in here to 

search for oil, and they had a very good and successful operation, and I want to say this, I think the 

government gave the oil men just as good a deal as any other government did. I think they did, and these 

discoveries have been very important, and everyone is very pleased about that. 

 

Here again I notice another swing — the oil business is slacked up for one thing and they tell us there is 

a great industrial boom here, but I don‘t see much evidence of it. However, I do see another swing to the 

left from the members on your right, Mr. Speaker. I think they have made a complete left turn, and I 

don‘t think they ever waited until the light changed. They went right against the red light. I have heard 

more condemnation from that side of the house Mr. Speaker, of the private enterprise system during this 

session than I think I ever did before while a member here. Speaker after speaker got up and denounced 

private enterprise as though it was a bad and evil thing, private enterprise was an evil thing, and one 

gentleman across there speaking the other day, referring to the Liberal opposition, and he talked about 

the Liberals and their free enterprise friends. I don‘t know whether he meant it for an insult, I took it as a 

compliment. Those are the kind of people I want to be friends with, and now I want to say something 

else. 

 

Mr. Thatcher, Leader of the Opposition, has been accused of sabotaging Saskatchewan industry, because 

he said we were in a state of industrial stagnation in Saskatchewan and blamed it on the government. 

Suppose he did, I don‘t think it had any effect at all. I think the people who are sabotaging 

Saskatchewan industry today Mr. Speaker, are the hon. members to your right, who never let up for one 

moment on the private enterprise system. Where are you going to get money to develop the country if 

you don‘t get it from private enterprise? Where are you going to get it? Are you going to get it from the 

communists or the socialists, or who? You have to get it from private enterprise people, and as long as 

you condemn them the way they are being condemned now, you won‘t have much luck getting industry 

into this province. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

23 

Mr. Horsman: — We have heard a lot about this great industrial development — there has been some 

development — everyone is very pleased about that — but it is a strange thing to me to think that this 

industrial development is anything like the extent that hon. members opposite claim it to be, why is it 

that our unemployment figures are at an all time high in Saskatchewan? Why is it that our population 

does not increase? What becomes of our young people? Our population has been static for years, and we 

are the slowest growing province in Canada outside of Prince Edward Island, and Prince Edward Island 

has no place to expand. They are just a little island out in the sea, with no place to expand. 

 

Our young people leave the country, go to other provinces and other places, where opportunities are 

greater, and I think this government must take their share of the blame for that. I think their policy and 

their attitude toward business and business people has had something to do with keeping industry out of 

this province. Why haven‘t we got a pulp mill? They have been talking about it for years. Nobody has 

made up their mind yet to spend millions of dollars here, and I doubt if they will, as long as hon. 

members to your right continue to condemn free enterprise. 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, I don‘t know for sure whether this government knows what name they should be 

called by. I remember when they would stand up here anytime and be counted as socialists, they were 

proud of it. Then a few days ago one member over there resented the fact that we were calling them 

socialists. I don‘t think there is any stigma to the name socialists. I don‘t think there is. But they are a 

mixture now that they have joined up with the labour group, whether they are NDP or CCF I just don‘t 

know. I would like to know for sure what their name is. They talk about the old parties and what a 

terrible group they are. How they never did anything right, the Liberals and the Tories. I want to say 

this, Mr. Speaker, that ever since this country was formed, ever since Confederation, we have had either 

a Liberal or a Conservative government at Ottawa, and I think the way the country has gone ahead and 

prospered should be proof to anyone that the business of the country has been fairly well handled. At 

least there is a history behind them, the Liberal party has a history that we are very proud of Mr. 

Speaker, that is more than can be said about the hon. gentlemen to your right, because they have no 

history, they still remind me of a Missouri mule, you 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

24 

 

know, they have no pride of ancestry, and no hope of posterity. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Horsman: — As time goes on and certain regulations and rules and laws are passed here, putting a 

little more power in the hands of some officials of the government and some minister, these things creep 

up on you and the latest thing of course is the medical services plan. 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, I don‘t suppose there is a person in this house that is more in favour of a medical 

services plan than I am. I don‘t suppose there is anyone in this house that has had any more experience 

with medical services in a small way than I have. We have had medical services in my municipality for 

over thirty years now. It has worked out fine. But the government here seems to have run into a snag 

with the medical profession for some reason. It is a reason that is hard for me to understand, as I have 

dealt with doctors a good many times on our municipal plan, and never at any time did we have any 

trouble in making a deal with members of the medical profession, and even when we couldn‘t pay them, 

when we owed them thousands of dollars at the end of the 1930‘s they never turned down one of our 

patients. I think a plan could be worked out if they would sit down with the doctors and figure out a plan 

that was acceptable to them. If you could have a province-wide medical plan that would work out to 

everyone‘s satisfaction. 

 

Now to go back again, I don‘t go back in history very often, but I am just going to go back for a few 

minutes — you know it is a favorite topic of members to your right, to go back and talk about the 1930‘s 

and about the governments of that day. How they did nothing to help the people and all that sort of stuff. 

Of course that is a lot of eye wash as far as that goes. They say that the governments of the day never did 

anything to help the people, to help the farmers. The farmers were in desperate circumstances, there is 

no question about that. Everybody knows it — they owed taxes, they owed store bills, they owed interest 

on mortgages, bank loans, and they could pay nothing, and they were worse than bankrupt in a lot of 

cases. 

 

The government of those days passed two acts, one was the Farmers‘ Creditors Arrangement Act, 

passed by the federal government, and under the terms of that 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

25 

act farmers had thousands and thousands of their debts written off, and the provincial debt legislation 

was something the same. Many farmers got relief under those acts. But what was the CCF cure for all 

the ills that beset the farmers in those days. What was it? You go back to the election of 1934, and their 

cure was the use-lease, that is what they advocated, we will take title to your land, and pay your debts, 

we will pay your debts, pay your taxes, but we will take title to your land, and then we will lease it back 

on a use-lease basis. Thank God the people of Saskatchewan didn‘t fall for that. If they had and elected 

that government at that time, I venture to say that more than half the farmers of this province would still 

be tenants of the government. 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, I see my time is just about up, and I am going to be followed by my young friend 

from Athabasca (Mr. Guy). He was born in my country, and we are very proud of him up there, and I 

know all the members of this side of the house too are very proud of Allan Guy. I will just sit down and 

let him take over from here. 

 

I wish I had more time, but unfortunately I am something like the people to your right Mr. Speaker, my 

time has just been run out, but I will not support the motion. 

 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, first of all I would like to convey greetings to my 

constituency of Athabasca and hope this finds them all in good health. 

 

I must confess that when the wind blows down here on the corner of Hamilton and 11th Avenue, there 

are many days I wish I was back up in that good old country. 

 

I would also like to say hello to the people of the Senlac area, in the constituency which Mr. Horsman 

just mentioned, my home town, and I still have many fond memories of that area. 

 

For the first few minutes this afternoon I wish to refer to some of the problems which we have in the 

constituency of Athabasca. The year 1961, Mr. Speaker, was not a particularly good one for the people 

of my constituency, or for the north as a whole. It was marred by one of the worst fire seasons in 

Saskatchewan‘s history. 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

26 

 

It interfered to a great extent with the summer fishing season. There were many days when the 

commercial fishermen were forced to bring in their nets, passing up the opportunity of making forty, 

fifty, sixty, seventy dollars a day, and go fighting forest fires. Now the people of my area are resigned to 

the fact that these fires must be fought to protect their natural resources. What they cannot resign 

themselves to is the fact that they can be forced by the Department of Natural Resources to give up a 

profitable occupation to fight forest fires for a wage of $4.00 a day. This pittance I have mentioned so 

many times doesn‘t even buy the clothes these people wear, and one can hardly believe that a 

government that has one ounce of respect for fair play and justice can sit back and see these people 

exploited year after year. I have stood here in this house for three sessions and condemned the 

government that sits on your right, and yet not one blush of shame appears on their cheeks. Their stolid 

indifference to the exploitation of these forest fire fighters is hardly compatible to their slogan of 

humanity first. I had been hoping that the Minister of Natural Resources would stand up in this house 

and say that conditions are going to be improved, and that there will be an increase in forest fire wages. 

To date there has been no such announcement. 

 

Now another pressing problem in my constituency is the need for increased transportation and 

communication facilities. I think we all agree that the time is long gone when communities should be 

isolated for long periods of the year. Yet we have areas in our northern part of the province such as 

Fond-du-lac and Wollaston Lake, Stanley, Pelican Narrows, South End Reindeer, to mention a few, that 

can be completely isolated for six weeks in the fall and six weeks in the spring, when break up and 

freeze up takes place. During this time no one can enter or leave the community. This is particularly 

serious in the case of illness, as these areas do not have doctors and many of them do not have nurses. 

Now if the statement of some members opposite that in the thirties under the Liberals if you got sick you 

died is true, it is even more true in these northern communities today under the socialists. 

 

Hon. A.G. Kuziak (Minister of Natural Resources): — Oh go on . . . Liberals today. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Now while it is true that in some of these cases a road is not feasible, it is also true that an 

air field is 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

27 

feasible in all cases. There is not one of the communities that I have mentioned where an air field could 

not be built, in fact many areas have requested the government to consider the construction of such 

landing strips, and they have even offered to help with as much of the clearing and construction as 

possible, but again the plea for equal treatment with the southern part of the province falls on deaf ears. 

Many of these communities could be reached by road, and it is to be hoped they will be in the near 

future. I was pleased with the return I received last fall stating that preliminary work would be done on 

the road to Sandy Bay and Island Falls. A road to these settlements is long overdue, particularly when 

you consider that in the last six years alone the government has received more than $438 thousand in 

revenue from the Churchill River Power Company at Island Falls. Now other settlements are just as 

deserving and have waited patiently for outside links whether it be by road or air. However, I am sorry 

to have to report that the outlook for the coming year is not a bright one. The estimates for 1962-63 for 

roads and air fields, in the northern part of the province have been decreased by $385 thousand over the 

previous year. 

 

Now before leaving the topic of roads, I wish to refer to four specific roads in my area. One road is 

known as the Bittern Lake Road. It was started as a winter road in 1957. We were told at this time that 

the road joining No. 2 highway north of Prince Albert National Park to No. 2 highway south and east of 

the park would be completed as an all-weather road. The D.N.R. have spent more than $68 thousand on 

this road, but today it lies in disuse, and the trees are already growing up to cover it. This is the type of 

efficient planning for which this government has become famous. 

 

Now several years ago the settlement of La Ronge was pressed by the government into incorporating as 

a village. Prior to that time it was administered by the Department of Natural Resources. The main street 

and the only street in La Ronge that winds along the lake, was a disgrace, when the village took it over. 

Unfortunately the village did not get a firm commitment that this street would be constructed to a 

suitable standard before the government was through. Since that time the Department of Highways have 

refused to reconstruct this street. La Ronge has a small assessment — thus a very low tax revenue so 

they are not and will never be in a position to reconstruct this road on their own, the result being that this 

village, the greatest tourist settlement in Saskatchewan, has a street that is dangerous 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

28 

 

due to the extreme dust in the summertime, rough from all the drainage water crossing it as it flows into 

the lake, and at times impassable due to washouts, and their request for assistance go unheeded. 

 

Now Uranium City has a similar problem with their road to Eldorado. This is a dangerous road that runs 

along many deep lakes. Already there has been many deaths from cars going off the road into the lake 

and people drowning. Many requests have been made by the community and by myself for erection of 

barriers at the more dangerous areas. In spite of promises to look into the situation, the last word that I 

received was that nothing has been done. Although the government did say they would supply plenty of 

signs stating this was a dangerous road, which of course is cold comfort to those who have lost loved 

ones on this road. 

 

Finally in regard to roads, I want to say that my belief that the announcement last spring that the 

Uranium City road was to be changed was a smoke screen to hide the fact that the road will not go 

beyond the Churchill River, was borne out by the Minister of Highways the other day. For the next fiscal 

year only $20 thousand has been allotted for this project. It would appear to me that by stopping 

construction they are breaking their agreement with the federal government, and this could well affect 

any future program proposed by this government. A government that can‘t honour one agreement is not 

likely to honour another. 

 

Now before leaving the topic of communication and transportation, I must say that I was pleased to 

receive a return last fall stating that long distance telephone services would be extended to the 

communities of La Ronge and Uranium City in the year 1962. I hope this program will be carried out as 

stated. I was waiting today for the Minister of Telephones to make such a statement in this house. 

Perhaps it will be carried out but I am just a little surprised that he didn‘t make the statement when 

reviewing the work of his department for the coming year. 

 

Now during the throne speech debate I made some reference to the northern co-ops in Saskatchewan. I 

do not intend to repeat what I said then. However, a report in the Prince Albert Herald stating that 

production increased 13 per cent over 1959-60, makes me want to publicly congratulate the members of 

these local co-ops. It shows how hard these people are working to make the co-ops a success. It is 

unfortunate that the report goes 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

29 

on to say that although production is up 13 per cent, that dollar value of sales dropped 4 per cent, and I 

will say now what I have said again, that I contend the fishermen of northern Saskatchewan are the 

victims of mismanagement and inefficiency by the government in charge of marketing their fish and 

administrating the central agency. Now last year and this year has also been a very difficult year for the 

trappers in the north. The spring hunt brought lower prices last fall due to adverse weather conditions, 

the catch was reduced by 50 per cent. In view of this it was to be expected that the trappers would be 

concerned about the low returns for their hard work, and it was with this in mind that at the trappers‘ 

convention in Prince Albert the trappers passed a resolution advocating the lowering of provincial 

government royalties on furs, and lowering of the handling charges in order to provide a higher return to 

the trappers. Now this would appear to be a reasonable request under the prevailing circumstances. What 

was the government‘s reply to such a request? Well, according to a report carried in the Prince Albert 

Herald, the manager of the Fur Marketing Service, told the trappers they must try to take more beaver 

pelts during cold weather and raise their finishing quality. Not an answer of yes or no to their requests or 

anything else, but dodging the problem like the socialists have a habit of doing. This was hardly a reply 

to be treated enthusiastically by the assembled trappers. 

 

Last summer while making a tour of my constituency I was shocked by the number of people who were 

unemployed. You would find men and boys in the prime of life sitting in front of the local store with 

nothing to do, and almost without exception they told me they wished they had some work. They were 

tired of living on rations and social aid. They wanted to be gainfully employed. They are proud people 

and they do not like to be forced into accepting rations and social aid from our provincial and federal 

governments. When this government that sits opposite sing their swan song two years from now, they 

will stand condemned above all for their failure to institute programs that will put our northern people to 

work. The development of our resources, improving of their communities, and the raising of their 

standard of living, must all to be done, and they sit there with no solutions. There is no reason in the 

world, when there are so many resources to be developed, when there are so many roads and air strips 

that could be built, so many homes to be constructed and improvements to be made in their standard of 

living, that these northern residents 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

30 

 

should be forced to accept the indignity of receiving social aid. If this government would adopt a new 

approach, would stop treating these people like guinea pigs with their community and social surveys and 

treat them as men who have the right and the desire to help themselves, many of our social and 

economic problems would be solved. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Before concluding my remarks concerning my constituency in the north half of the 

province, I would like to refer to two articles which appeared in the Leader-Post on September 16, 1961, 

and September 23, 1961. These articles sum up concisely and well what I have just said about the 

governments, both provincial and federal, in their failure to solve the basic problems of the north. I 

would like to quote a few excerpts from these two stories. The writer here has pointed out the failure of 

both provincial and federal governments to help our Metis and Indian people. Some of the comments 

were the following: 

 

―The Federation of Saskatchewan Indians complained recently the Indians were conscripted to fight 

fires during the fishing season, robbing them of their only summer opportunity to make a living. The 

tourist industry and development of mineral resources has not been sufficient to make any worthwhile 

contribution to alleviating the economic difficulty of the natives. The number of roads into the north 

are few and little employment is created. There is not one agricultural expert paid by the federal 

government. There is only one job placement officer for nine Indian agents only one social worker . . . 

 

It goes on and on, and finally concludes: 

 

―As can be seen much of what is being done is haphazard, merely acting as stop gaps, something more 

comprehensive must be done. When will this happen?‖ 

 

These statements Mr. Speaker, are all true, particularly the last one about the haphazard planning of the 

socialists. When will something more be done? By the look of the budget of 1962-63, it won‘t be this 

year. 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

31 

One can find little in the budget to suggest the government has become concerned with the decreasing 

revenues of these people. There is plenty of evidence, however, that the people of the north half of the 

province, like those of the south half will be crushed by the burden of heavy taxation. Already they are 

paying increased licenses, royalties on their natural resources, they are paying an extra two per cent 

education and health tax, and an extra $24 a head for health and medical plan from which they will 

receive little benefit. This is sure proof that the socialists are more concerned with what revenue they 

get, than the services they can give our northern people. I might add that these remarks that were made 

in the Leader-Post on those two dates, were written by a chap by the name of Mr. Myron Kuziak, and I 

would like to suggest that here is a man to whom the Minister of Natural Resources could go for a great 

deal of help. 

 

Now I would like to turn to the tourist industry in this province for a few minutes. I said the other day in 

public accounts that I was afraid Saskatchewan was not keeping up with the rest of Canada in 

developing her tourist industry, and I would like to enlarge on this a little further today. First of all, we 

cannot deny that tourism is big business in Canada today, and I would like to refer to a clipping by the 

Hon. Mr. Dinsdale, Minister of Northern Affairs, where he states that tourism earns more cash than 

wheat. 

 

―Tourism has moved into second place ahead of wheat, as an earner of export dollars, and the tourist 

population explosion is resulting in growing pains in the federal national parks, Hon. Walter Dinsdale, 

Federal Minister of Northern Affairs and Natural Resources told a press conference here Tuesday.‖ 

 

Now it has been estimated that the tourist industry is worth $1½ billion a year in Canada, and I think all 

provinces have awakened to this tourist explosion and it is my hope that Saskatchewan will not be left 

behind as she is in so many other industries under the socialists. At present, Mr. T.K. Shoyama in the 

Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, Monday, December 4, 1961, said, ―How important is the tourist industry in 

Saskatchewan?‖ He was addressing the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, and he stated that last 

summer tourists produced more dollars in northern Saskatchewan than forestry, fishing and 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

32 

 

trapping combined. However, in comparing Saskatchewan‘s effort along with the other provinces, it 

would appear that we are not holding our own or we will not continue to hold our own unless the 

government is prepared to acknowledge to a much greater extent its responsibility in promoting its 

tourist industry. 

 

Now I realize that all provinces do not have the same natural attractions. For instance Alberta, British 

Columbia, with their mountains are in perhaps a more favourable position than Saskatchewan and 

Manitoba. However, I feel we must do the best job possible to sell what attractions we do have. I would 

submit that Saskatchewan and Manitoba are in a very similar position and therefore I became somewhat 

alarmed when I read some statistics on Canada‘s tourist industry released at the federal-provincial tourist 

conference in Ottawa late in 1961. These statistics showed that in 1961 Manitoba estimated 1,300,000 

tourists spent $37¾ million in the province. During the same time Saskatchewan estimated their number 

of tourists at 650,000, just half who spent $12 million or one third as much as in Manitoba. The report 

went on to say that Manitoba spent ten times as much in promotion, and it appears this promotion is 

paying off. 

 

Now I was further disturbed by a report in the Leader-Post on November 13, 1961, ―Government 

support limited through lack of funds.‖ This was by the Industry and Information Minister Mr. Russ 

Brown, who said provincial government support for tourist industry is limited by lack of funds and 

personnel, but he told the concluding session of the Saskatchewan Tourist Association, first annual 

meeting, that his department would continue to press for every dollar we can get our hands on. He went 

on further and said a formal tourist survey likely would be conducted in the province in 1963, to relate 

tourism to other industry. But I would like to submit Mr. Speaker, 1963 will be too late. This survey 

should have been taken last year or the year before, and now it should be taken immediately. It is 

imperative that tourism is related to other industries as well as to other departments of this government. 

The D.N.R. must know what facilities can be expected to be needed during the next year because it 

appears already they are falling behind in providing the necessary facilities for campers and other 

visitors. 

 

Now I realize I will probably be criticized by the members opposite for suggesting an increase in 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

33 

expenditure, but I submit that increased expenditures are needed and will pay big dividends. The tourist 

dollar, don‘t forget, is an extra special dollar for this province — it is special because it circulates 

quickly; it purchases goods that are not otherwise purchased; it pays cash; and it is earned elsewhere but 

adds to the wealth of your community. Tourism is truly an industry which is worth encouraging as it will 

generate employment and economic activity from one end of the province to the other. 

 

I will go so far as to suggest that the budget for tourist expenditure be increased by $250,000 and I will 

go even further and suggest where this money can come from. We can get $135,000 from the Centre for 

Community Studies and $121,000 from the Economic Advisory and Planning Board, neither of which 

contributes anything to the prosperity of this province. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Now a few minutes ago the member from Meadow Lake (Mr. Semchuk) suggested that 

17th-century policy was not suitable for 20th-century living. Well I would like to suggest further that 

19th-century socialism and communism is not needed in the 20th century. It would appear from recent 

events that the zenith of the NDP has been reached in Canada and in Saskatchewan. When a prominent 

member of the NDP has the courage and the fortitude to face the truth and act according to his 

conscience, one can do nothing but commend him. Saskatchewan can feel proud and especially the 

farmers, that one of her native sons saw fit to risk his political career for the welfare of the farmers of 

this province. 

 

Of course there are those who condemn him. Among those who condemn him are those who believe as 

Mr. Argue does, that the NDP is not good for Canada, but unlike Mr. Argue they have not the courage to 

openly repudiate the NDP. The greatest tribute that has been paid to date to Mr. Argue was paid him by 

a former colleague, Douglas Fisher, CCF M.P. for Port Arthur, when he spoke in the House of 

Commons on behalf of the remaining CCF members or NDP members after Mr. Argue‘s defection. Now 

while it was a tribute to Mr. Argue it was also an acknowledgment of the fact that the NDP was through 

as a political party in Canada, because he concluded his speech with the following words, found on page 

1135 of the Hansard, February 22, 1962, when he said: 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

34 

 

―I should like to imagine the hon. member back in this house in a growing Liberal party, as the heir of 

Jimmy Gardiner. I may be here to watch it, but perhaps I shall be back in a schoolroom teaching some 

children. I think I can tell those children that he was a very likeable fellow.‖ 

 

Now I can see that in the next few months members opposite as well as federal M.P.s will be rushing to 

search the Hansard for the past speeches of the M.P. for Assiniboia to use against him. This will not be a 

new game for them, because they have been doing this for three sessions, since our own Leader of the 

Opposition entered this house. It would appear here in Saskatchewan that the sport of reading speeches 

of our leader before he saw the light has become rather dull. They have found that since his stock has 

risen by leaps and bounds across the country, that they must now assume their true identity and become 

the cowardly name-callers that we saw evidence of the other day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, three speakers in a row the other day made deliberate, disgraceful attacks against the 

personal character of our leader. I was not surprised to hear the remarks from the members from 

Shaunavon (Mr. Kluzak) and Redberry (Mr. Michayluk) attacking our leader. It was a case here of 

monkey see, monkey do, but when a minister of the crown, and I refer to the Minister of Highways, who 

was supposed to be outlining the work of his department, had to spend his time on a personal attack on 

the Leader of the Opposition by accusing him of sabotaging Saskatchewan for personal ambition, it is a 

sure sign of the fear of defeat. These increasing personal attacks upon members of our side of the house 

show signs that we are striking home in our uncovering of the multitude of sins of this government. The 

only line of defense now appears to be personal attack. When a government cannot stand the criticism of 

the opposition, it is time for them to resign and let the people of the province decide their fate. 

 

After the derogatory remarks of the Minister of Highways he had the nerve to go into the heavenly realm 

of miracles. I looked up the meaning of the word ―miracle‖ in the dictionary and found that a miracle 

was a wonderful happening contrary to the known laws of nature, or a feat or occurrence so unusual as 

to seem miraculous. 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

35 

Now I would like to refer again to a remark or two that was made by the member from Meadow Lake 

(Mr. Senchuk). He made some derogatory remarks concerning the chamber of commerce. I was rather 

surprised to hear that, because I understood that at one time he was a very active member of the Meadow 

Lake Chamber of Commerce, and I would like to remind the member from Meadow Lake as well as all 

members in this house, that the chamber of commerce and our local boards of trade are the last bulwark 

against socialist and communist control of local government. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — You can laugh Toby. Now his statement that there is more need to fear right wing theories 

than to fear communism, and his suggestion that communism need not be feared in Canada must be very 

welcome to the communist party in Saskatchewan and in Canada. I think we all know there is no 

country in the free western world that does not need to fear the aggression and ravages of communism, 

and Saskatchewan has become a particular haven for these people who hide under the guise of being 

socialists. From time to time I must admit that speeches from members on that side of the house seem to 

show where their true sympathies lie. 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, I think that is about all I wish to say on this particular occasion. I know the members 

on the other side of the house will be very sorry to hear that. I will support the amendment but I certainly 

will not support the motion, because it is not one that would be acceptable to the people of my 

constituency, and it is not one that is going to bring any renewed industry or resource development in 

my part of the province. 

 

Hon. Russell Brown (Minister of Industry and Information): — Mr. Speaker, I had thought that I 

would not have an opportunity to enter this debate, but I am rather pleased to have that opportunity, 

because there are one or two things that I would like to deal with today. 

 

I would like to start first by joining everyone else on congratulating you on your election to the office of 

Speaker. Like most members in the house I am sure you will do a very fine job, and having sat in this 

house together for quite some time I am quite sure it is 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

36 

 

needless for me to say to you that you need have no worries as far as I am concerned in maintaining the 

dignity and decorum which we usually expect in a chamber of this kind. 

 

Although he isn‘t in his seat, I would like to offer my personal congratulations to the latest addition to 

the house, the hon. member from Weyburn (Mr. Staveley). I have had the privilege of knowing the hon. 

member for quite some time. I worked with him at times when he was in the municipal field and I found 

he has always been a very likeable fellow and I am sure he will add something to the deliberations in 

this chamber and I wish him well during the time he may serve. 

 

I would like to say thank you to my hon. friends opposite for their thoughtfulness in sending me a very 

lovely bouquet of flowers during the time I spent in the hospital. I appreciated it no end. I might suggest 

that certainly after I received these flowers I broke out with an allergy and some of my friends on this 

side of the house were unkind enough to suggest that somebody had dusted the flowers in order that I 

would catch this particular ailment, but I want you to know I don‘t really believe that and I did very 

much appreciate the kind thoughts expressed by the members in sending these flowers to me. 

 

There are a lot of things that one could discuss in this debate and a lot of remarks which have been made 

in this house by the members in this house which could be debated, a lot of the statements made could 

be corrected. The first thing that I want to do this afternoon because I think it is important is to say 

something with respect to this government‘s views on the proposal for a conference on the long distance 

power transmission grid, which is being proposed by Prime Minister of Canada. As all members know 

sometime ago the Prime Minister announced it was the intention of the government of Canada to 

propose to the provinces that a federal-provincial conference be held to discuss the question of long 

distance transmission of electric energy. An invitation to such a conference was duly received by the 

government and the Prime Minister was advised that when the conference was called, most certainly 

Saskatchewan would be represented. In his letter to Premier Lloyd the Prime Minister suggested there 

were three questions which might well be considered at such a meeting — one was the general 

advantages to be derived from regional and inter-regional and in certain circumstances inter-national 

inter-connection of electrical facilities — 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

37 

the second was the principal problems involved in long distance power transmission and the nature of 

the steps that might be taken to overcome these problems, and three, the role which the federal and 

provincial governments should play in the planning, research and development required in order to 

obtain the greatest benefit to the provinces and the nation. 

 

On March 12th the Premier received a telegram from the Prime Minister advising a conference would be 

held Monday, March 19th, at 10:00 A.M. and expected to conclude by 5:00 P.M. the same day. The 

Premier immediately replied to the Prime Minister, expressing surprise and concern that only one day 

had been set aside to discuss this very important matter. The Premier suggested that we felt a matter of 

this kind should be given plenty of time for consideration and discussion. However, we were advised 

that the meeting will go on as planned, and it is still expected that it can be concluded by 5:00 in the 

afternoon. We take strong exception to the cavalier approach to a matter of this importance by the 

federal government. As a matter of fact it makes one wonder whether or not this is just once again a bit 

of window dressing which the Prime Minister is dragging out at this time to suit his own purpose. I most 

sincerely hope not Mr. Speaker, because the province of Saskatchewan, the government of 

Saskatchewan is very happy to see this kind of a conference called. We feel very strongly that the 

deliberations at this meeting should be directed towards the formulation of a national power policy, 

which would enable the present and future requirements of all provinces to be met in the most 

economical manner. This I would suggest, will involve a very thorough review of the many technical 

problems involved, as well as the clearer formulation of our respective responsibilities in this field. 

 

We will also, I suggest, require a positive assurance by all representatives at the conference of their 

readiness to participate in a joint program of development. I think it is well if we take a look at the 

importance of power to a nation such as Canada. No nation in this modern age can be disinterested about 

the supply and the cost of electrical energy. Power is the very sinews of its industry and the source of 

comfort and convenience to its people. It is of particular interest to Canada Mr. Speaker, as per capita 

consumption of electricity is the second highest of any country in 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

38 

 

the world, and several of whose industries are dependent for their very existence on large supplies of 

inexpensive power. Fortunately Canada has in the past been able to rely on power which next to that of 

Norway has been the cheapest in the world. However, there are now indications that some of the relative 

advantages that Canada has enjoyed in this form of energy are being lost. Particularly as far as the 

United States is concerned. The frontiers of the relatively sceptical abundance of cheap hydro resources 

upon which the pre-eminent position of Canada in the power world has been based, are now being 

reached, and it will be increasingly necessary to turn to higher cost power, whether it be from more 

remote hydro sources or from thermal generating stations. It seems then to us very essential that this be 

one of the matters discussed at the federal-provincial conference. This is particularly important in view 

of the indication that electric power will constitute an increasingly important element in Canada‘s 

energy requirements. 

 

For example on the basis of the Gordon commission forecast of the 4.5 per cent annual rate of growth in 

the gross national product in the period from 1955 to 1980, it was indicated that the total energy 

consumption of Canada would be expected to rise on an annual basis at the rate of about 4 per cent over 

the same period, but electrical energy is expected to rise at an annual rate of some 7 per cent. 

 

In the past significant economies in electrical power costs have resulted by the step by step integration 

of isolated units into a single provincial system. This process now appears to be largely completed. Then 

to receive more savings of this nature interprovincial integration of power systems will be required. If 

then the expanding Canadian requirements for power are to be met in the most economic manner a very 

considerable measure of federal-provincial and interprovincial co-operation must be forthcoming. Co-

operation along these lines is of particular importance to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan, along with some other provinces, has not been favoured with low cost electric power 

during the past. In recent years however, the establishment of an almost completely integrated provincial 

power system has resulted in very considerable reductions in power costs in spite of the very 

considerable distances involved in the province. Further economies may be expected as the years go by. 

As we are able to utilize larger and more economic generating plants, then our power costs will 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

39 

continue to come down. 

 

I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that there are at least four basic objectives of a national power policy for 

Canada. One to achieve the production and transmission of electric power at the lowest possible cost, 

and to reduce disparity of cost between the different regions throughout Canada; two, to promote the 

fullest utilization of Canadian rather than imported energy resources by connecting presently 

undeveloped energy resources in some areas with growing energy shortages in other areas; three, to 

promote the optimum balancing of hydro electric and consumptive needs of water; and four, to enhance 

the economic growth and development of Canada and of its various regions. 

 

The Trans Canada Power grid then, we suggest, can play a key role in helping to meet these four 

objectives. In our opinion it is an appropriate and indeed an essential aspect of national power policy to 

promote the greater equalization of the cost of electrical energy throughout Canada. We do not suggest 

this should be done at the price of raising costs in the present low cost power areas above the levels 

which normally prevail, but rather we believe there are now opportunities for a national power program 

that will provide benefits to all the provinces. One of the anomalies of Canadian economic development 

Mr. Speaker, has been the fact that the most highly industrialized and the most populous central regions 

and accordingly the highest consuming areas of Canada have been deficient in energy resources, with 

the exception of hydro electricity. 

 

At the same time very abundant energy resources in the form of coal, petroleum and natural gas are 

found in the less populous regions of the dominion of Canada. Moreover, because of the distances from 

these resources to central Canada these Canadian resources have until comparatively recently been 

relatively undeveloped and the energy required in central Canada has been largely imported. We believe 

one of the purposes of a national power policy can achieve and facilitate the development of these more 

remote energy resources, largely by conversion to electric power for transmission to meet the Canadian 

requirements in other areas, and in this way to meet the energy demands of the nation with newly 

developed sources of supply. 

 

Electricity has been a significant exception 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

40 

 

to the fact that basic energy costs in central Canada and indeed the average for all Canada have been 

considerably above those of the United States. 

 

However, there are now signs that the relative advantage enjoyed in respect to electricity, particularly by 

Ontario, is being diminished. It is now possible to visualize a reversal of the present relative position in 

power costs. With virtually full utilization of suitable hydro sites in Ontario it would seem then it would 

be necessary to turn the United States coal for fuel for thermal plants. This would indicate that additional 

increments of electric power will be produced at costs above those in the United States. We do not think 

that the development of nuclear energy for power generation appears to assure a continuing advantage in 

power costs in Canada. The maintenance of an advantage in power costs depends then on utilization of 

Canadian energy sources which may be developed more economically than the United States energy 

sources. This we believe is an important role of any national power policy. 

 

The government of Saskatchewan feels too, Mr. Speaker, that a national power policy should also be 

considered in relation to a broad national energy policy. For example it seems to us difficult to justify 

the relatively free export of natural gas when the export of electricity is authorized only under very 

restricted conditions. Natural gas, I would point out is a non-renewable resource, not available in over-

abundant supply. While electric power when generated by water power is based on a constantly 

renewing resource. The energy from which if not utilized today is lost forever. It should be remembered 

to Mr. Speaker, that a large portion of the natural gas now being exported is being used for electricity 

generation. This I would suggest is a very low priority use. We feel then that the whole matter of energy 

export policy should be thoroughly re-examined with a view to establishing it on a national and 

consistent basis. 

 

There are, I would suggest, several implications of a national power policy with respect to the regional 

economic development of the various parts of Canada. The implications that a national power policy 

will have for regional economic development are very profound. To cite one example — the large scale 

conversion of Saskatchewan lignite coal into electric power for transmission to central Canada under a 

national power program will have a very considerable impact on the economy of this province. 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

41 

While some additional employment will be created directly, the principal effect would be in the realm of 

power costs and indirectly on industrial development. The incremental cost of power to Saskatchewan 

for the first time in the history of the province would be actually lower than that in Ontario. For any 

industry, which is a heavy user of electric energy this could be a critical factor in determining whether or 

not to locate in this province. 

 

Similarly, the development of a national power program should be integrated with water development 

and use policies. It is apparent that as consumptive uses of water increase there will be a reduction in 

hydro potential. Obviously a multi-purpose use of water should be taken into account in a national 

power policy. 

 

It is the opinion of the government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker that one of the first essentials of a 

national power program is an adequate and detailed knowledge of the level of possible demand and the 

resources available to meet it. We suggest that such an assessment of power requirements and inventory 

of power resources should be undertaken as soon as possible as a federal-provincial project. An 

inventory of power resources, we suggest, would probably deal with substantial surpluses of potential 

power while they are still available. We suggest that such an inventory should include the lignite coal 

fields of Saskatchewan, the coal fields and the tar-sands of the province of Alberta, the Hamilton Falls in 

Labrador, the Saskatchewan-Nelson River basin, the Columbia and the Peace River and tidal power and 

coal in the maritime provinces. 

 

It would be unwise, I would suggest Mr. Speaker, to proceed with partial development or sections or 

what might become a national transmission system without having a relatively complete plan based on 

this kind of study for the optimum use of the total electric resources in the dominion of Canada. A 

national power program should assure full utilization of appropriate Canadian sources of fuel. For 

instance the tremendous coal reserves in Canada are virtually unusable except as a source of electric 

power and accordingly very serious study should be given to the possibility of exploiting this resource 

for Canadian development. 

 

Of particular interest to Saskatchewan is the contribution that the abundant reserves of Estevan lignite 

coal could make in a national power program. 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

42 

 

Here there is a probable reserve, a recoverable reserve, of something like 6.6 billion tons from which 

electrical energy of the order of magnitude of a billion kilowatt years could be developed, or as much 

power as the Columbia and the Peace Rivers combined could generate in more than a century. This coal 

could be mined and delivered to a local power plant, using units of 500 megawatt capacity which could 

produce energy for less than three mills per kilowatt hour, including all labour and capital costs. 

 

I don‘t think I need to point out Mr. Speaker, that an installation with generating units of 500 megawatt 

capacity, such as I have referred to, could not be supported, certainly at this time, by Saskatchewan 

alone. However, in view of the developing hydro power deficiencies in Ontario, there is every reason to 

believe that a market of sufficient magnitude to justify the construction of the necessary generating and 

transmission facilities could be found in that province. There are reasonable indications then, that on this 

basis the power generated at the cost which I have referred to, with Estevan coal could be economically 

transmitted to the province of Ontario at a price which would be competitive with power which they 

might generate based on the use of United States coal. 

 

In our view then, the fulcrum of a national power policy is a trans Canada power grid. Upon it will 

depend the possibilities of transmitting surplus power from one region of Canada to another. It would 

provide opportunity for greater equalization of power costs throughout Canada and make it possible to 

achieve generally lower power costs throughout this nation. It will enable the utilization of presently 

undeveloped fuel resources and would be, I would suggest, of great assistance to the overall 

development of this great country of ours. 

 

Studies have been instituted by this government and by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation — to date 

they are only preliminary. However, it is indicated to us that a trans Canada grid would be economic 

provided the amount of power transmitted were large enough. It is indicated that a minimum of 

something like a million kilowatts would seem to be required. While the grid would undoubtedly 

involve a very large capital expenditure which I am sure we can all visualize, we have every reason to 

believe that the savings involved in transmitting inexpensive surplus power to meet increased demand in 

other areas would justify these investments. 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

43 

We believe that it could be economically justified by the savings alone, arising from a reduction in 

emergency reserve requirements, and a reduction of the total peak load capacity requirement, because of 

the diversity between the different provincial peak loads. 

 

On the basis of preliminary studies made of the feasibility of developing power sites down stream on the 

South Saskatchewan River, it is our opinion that the entire head on the South Saskatchewan between the 

dam and the fork on the main river, between the fork and the Manitoba border could be developed. Since 

the flow of the river system is relatively small, it is understandable that the energy potential is small. 

Without an increase in the available flow of water in this river, interest will lie in the use of this for 

providing peaking power purposes. The ultimate installation for peaking power would seem to be in the 

order of three to five million kilowatts. Any additional water flowing into the Saskatchewan River 

system and particularly into the South Saskatchewan River would have considerable value in terms of 

the additional power that could be generated without any additional investment in generating plants. 

 

When we look at the future consumptive demands on the waters of the Saskatchewan system, in relation 

to the available flow, it seems quite clear how limited the water supply really is. The problem is 

increased by the fact that the Saskatchewan-Nelson drainage basin is the major source of surface water 

in the prairie provinces. Because of the deficiency of other provincial water sources the government of 

Saskatchewan feels that it is important to consider ways and means by which the total flow of the 

Saskatchewan system can be increased. Preliminary studies of the possibilities of diverting water from 

other water-sheds into the Saskatchewan has already been undertaken. These studies Mr. Speaker 

indicate several very interesting possibilities. There is, for example, the Clearwater diversion in the 

south branch, and diversion from the Athabasca into the north branch. In addition to these there are 

several possible routes for diversion from the Peace or the Fraser, and the Columbia rivers. These 

preliminary studies indicate the probable feasibility of stage by stage diversion from these water-sheds 

to meet increasing consumptive needs and power requirements in the prairie area. 

 

The importance of the Columbia and/or the Kootenay diversion lies in the fact that it appears to be the 

only direct means to augment the flow of the south 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

44 

 

branch of the river. For this reason it may be very desirable to undertake it prior to some of the others 

that have already been studied. The diversion from other water-sheds . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order in the galleries. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — . . . would at least double the energy available at all power sites on the 

Saskatchewan River right down to Grand Rapids and would substantially increase the energy available 

on the Nelson River Our preliminary examinations indicate the value of this energy, much of which 

could be secured from existing installations would pay for the diversion costs. We feel that the potential 

benefits of these diversions are so important to the long-term development of the prairies and if feasible 

— so clearly in the national interests that the matter warrants a very full and a very early study. 

 

We feel Mr. Speaker, that we have already examined this matter sufficiently to urge that the Columbia 

Treaty should not be ratified without reserving the right to devote a reasonable portion of the flow into 

other basins in Canada. As the treaty now stands, it would appear to eliminate any diversion from that 

source for some 60 years. If the diversion from the Columbia is feasible and required in the future to 

meet increasing demands in the prairie regions, the choice would be between using the entire flow of the 

Columbia for power generation in British Columbia and the United States, or diverting a small portion 

of this flow into the Saskatchewan to satisfy hydro and consumptive needs. Water so diverted might 

generate just as much power in the course of its passage to Hudson Bay as it would en route to the 

Pacific, but the whole of it would be generated in Canada in the one case, while about half of it would be 

developed in the United States in the other. 

 

Looking at the question, Mr. Speaker, of the sharing of the responsibility in the type of program which 

we feel should be undertaken, it seems quite obvious to us that if power development in Canada 

depended entirely on the individual and a separate action of the provinces, the economic benefits which 

could accrue to both the provinces and the nation as a whole from this kind of program would not be 

realized. We believe that the federal government has an over-riding responsibility for this kind of 

development and we argue that it must play its part in an effort to achieve those goals. 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

45 

We would suggest then that the first state of a joint effort between the federal and provincial 

governments should be the initial planning of the whole national power program. I can assure this house 

that the government of Saskatchewan stands ready to participate in this work. 

 

We feel that an important aspect of the joint effort is the sharing of the financial burden of this kind of a 

program. We would suggest that the case for federal participation is quite clear because many of the 

advantages resulting from a national power program will be felt outside the province in which the 

development actually takes place. For example, low-cost power, generated from the use of coal from the 

Estevan lignite fields will be enjoyed by industry in the province of Ontario. It should not then, I 

suggest, be expected that Saskatchewan will bear the full burden of financing the generating capacity 

that would be needed to make this kind of power exchange possible. 

 

We suggest too, that one of the ways the federal responsibility for a national economic development 

should and could be discharged is through a program such as this. Federal participation in these projects, 

by actual investment, by provision of low cost money, even at subsidized interest rates, and by outright 

grants, can I would suggest, be fully justified. We believe that one of the first things that needs to be 

done is to conduct a very comprehensive study to examine the various aspects of a national power 

program such as I have referred to. It is our opinion that it would be desirable to have these studies 

planned and co-ordinated by some federal-provincial technical body, to assure that both a systematic 

approach to the national power plant and a common basis for analysis will be made. We feel then that 

such a body should be established as quickly as possible. We also suggest that such a body might well 

function as the continuing technical committee for regular power conferences of the federal and 

provincial governments. 

 

With respect to the basic technical studies themselves, it is our opinion that a consortium of consultants 

should be established to include consultants normally employed by the various utilities, consultants who 

the utilities have confidence in and who are probably quite familiar with the operation of the various 

utilities. Terms of reference should, I would suggest, be formed in consultation with the various utilities 

and the various 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

46 

 

governments involved. Technical supervision of the work of the consultants might well be turned over to 

a continuing technical committee. 

 

I want to say Mr. Speaker, that the government of Saskatchewan is most firmly convinced that out of the 

studies which could be carried on, as I have suggested, will emerge the beginnings of one of the most 

significant developments in resources planning and utilization that we have witnessed in Canada. 

 

I wanted to say something about Saskatchewan‘s position on this matter because as members of the 

house probably know, I will be attending the meeting in Ottawa, accompanied by the general manager of 

the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and at least one other representative. I have a wire placed on my 

desk, it came to the Premier today from the Prime Minister, and he says: ―Re your letter of March 14th, 

general discussion of federal-provincial meeting on long distance transmission expect to be completed 

on March 19th but the Minister of Northern Affairs and National Resources will be pleased to have 

further discussions on March 20th with Saskatchewan representatives on any specific proposals.‖ This 

isn‘t exactly what we had in mind, Mr. Speaker, but it may turn out to be desirable for the Saskatchewan 

delegation to stay over and have some further discussions as suggested might be carried on by Mr. 

Diefenbaker. 

 

There is still a little time left, and I don‘t want to take up too much of it, but during the course of this 

debate there have been some things said which I can‘t help but take exception to. Remarks such as, or 

the intimation at least that the natural gas extension policies of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and 

of this government are decided strictly on political ground. There has been a lot said about the 

tremendous burden of debt which we are supposed to be carrying here in the province. The amount of 

money which we have borrowed, and things of that kind. There have been some statements made with 

respect to lack of industry. I don‘t want to take too much time — it would be rather useless for me to try 

and answer all of these silly criticisms which come from across the floor. I know that a lot of the 

gentlemen sitting over there, when they said these things they have their tongue in their cheek – they 

don‘t really believe them themselves, but they feel that they have to say them — that they have to get 

something in the paper showing that they are standing up and criticising the government. I appreciate 

this, 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

47 

and I don‘t quarrel with it to any great extent. As a matter of fact there are times when I can sit here and 

almost kill myself laughing at some of the ridiculous things which are said. I am sure that the public are 

equally aware, as I am that a lot of things which come from across the floor are not only ridiculous but 

completely contrary to the facts. 

 

There has been a lot of criticism about the new head office building which is being constructed for the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation. I had a few laughs during the last few months when I found members 

of the opposition were finding more ways to spend the money which is going to be devoted to the 

construction of this building than you can shake a stick at. I didn‘t bother to total it all up, but I am sure 

that the amount of money which the new head office building is going to cost was spent on different 

projects at least 20 times by my friends opposite. Now I would like to suggest that you can only spend it 

once, so if you have one particular thing that you think it should be spent on let‘s stick to that and not 

spend it for roads, highways, natural gas, geriatric centres, mental hospitals and things of this kind. I 

would point out Mr. Speaker, that in most of the cases they are away off base because the money 

wouldn‘t be available for these projects even though it were not being spent on the head office building. 

 

I want to say right here and now that I make no apology for the fact that we are spending several million 

dollars to construct in this city adequate head office facilities for the largest industry in this province. I 

think it rather ridiculous, for my friends opposite to suggest there is no need for a new head office 

building. I have said before in this house, that you can‘t operate this kind of utility from a pup tent 

pitched in Victoria park. You can‘t operate a utility of this kind efficiently when you have your 

personnel spread all over the city of Regina. You must be able to house your staff if you intend to 

employ them and if you intend to have them operate efficiently. This utility has grown a lot in the last 

few years. It is not the tiny little utility which it was when the Liberals operated it. It is now a very 

thriving utility, a utility doing well up in the $40 million business a year, a utility because of its 

expanding activities finds it necessary to continually add numbers to the staff. I have a lot of figures 

which we have developed on the amount of space we will require in the future and I want to assure the 

house, particularly my friends opposite, 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

48 

 

it will not be too long before we will be filling this new head office building very well. I would point out 

that by the time we move into this building — by the time we have it fully occupied we would have to 

continue, up until that time to find more rental space. By the time we move into the building the amount 

of money, which we will be spending on rental will be more than adequate to pay the annual capital 

costs and interest costs on this building. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — The only difference being we will be spending this money once again in paying 

for an asset on behalf of the people of this province and it will not be simply going down the drain in 

paying rentals to somebody else. There is a lot more that I could say about it. A lot of criticism has been 

made about the type of building — people have referred to it as being a fancy building, and I want to say 

again that it is no such thing. It is a very plain building, a building which has been designed in order to 

be made the utmost use of for the services which we require. The cost of this building has been kicked 

around a lot. I don‘t know how many times we have told my friends opposite this building is going to 

cost in the neighbourhood of $6 million. They know, I am sure, that the contract has been called and the 

building is being built now for just slightly over $6 million and yet they continually refer to a $9 million 

head office building. I suppose, as usual, we must excuse them because it is about the normal 

exaggeration which we expect when they start talking about matters of this kind. 

 

I want to say just a word, Mr. Speaker, about natural gas. I was rather tickled to listen to my good friend 

the hon. member from Gravelbourg (Mr. Coderre) the other day, doing somersaults when he started out 

blasting the government for the debt we have accumulated and the tax burden which we have imposed, 

as he says, and this sort of thing, and criticized the fact we have been borrowing substantial amounts of 

money. The hon. member forgot to say of course that by far the major part of the money which has been 

borrowed over the last few years has been borrowed in order that I could spend it, through the power 

corporation in continuing the expansion of the electric system in this province and the natural gas 

system. 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

49 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — Having done that Mr. Speaker, he then turned around and chastised me because 

natural gas was not going to be taken to the towns of Gravelbourg and Lafleche in 1962. He did a very 

good job Mr. Speaker, of telling the house of the very great benefits of natural gas to the communities, 

such as he referred to. I have been telling them this for years, but they still stand up and criticize the fact 

that we borrow money in order to take natural gas to the communities such as this. He said that these 

things were dealt with on a political basis. This is an attack which I cannot let go unanswered and I 

know that most of my hon. friends sitting over there will agree with me on this. I want to tell you Mr. 

Speaker, what has happened in the past. I want to suggest to you that if these decisions were made on a 

political basis that instead of having 16 communities which are getting gas this year being in Liberal 

ridings — there wouldn‘t be any. But there are 10 out of 16 in opposition seats. I would ask my hon. 

friends to take a look at the number of communities which are serviced with natural gas which are in 

their ridings and compare them to the number in ridings represented by my friends on this side of the 

house. 

 

I want to say this Mr. Speaker, that if these decisions were made on a political basis, you Mr. Speaker, 

would not have to come to see me every few weeks and ask me when I was going to get around to 

putting natural gas in your constituency, in some of those very fine towns which you represent. I want to 

say Mr. Speaker, that your deputy, the hon. member for Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) would not have to 

come and see me about getting gas to Touchwood constituency. Above all Mr. Speaker, I want to 

suggest this to you, that if these decisions were made on a political basis there wouldn‘t be a riding 

called Last Mountain, which is represented by myself, the minister in charge, that hasn‘t one community 

with natural gas. I say that is just a little bit disgusting when my hon. friends sit over there and tell me 

that the way I decide where to put natural gas is by who represents that constituency. I sat here the other 

day when my hon. friend from Gravelbourg (Mr. Coderre) was saying these things and I watched the 

hon. member for Melville (Mr. Gardiner) who had just been advised that three more communities in his 

constituency were to get natural gas. I watched the hon. member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) who 

had just been advised that he was getting 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

50 

 

more natural gas this year, and I watched the hon. member for Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) who has 

hardly any places left that need natural gas — all sit there and practically kill themselves laughing. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — What about Cannington? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — We‘ll get around to you one of these days. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — . . . North pole. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — You are so right. However, I don‘t think my hon. friends opposite are being quite 

fair. I can forgive them for a lot of things, because I know they think there is nothing else to do, but by 

George fellows, you should be just a little reasonable. I have to live over here, remember. 

 

An Opposition Member: — You can join the exodus. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — Incidentally, just one other thing on this Mr. Speaker. My hon. friend from 

Gravelbourg (Mr. Coderre) also said that this $9 million he said the head office building was going to 

cost, and which he knows is quite incorrect. Anyway he said that this $9 million could be better spent in 

taking natural gas, as he said to 90 more communities. Well I want to say this Mr. Speaker, that from the 

studies which we have continually conducted in the power corporation, looking to the future 

development of our natural gas system, I would doubt very much whether or not there are 90 more 

communities in this province that could be served with natural gas economically. We are getting toward 

the end of the communities which we can go to and still not operate those particular systems at a loss. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Cannington ought to be in line right away then. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — I will say a word about the problems down in your area — my friend from 

Cannington. The hon. member for Estevan (Mr. MacDougall) can listen to this too, because some of the 

communities in his constituency are not going to get natural gas this year — and he said, why we are 

sitting right on it. Well if he is sitting right on it I wish somebody would use a match. However, I again 

take exception to this because the hon. member was in my office 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

51 

not too long ago with a delegation from that area. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Who? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — Not you, the hon. member for Estevan. We had explained to him at that time that 

there was a problem which we are confronted with before we can service that area. He knows full well 

that the gas referred to has a heavy sulphur content and because of it there are a considerable number of 

problems to be overcome before you can utilize that gas. He also overlooked the fact — or forgot to 

remind the house, it isn‘t quite sufficient to just build an iddy-biddy short line as he says from the plant 

into these communities. We can‘t operate a gas system that way, leaving them hanging on just that one 

particular source of supply. We have to look at little further in the future and make sure when we do take 

gas to communities that they are going to have a good source of gas and good gas to burn when it gets 

into their burners. 

 

However, I am hoping that as the years go by that the hon. Provincial Treasurer will be able to find a 

little more money and that we will be able to continue to expand the natural gas program. In view of 

what I have just said I am sure that my hon. friends opposite have no worries, really no worries about 

whether or not the communities in their constituencies will get gas because they know full well that 

politics have never entered into the development of this great utility. There is only one hitch that I can 

see, Mr. Speaker, if my hon. friends opposite, with all the talking they are doing about the tremendous 

debt, convince the Provincial Treasurer that they are right, then I am afraid I won‘t have any more 

money to spend on gas. 

 

Now I just want to take another moment or two and it won‘t be very long, but we have had a lot of talk 

in the house about industry and keeping industry out. A lot of silly statements have been made. Probably 

some of the ones that I am making now can be classified as such Mr. Speaker. I don‘t want to take too 

much of the time of the house dealing with these matters, but I want to say this: again I make no 

apologies for the Department of Industry and Information on the job which we have been doing and will 

continue to do with respect to attracting new industries to the province. While my friends opposite may 

say that we are away behind the other provinces as far as attracting new industry is concerned. In 

Alberta some of the people there seem to think that we are doing much better than the province of 

Alberta because here is 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

52 

 

a clipping of a story from the Calgary Herald, March 17, 1959 which said Alberta is running third in the 

race to lure new industry to the prairies. He said in the race to entice industry to the west, it appears that 

Alberta is running third. In the lead and running abreast are Saskatchewan and Manitoba. I could read 

you a lot more of it, but I don‘t think it is necessary. 

 

I want to go back and say again what I said in the public accounts committee last Monday. I feel that the 

gentlemen opposite, particularly the Leader of the Opposition are doing a disservice to the province of 

Saskatchewan when they continually go around, not only in this province but in Canada and elsewhere 

telling the people that we are rapidly becoming a depressed area and that they shouldn‘t by any means 

come and settle in the province of Saskatchewan. Fortunately I have found that as time goes by more 

and more people, industrial people, are beginning to pay less and less attention to the ridiculous 

statements which emanate from my friends across the floor. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — I have sat down with business men across Canada and the United States, talking to 

them about the prospects of various industries in this province. I have said to them, would you tell me 

whether you can have any serious worries with respect to settling in the province of Saskatchewan. They 

have said, what do you mean Mr. Brown. I have said well I am sure you must have heard the things 

which are said by the opposing political party in our province. Generally they all said the same thing. 

Mr. Brown, we do not intend to be misled by such ridiculous statements as may come from people of 

that kind from time to time. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — I want to say Mr. Speaker, that some of the present supporters of the opportunities 

in the province of Saskatchewan are the people who came here and have dealt with this government and 

established industry and have gone away into other provinces and told their friends and associates that 

you can‘t get a better deal or a better reception anywhere in Canada than you can in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

53 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — I want to say Mr. Speaker, that some of the things which are said by some of my 

friends opposite can be very definitely proven as far from being factual and truthful. I remember the 

hon. Leader of the Opposition coming back from overseas a little over a year ago, after going over for a 

rest after his strenuous efforts in this house, coming back and making statements in the northern part of 

this province, that he had been told by German potash interests that they would never undertake any 

project in Saskatchewan as long as the CCF government was in office. I want to say Mr. Speaker, that I 

can show that there wasn‘t anybody actually said that to the Leader of the Opposition. The only German 

company that was active in the potash field in Saskatchewan at that time was a company known as 

Alwinsal. This is a company which is comprised of German and French interests. This company intends 

to stay in Saskatchewan and it is that company which is referred to in this story in the Leader-Post not so 

long ago — that they intend to go ahead with a $30 million potash development in Saskatchewan. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — This I say Mr. Speaker is a disservice to this province when this kind of talk is 

thrown around. I understand how my friends feel. They think this might lead to some political hay for 

them. I have no quarrel with any party trying to make a little bit of political hay. But I want to ask them 

— they should accept some responsibility and they should not be prepared to sacrifice the future welfare 

of this province simply for political purposes. I would hope that my friends opposite would be bigger 

than that, they should be satisfied to find other issues on which to try to make a little political hay. 

 

I asked the hon. Leader of the Opposition the other day, or suggested to him that I would hope that he 

would make my job a little easier for me — that he would help me try to promote the economy of this 

province rather than making my job that much more difficult and rather than going around trying to keep 

people from coming into this province and establishing their business. I know that a lot of these 

statements which have been made across the way, and again mainly by the Leader of the Opposition, 

have had a very serious detrimental effect on one of the industries in Saskatchewan and Regina — 

Interprovincial Steel. I know that that company has lost 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

54 

 

business because of some of the criticisms which have been levelled by my friends across the way. They 

have had orders cancelled because the customer said, from the things that we hear, the things which are 

said about this company, we are not too sure that you can produce. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Are you prepared to table them in this house? Will you table a copy of the orders 

that were refused? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — It is a fact Mr. Speaker, and I want to suggest to my hon. friend and I mean this in 

all sincerity. I don‘t blame you really, if you can make some political capital out of Interprovincial Steel, 

but I am going to suggest that your timing isn‘t too good because as this industry succeeds you are going 

to look awfully ridiculous because of all this criticism which you have made and it will be proven very 

definitely that you are out to crucify it for your own end. I am going to suggest to you that you don‘t 

need to make it difficult for this industry — all you have to do gentlemen is sit back and wait, if it falls 

on its face you have it made, all you have to do is go around and say ‗well there you go, they did it 

again.‘ In the meantime why don‘t you give the industry a chance. It means a lot to this province. It is 

going to be a success. It is going to be a success in spite of all the difficulties it has had. It is going to be 

a success in spite of all the things and all of the unfair criticism that has been levelled by my friends 

across the way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on all afternoon and talk about these things. I don‘t think I want to take up too 

much more time. Mr. Speaker, as I say I could go on all afternoon, and somebody said I had, it is 

probably true, but I want to say this in closing that reference has been made to other industries which we 

should get here in the province of Saskatchewan, reference has been made particularly about pulp mills. 

My hon. friend from Arm River (Mr. Danielson) was talking about one I believe. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — No, no . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — . . . about a year ago when my hon. friend chided us because we didn‘t have a pulp 

mill at that time and here he said, ―look four mills in Alberta.‖ Well I told the public accounts committee 

the other morning, Mr. Speaker, that these mills were much like Mr. Diefenbaker‘s vision — they really 

didn‘t amount to very much. I have checked, 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

55 

just last night before I went to public accounts and what did I find — I couldn‘t find four pulp mills in 

Alberta, I couldn‘t even find one, I found one that had turned a little bit of sod on their site in the hope 

that they would be able to then get out and finance it because they hadn‘t been able to raise the money 

yet, as far as the other three are concerned, nobody knows but they are still not in sight. The pulp mill 

which they had in Alberta for a number of years has had difficulties ever since it became established. It 

has lost a terrific amount of money. What the future holds for it, I don‘t know. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — That reminds me of the mill you started to build before the 1956 election. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — Every effort is being made to induce the establishment of a pulp mill in the 

province of Saskatchewan. I want to say this, that it is not an easy task because of the situation which we 

are facing. We know that we can put together a proposition, as far as the pulp industry is concerned 

which is second to none, it could be very attractive indeed, but there are factors Mr. Speaker, over which 

we have no control. These are the deciding factors, the question of markets and particularly the question 

of transportation costs. These are the things which have prevented the establishment of a pulp mill in 

Saskatchewan. We intend to keep on working on both of these problems, we are continually negotiating 

and talking to interested parties. I hope one of these days that we will get a pulp mill. I can assure my 

friends, as long as I am minister, do not intend to say one word about it until the mill is actually under 

construction. You won‘t hear anything from me. 

 

We have been doing a considerable amount of work Mr. Speaker, on petro-chemical and iron ore 

projects for Saskatchewan and that sort of thing. I might say that some of these things look very hopeful. 

I hope that in the not too distant future there will be developments taking place in the province which I 

will be very pleased indeed to announce. 

 

I have left just about time to carry out one or two other little pieces of business, so Mr. Speaker, I will 

close by saying I don‘t think I could really support the amendment, and I must support the motion. 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

56 

 

Mr. Robert Perkins (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to make a few additional comments in support 

of the expenditures as outlined in the budget brought down on March 9th last. I would like to carry on 

the debate at the next sitting and I move for leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MOTION: ALLOWANCES PAID TO MEMBERS 

 

Premier Lloyd moved: 

 

―That this Assembly is of the opinion that all matter pertaining to allowances paid to the Members of 

the Legislative Assembly, to the Speaker, to the Deputy Speaker and to the Leader of the Opposition 

under authority of the Legislative Assembly Act and salaries paid to the President and Members of the 

Executive Council, should be submitted to a Committee consisting of five persons, the 

recommendations of the said Committee to be laid before this Assembly.‖ 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, I think it is generally agreed by most people in the public who have 

given consideration to it and by most members of the legislature that there ought not to be any financial 

barriers which prevent the legislature and the public from having the services of the best available 

people in the province. It is also generally agreed by all members of the legislature that the duties which 

members have to perform in order to carry out their responsibilities to their constituencies and all the 

people of the province are steadily becoming more onerous. It is always a problem which members 

discuss and come to conclusions on with considerable reluctance and diffidence and difficulty because it 

is in a fact a matter of setting their own remuneration or at least their own compensation for time given. 

 

Consequently it is suggested that there is value in having this matter reviewed by a group of persons 

outside of the legislative chambers. This resolution proposes that such a group would be established and 

they would then report back to us. It would of course then 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

 

57 

be the final responsibility for the legislature to accept this or to modify the recommendations made. The 

final decision is in our hands but it is felt there is advantage in having a group of public citizens look at 

this problem which is indeed an important one. I therefore move this resolution, seconded by the 

member for Moosomin (Mr. McDonald). 

 

Mr. Speaker, I cannot of course guarantee that the committee will be able to report during this session, 

although I think it is of great advantage if they could do so. I will try and arrange it that way. They will, 

among other matters, have to compare the existing arrangements in the province of Saskatchewan with 

those of other provinces, and of course, they will have to give some individual and group study to the 

entire situation. I am pleased to move the motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): — I think the motion is a good one. I agree with the remarks the 

Premier has made, because I am familiar with the fact that it is becoming more difficult for political 

parties to obtain the services of those people they would like to have as their candidate, from one 

election to another, and I am sure all political parties are finding the same difficulty. 

 

The main reason seems to be that people are hesitant to enter public life, because of the remuneration 

they receive for their services, and I think this is very important Mr. Speaker. I don‘t think anyone 

should be prohibited from entering public service, because they feel the financial reward is not adequate, 

and I am afraid many people in Saskatchewan and elsewhere do not realize the financial burden the 

members face and the financial burden is growing from year to year, and this is a matter I am sure 

members on both sides of the house are hesitant to vote themselves either increases or decreases in 

salary, but there are people in the general public who are familiar with the problem that confronts 

members, and I think the suggestion of placing it in the hands of people outside of this house is an 

excellent one. 

 

Of course the final decision will be made by the members of the house, and I would hope the committee 

will find it possible to make its recommendations known to this assembly before we prorogue so that 

some action 



 

Friday, March 16, 1962 

58 

 

may be taken. We are only some two years away from a provincial election in Saskatchewan, and some 

people are probably making up their mind now whether they are going to be candidates or not, and I 

think the sooner this matter is taken care of the better. 

 

I am one of those who believe the salaries in Saskatchewan are getting out of line, especially the salaries 

paid to the members of the Executive Council, and the salary that is paid to the Premier. The Premier of 

this province heads the biggest business in the province of Saskatchewan, and I think he deserves to be 

paid for it. Perhaps the salary of the Attorney General is a little too large . . . I wouldn‘t go that far . . . 

 

There are people even on the other side of the house Mr. Speaker that could get a bigger salary in the 

business or industrial world, but I do think the main reason for looking at this problem is to compensate 

people adequately for the services they give to our province, and make it possible for people from all 

walks of life as far as finances are concerned to play their proper role in the legislature of our province. 

 

Some of the other provinces have taken a look at the salaries and indemnities that have been paid, and 

gracious, when the news was announced, I think the people that were going to receive these salaries and 

indemnities must have been shocked. This was in the province of Ontario. I understand that the salary of 

the Leader of the Opposition is now $21,000 and I have no complaint with that, Ontario is a big 

province, and anyone who shoulders the responsibility of leading the opposition in a province the size of 

Ontario earns that amount of money. If we bring our salaries and our indemnities up to the level where 

they should be, then we are going to attract people into this assembly and into other assemblies, who can 

make a great contribution to the government of this province and the government of Canada, and I have 

great pleasure in seconding the resolution. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, before moving the motion for adjournment if I might announce to the 

house, that we are now developing quite a list on the order paper, and I suggest that beginning with 

Monday we start evening sittings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move the house do now adjourn. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:35 p.m. 


