




















































Hansard: March 30, 1962


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

26th Day 

 

Friday, March 30, 1962. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Hon. C.G. Willis (Minister of Highways and Transportation): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of 

the day are proceeded with I want to draw the attention of the members of the House to the pupils in the 

speakers’ gallery to my right. These pupils have come down from Gronlid, north of Melfort about thirty 

miles, to spend two days in the city. They are accompanied by their principal, Mr. Walter Bodnarchuk, 

and another teacher, Mr. Frank Garchinski. On behalf of you, Mr. Speaker, I want to assure them the 

memories which they will take back after spending two days in the city, they will cherish the rest of their 

lives. 

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina City): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day I am sure all members 

would like to join with me in welcoming to this legislature 200 students from the Sacred Heart Academy 

in the city of Regina. There are Grades X, XI and XII in the group. They are with their teachers, Sister 

Marie St. Louise, Sister Marie St. Theodore, Sister Marie St. Jude, and Miss Margaret Hartnell. We hope 

their stay with us this afternoon will be informative, educational, and an experience they will long 

remember. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Before I call government orders I would like to inform the Assembly that His Honour 

the Lieutenant Governor will be here later today. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 43 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Government Telephones Act 



 

March 30, 1962 

 

 

2 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour and Telephones): — Mr. Speaker, this is a pretty routine 

amendment to The Saskatchewan Government Telephones Act. There are no longer separate divisional 

districts in Saskatchewan, the whole province being one district, by virtue of the District Court Act 1960. 

 

It is therefore necessary to refer to judicial centres in place of divisional districts. 

 

Then we must refer to the cost of arbitration which is set out in section 3, and then in subsection 5, the 

purpose of this amendment is to permit the investment of temporary surplus funds in trust company 

deposits. 

 

With that explanation, Mr. Speaker, I would move the second reading of Bill No. 43, An Act to amend 

The Saskatchewan Government Telephones Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

Bill No. 45 — An Act to amend The City Act 

 

Hon. E.I. Wood (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — We have before us an act to amend The City Act. 

This act contains quite a few amendments to the act as it now stands. I do not feel they are too 

controversial and I think they will be much better dealt with in committee. 

 

I would like to mention at this time the one regulating and controlling the sale and setting off of 

fireworks in the city, another in regard to the discretionary powers of council regarding the granting and 

refusing of suspension of licenses. Another amendment will deal with removing control on shop-closing 

hours by the council for barbers and beauticians. Another amendment will bring in the setting up of 

capital trust funds in cities, which previously has been held by rural municipalities, and last year was 

brought in for towns, but it is requested that it be brought in for cities as well to allow for more 

flexibility of capital financing. 

 

Another amendment we have here deals with the powers of council in declaring a building to be a 

nuisance and the demolition of same. The amendment we propose at this time is to bring in safeguards 

for the right of the individual, as well as to give the council protection 



 

March 30, 1962 

 

 

3 

in regard to such things. 

 

There will also be a House amendment brought in which will increase the amount that is allowable for 

aldermen’s indemnities set by the city council, and with these few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I would move 

that Bill No. 45, An Act to amend The City Act be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

Bill No. 46 — An Act to amend The Village Act 

 

Hon. E.I. Wood (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — This Village Act contains many of the same 

amendments which are in The City Act. There is one addition here in that it sets up the privilege of 

having an advance poll in a village, which previously has been held in towns and cities in regard to 

elections. I think all these amendments are readily understandable and can be better discussed in 

committee as a whole. 

 

With these few remarks I would move second reading of Bill No. 46, An Act to amend The Village Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It has been moved by the hon. Mr. Wood that Bill No. 45, An Act to amend The 

Village Act, be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. R.A. McCarthy (Cannington): — I would just like to ask the minister a question on this. Is there 

anything in The Village Act that has to do indirectly with the bill that is coming down on Monday with 

regard to the change of school districts and that sort of thing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wood: — No. I don’t think there is anything in this act that has any bearing on The Local 

Government Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

Bill No. 47 — An Act to amend The Town Act 

 

Hon. E.I. Wood (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, the amendments proposed in this 



 

March 30, 1962 

 

 

4 

act are very much the same as those proposed in The City Act. I don’t think there is anything 

controversial in regard to principle. They are much better discussed in committee. 

 

I will thus move that Bill No. 47, An Act to amend The Town Act, be now given the second reading. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

Bill No. 48 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Municipal Advisory Commission Act 

 

Hon. E.I. Wood (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — This is an act to increase the allowable 

membership on the Saskatchewan Municipal Advisory Commission. We did enlarge this commission 

last fall to the full strength that was permissible under the present legislation, but it was found that the 

school trustees as well as the urban municipal people felt they would like to have representation on this 

commission, which they felt was more representative of their interest, and in order to do this it was 

found necessary to allow the number to be increased at this time. 

 

With these few words I would move that Bill No. 48, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Municipal 

Advisory Commission Act, be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask a question about this 

commission. This Saskatchewan Municipal Advisory Commission, as it is now constituted, does that 

include the urban centres of this province in their scope of activities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wood: — May I answer the question. The commission at this time does contain Dean 

Cronkite, who has had a good deal of experience in this type of work, but I believe the urban people felt 

in view of the part that the smaller urban centres might be playing in regard to this, they would like to 

have someone who was closely identified at the present time with the smaller urbans. They have made 

this request to us in the Local Government Council, and it is our intention in the very near future, if this 

bill is passed, that we will be able to appoint another member to the council to the commission who will 

represent 



 

March 30, 1962 

 

 

5 

the interests of the smaller urbans. 

 

Mr. Danielson: — This is not intended to be the representatives of the city. This new appointee, is it 

intended he represent the city in this province on the commission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wood: — I think the question is better answered in committee, Mr. Speaker, but at the 

present we do not feel the cities are specially interested in having representation in regard to the 

boundaries. That is not our intention. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It has been moved by the Hon. Mr. Wood that Bill No. 48, An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Municipal Advisor Commission Act, be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. R.A. McCarthy (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, may I speak now? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes, you may speak now. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — I would like to make a few observations on this and I think you certainly need some 

more representatives on that committee. You certainly need representatives of the village. The village 

councils in this deal are going to be very much affected with it, and at the present time they have no 

representation on it. I would like to make this criticism if you want to call it a criticism, but it is rather a 

suggestion that the people who are on that committee now nearly all come from the west and the 

southwestern part of the province. There is no representative on the east or northern part of the province, 

and we have an entirely different situation in the east part of this province, and the north part, to what we 

have in the south and the southwest. It is a different system of farming, farms are smaller, and most 

people live on their farms, and after all I think that is the ideal situation for this province, and I think we 

are all inclined to more or less judge the things by our own backyards, I am not criticising these men, I 

believe they are sincere and all that. I don’t want anybody to think I am criticising the president of the 

advisory commission. I know them all except one; they are all personal friends, and their 

recommendations, I am not criticising, I believe were made in good faith, but I think you would have a 

much better representation if you had more from the villages. 



 

March 30, 1962 

 

 

6 

I don’t think one from the village is fair, there should be at least one, I would suggest two, and it should 

be somebody who is familiar with the eastern, the economy in the eastern part of this province. 

 

You know across the north and it is an altogether different economy from what we have in the west and 

in the south, because as I said before there is mixed farming, the farms tend to be smaller, and we get 

more snowfall, we have a much greater road problem in the wintertime, with snow and other things. I 

would like to respectfully suggest that the people who are added to this commission should be someone 

who is familiar with village problems and the problems of small towns, and more especially the villages, 

and that it should be someone from the east or northern part of this province who is familiar with that 

particular economy. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

Bill No. 49 — And Act to amend The Lloydminster Municipal Amalgamation Act, 1930 

 

Hon. E.I. Wood (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, as you know in the city of 

Lloydminster we have at the present time largely Saskatchewan legislation in effect. In the collection of 

certain taxes in the Alberta area, the Alberta government feels they should have the privilege to collect 

their taxes such as they have under The Hospitalization Act, and under their School Act. At the present 

time this is being done, but there is a certain feeling among the Alberta people that the legalities are not 

too clear, so the Legislative Counsel from Alberta has worked out with our Legislative Counsel certain 

amendments which they feel will clarify the situation and make it quite legal by orders in council being 

passed by both governments that they are able to collect the taxes on the Alberta side of the border. 

 

With this explanation I would like to move second reading to Bill No. 49. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Municipal Employees’ Superannuation Act, 1959 



 

March 30, 1962 

 

 

7 

Hon. E.I. Wood (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Bill No. 50 is an act to amend The Municipal 

Employees’ Superannuation Act, 1959. There are a few amendments that are not very controversial in 

principle. One is allowing employees to contribute by agreement with their local government to the 

pension plan before the conclusion of a years employment. Another is to allow purchase of securities 

under The Wascana Centre Act, as well as mortgages under The National Housing Act, and also another 

amendment to allow retirement because of ill health after ten years, instead of after fifteen years as at the 

present time. 

 

With these explanations, Mr. Speaker, I would move that Bill No. 50 be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:29 o’clock p.m. 


