




















































Hansard: March 20, 1962


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

19th Day 

 

Tuesday, March 20, 1962. 

 

QUESTION RE EXPLORATIONS 
 

Mr. W. Ross Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Before the orders of the day are called I should 

like to direct a question to the Premier. I was going to ask this question of the Minister of Mineral 

Resources, but since he is not in his seat and because of the importance of the question I am going to 

direct it to the Premier. Has the government received a telegram from Kerr-Addison Gold Mines, that 

they are halting all exploration work and prospecting in Saskatchewan, because of unfavourable 

government legislations? If so will the government immediately consider changing the mineral 

disposition regulations of 1961? 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Mineral Resources is absent today because of an 

invitation to take part in some proceedings in the city of Calgary relative to the mineral industry in the 

province and Canada. Since the Minister of Mineral Resources is absent today because of an invitation 

which takes him to Calgary to take part in the meeting in connection with the petroleum industry, I have 

no information with regard to the statement which the hon. member has made. I have every doubt that 

there is anything in the regulations which would in any way cause such a decision to be made. Certainly 

the government will look into it and see if there is anything unfair or untenable with regard to any of its 

legislation or any of its regulations at any time. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, might I direct a further question to the Premier. Does the Premier know 

that if these regulations are not changed there are other companies who may within the next few weeks 

take similar action to that which has already been taken by Kerr-Addison Gold Mines? 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier doesn‟t know and I doubt very much whether the Leader of 

the Opposition knows either. 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

2 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . this province under the socialists. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — We cannot debate a question. 

 

QUESTION: MINERAL CONTRACTS 
 

Mr. F.E. Foley (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are called would the Attorney 

General tell us the present state of affairs with regard to mineral renegotiations that are being carried on 

between the farmers and the government? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I could not accept that as a question because that would take a very lengthy 

answer. A question is something that could be answered in a short form, and I couldn‟t permit a question 

of this kind. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — On a point of order may I say that it is also objectionable because the whole 

question is presently before the courts. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Mr. Speaker, if I could ask a further question then. What offer has the government made 

in an attempt to settle this matter? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! As was pointed out this question of renegotiations is before the court and 

cannot be discussed here. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask before what court in the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, this is presently before Mr. Justice Disberry. 

 

QUESTION: MEDICAL HEALTH 
 

Mr. W. Ross Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are 

called I should like to direct a question to the Minister 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

3 

 

of Health. Is he yet in a position to tell the house and the province what progress he is making in getting 

the College of Physicians and Surgeons to sit down at a table, and negotiate with the government as to 

the medical plan. I am sure by now he has had a chance to read their letter. 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — I have, Mr. Speaker, had the opportunity of reading the letter, but I have not yet 

had the opportunity of replying to it. When this is done no doubt the College of Physicians and Surgeons 

at that time will know what is in the mind of the government and at that time perhaps we will be able to 

let the Leader of the Opposition know. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Is the government considering altering or modifying the bill for medical care which 

they brought in at the last session? 

 

Hon. Mr. Davies: — Mr. Speaker, the answer to that is contained in the letters that we have sent to the 

doctors‟ organizations, namely that we are prepared to consider any change that they can establish will 

assist the profession in adapting its position to the act. Until we have a meeting, and I told the Leader of 

the Opposition the other day, it is impossible really to know what is in the act precisely that seems to 

offend. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Blakeney: 

 

That Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair (the house to go into Committee of Supply) 

 

Hon. E.I. Wood (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, in continuation of my remarks of 

yesterday evening, I would like to stress the importance of municipal government in this province. I 

notice in the budget that is proposed at this time there is an item of some $2,400,000 for this purpose and 

I think that this matter of local government in the province of Saskatchewan is a very important matter 

and deserves our utmost consideration. Back in 1944 when addressing the SARM convention, Mr. J.J. 

Smith, who many of you will remember as deputy minister of this province for nearly 26 years had this 

to say: 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

4 

“Municipalities were the birth-place of democracy and democracy still depends on their vitality. A 

vital local government is absolutely essential to a successful operation of democracy.” 

 

This is very true today and it is up to all to see that local governments in this province remain vital and 

increase in vitality as the years go by. 

 

I believe one of the more interesting items to be discussed today that is under consideration by my 

department is that question of municipal reorganization which has had a good deal of discussion 

throughout the province in the last couple of years. I may say, Mr. Speaker, that this is not a new 

question. In fact in the latter part of the last century in what was then the Northwest Territories which is 

now Saskatchewan there was a move made to endeavour to organize local government throughout that 

part of the area. It was attempted on a basis of one township to four township areas. It was not too 

successful. At the last session of the Northwest Territories legislature there was appropriated some $5 

thousand for an enquiry into the subject of municipal organization but nothing was done at that time in 

this regard. In 1906 at the first session of the Saskatchewan legislature a commission was set up to study 

the organization of municipalities and municipal taxation. As a result of this commission, in 1908 acts of 

the legislature were brought down setting up The City Act, The Town Act and The Village Act. In 1909 

The Rural Municipalities Act was passed. Mr. Speaker, this has proved to be good legislation. This has 

stood on the books of the province for over 50 years and like the municipal men who had administered 

this act, it has served Saskatchewan well. 

 

I would like to say a word here about municipal men, both rural and urban. It just may be that I am 

slightly prejudiced because I did spend nine years on a municipal council, but I feel that municipal men 

are the salt of the earth, that there are none in the country who give better service for less pay and take 

more abuse in endeavouring to carry out a job and doing a good job in serving the public in regard to 

doing what they are asked to do. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wood: — I would like to say also in my opinion that these small nine townships and rural 

municipalities which were 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

5 

 

set up by the Department of Municipal Affairs at that time have a good deal to recommend them — that 

they have served a good purpose in the province and that they have been useful to the province and that 

they still to this day have a good deal to recommend them. The councillor with this township and a half 

division which he has to service is well acquainted with this area. He has a close contact with the people 

and there are many ways in which he can do service for the area and the people in an economical way 

that possibly might not be so easily done in a larger set-up. I maintain to this day that there are many 

things in favour of the smaller municipal areas as they are today, but I wish to point out also that there 

are some disadvantages as well. 

 

The first that I would like to point out to you today is in the matter of size. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that a 

larger municipal area could be used to advantage by the rural municipalities of this province to obtain a 

more economic operation and better use of their machinery and other equipment. Just the same as a large 

farmer can obtain better use of his machinery and equipment and can usually produce grain more 

economically than what a smaller farmer can. I think the same principle can be applied to the benefit and 

profit of the municipalities today if they had a larger area. I believe also that a larger area for municipal 

government could help to provide a stronger government economically and one able to provide the better 

services that are desired by the people of the community, just as a large urban centre can provide 

services which cannot be provided by a small urban centre. You have a stronger government in the larger 

urban centres and large tax base so they can do things in towns and cities that just can‟t be done in the 

villages and hamlets. Just the same as our nine township municipalities today can provide a better 

service along these lines than could have been provided by a one township and four township 

municipalities that were envisaged in the last century, just so I believe a larger area in municipal 

jurisdiction could be of benefit to the people today, and our better travel and communication facilities 

that we have at the present time make such a thing possible. Back in the horse-and-buggy days you just 

couldn‟t have had these larger areas but what I am speaking of today in regard to larger areas for 

municipal local government is quite feasible. 

 

Secondly, I believe that in building municipal areas around a service centre has much to advocate it to 

us. It is different from these nine township municipalities that are just drawn on the map of 

Saskatchewan like a grid and the municipalities at the 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

6 

present time are in many cases just a block in this grid with no specific relations to community or of any 

service centres in the area. I feel that this larger municipal unit, built around these service centres would 

give a larger sphere of unity in the area. At the present time you have, even the small municipalities, 

some people whose interests go this way and others who interests go the other way, whereas in a 

municipality which is centred around a certain service centre there would be more unity of interests in 

that area. You would also give farmers in all cases an interest in their specific roads to this centre. At the 

present time there are many cases where the road towards the town which he wishes to go lies for a short 

distance in his municipality and the rest of the way he is travelling in another municipality. This specific 

farmer pays nothing for the upkeep of his road and he has nothing to say about the upkeep of his road. I 

don‟t think this is a good situation to exist. 

 

It also would do away with a problem which often comes to the Minister of Municipal Affairs, where a 

municipality has built up a grid pattern in their own municipality and they wish an outlet to a centre or a 

highway or some other outlet in the municipality, but there are a few miles in there which are not in their 

jurisdiction and they depend upon neighbouring municipalities to build these roads for them. In many 

cases, the neighbouring municipality is not interested in building this road and justifiably so as it doesn‟t 

serve their ratepayers so why should they be interested in building a road which serves the ratepayers of 

another municipality. If we had municipalities drawn on a basis on which the main service centre of the 

area was in that municipality then these roads would lead toward that centre and a good many of these 

troubles which we have today in the rural municipalities would be eliminated. 

 

Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, I believe that coterminous boundaries between school units and the larger 

municipal units would be of great benefit. It would simplify the relations between the rural municipal 

councils and our school units as well as possibly such other organizations as ag. rep. districts or union 

hospital districts or others along that line. At the present time we have school units who have to deal 

with a dozen or more rural municipalities and at the same time we have rural municipalities that have to 

deal with more than one school unit. It unnecessarily complicates the work that is carried on between the 

school units and the municipalities. If you have one school unit dealing with one municipality it would 

greatly facilitate the work that is to be done. I think this is elementary and all will agree with this point. 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

7 

 

Going further, point four, in a country system in which the function of the school and municipal 

government were brought together it would also provide beneficial results for the people of the area. I 

believe it would eliminate a good deal of friction, not that there is such a lot of friction between 

municipal governments and school unit boards, but it would eliminate this where it does arise, because it 

would be the same people handling these problems. It would give opportunity for better overall 

planning. When you have one group planning their share of the budget in regard to education and 

another group planning their share of the budget in regard to municipal work, you don‟t have the same 

co-operation between them. When it comes to deciding on roads, the school people are wishing certain 

roads in regard to the bus routes, but the municipality is not always consulted in regard to these things 

and build roads elsewhere. I feel if it were under the same board that this sort of planning would be 

facilitated. It would lead to more equitable finance. Instead of leaving municipal men to pick up the 

balance of the tax money which is available for their use and allowing other local governments to 

requisition what they need, when the budgets were being proposed they could sit down together and 

discuss these things and work together in developing what the budget and the tax rate should be for a 

given county area. 

 

I think it would also give more clear-cut authority and responsibility to the people who are in charge of 

the government. At the present time one group handled other things in the area and it is a little hard 

sometimes to decide where authority starts and where authority ends and where responsibility starts and 

where responsibility ends. If they were under the one board, and all these things were handled by the one 

board, this sort of trouble would be kept to a minimum. This is very briefly what I think would be some 

of the benefits that could be derived from reorganization of municipalities. 

 

As I have said before, I freely admit that there are many virtues in the smaller municipalities and I am 

quite prepared to admit that there are drawbacks in regard to larger municipal units. But as I have 

pointed out I believe that the larger municipal units have a good many virtues as well. I believe it was 

Mr. Lincoln who said: 

 

“That the true rule in determining whether to reject or embrace anything is not whether there is evil in 

it but whether there is more evil than good.” 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

8 

Mr. Speaker, on balance I believe that the larger, community-centre, coterminous areas have much to 

recommend them and we should earnestly consider reorganization along this pattern. 

 

Now this is not something that has been dreamed up by the Saskatchewan government. This has been 

successfully used in the province of Alberta for many years. It has also been successfully used in the 

states to the south of us. It has been recommended to the government by the Royal Commission on 

Agriculture and Rural Life as well as by the Local Government Continuing Committee. After seeing 

these things carried out in other places, adopted and used successfully and recommended for use in this 

area, if this government had failed to make it available to the people of this province — this that has 

been recommended and set out by these other people — we would have been guilty of gross neglect and 

mismanagement. 

 

The Local Government Continuing Committee looked at this problem. As you know they spent a good 

many months in doing so and when they presented their report they recommended that no vote be given 

to the people of the province in regard to the setting up of this reorganization principal. They presented 

quite convincing arguments. After a good deal of study and in consultation with local government 

groups throughout the province, the government decided to reject this proposal. They decided to allow 

each area to decide for themselves whether and in what manner they wish to be organized. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are a good many people in the province today who maintain that it would have 

been better to have organized the whole province without a vote the same as was done in Alberta. We 

would have a more uniform picture of local government than what we are liable to have by allowing 

each area to decide for itself. Many maintain that this would have been the better way to go about it. As 

far as I am concerned, Mr. Speaker, I am prepared to argue that in the long run the best form of local 

government is that which is chosen by the people themselves. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — See if you can stay with it. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — They don‟t clap over there. 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

9 

 

Hon. Mr. Wood: — As far as boundaries are concerned, we have not been able to devise any way in 

which we would have a vote on boundaries. This is a many-sided problem, whether the boundaries 

should go here in this case, or over there in another case. It seemed to us that the only way that this can 

be satisfactorily handled is by a boundary commission. I believe there has been a good deal of agreement 

on the part of local government people in regard to this. 

 

We have set up a boundary commission by enlarging the municipal advisory commission which is now 

composed of Dean Cronkite, former Dean of Law at the University of Saskatchewan; Dr. Fisher, former 

president of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities; Mr. McGillvary, former president of 

the School Trustees Association; Mr. Thomas Garland, the former president of the Association of Rural 

Municipalities and a former school unit board chairman; Mr. Les Johnson, a former reeve of a 

municipality; Mr. A.B. Douglas, former president of the School Trustees Association. Mr. Douglas at 

the present time is acting in an advisory capacity to the commission. Now this commission is working 

throughout the province, meeting with people on the local levels, at the municipal councils, the school 

unit boards, village councils in many cases and other interested bodies, endeavouring to find out what 

would be the best possible boundaries for local government in the province of Saskatchewan — not only 

school unit boundaries but boundaries for any type of local government that might choose to use them. 

They are endeavouring to find what would be the best possible boundaries that can be decided upon. 

They will form their tentative decisions and then they will go back to inform the people of what their 

tentative decisions are and give them an opportunity to express themselves in regard to these opinions. 

They will make a final report to the government, quite possibly area by area throughout the province. 

The government will study their submissions and will decide what the local government boundaries 

should be and will proclaim them — possibly again area by area throughout the province. 

 

It is expected that school units will adjust immediately or as soon as possible to the areas in most cases. 

But the rural municipalities are under no compulsion whatsoever to adopt these boundaries for 

themselves. They may remain exactly as they are except that in a case where people of the area do decide 

to set up a larger municipal unit. Where the boundary of that 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

10 

unit cuts through a municipality, that part of a municipality that falls within the area will become part of 

that area and the part that falls outside the boundary will become part of a neighbouring municipality 

may remain as it is, or may join into another larger municipal area. Aside from that, rural municipalities 

may remain exactly as they are and no compulsion whatsoever will be brought on them to change. 

 

If the people in those areas wish to reorganize their local governments it is my intention to bring into this 

house, within a week or so, an act which will permit them to do so. At the present time, if an area wished 

to set up a country or a larger municipal unit they could not do so under present legislation. We expect to 

bring down an act which will allow them to do so if they wish. In this act will be set out procedure by 

which they will be able to go about setting up votes for the people of those areas. I will make it clear 

here that people will have a free vote in regard to this, to vote for what they want — the larger municipal 

units or whether they want to remain as they are or whether they want to go into a county. They will have 

a very good opportunity to express themselves and to vote in regard to this. 

 

Last summer the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities requested that a local government 

council should be set up to advise with the government in regard to municipal organization in this 

province. This council was to be set up from members of the organization of the urban municipalities 

and also the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association. Three members from each. This has been done 

and is now composed of Mr. Nicks, the president of the School Trustees Association, Mrs. Kinglsey also 

of that association and Mr. Thornton their secretary; Mr. Robert Dahl, the president of the Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association; Mr. Bye, a member of their executive and Mr. Connors their 

secretary; Mr. Hamilton, the president of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities and Mr. 

Irvine, the vice-president has served with him as well as Mr. Wilkinson, their secretary. 

 

We have had several meetings with the local government council. They have met with the Hon. Mr. 

Turnbull, the Minister of Education and myself as well as a couple of meetings with the Municipal 

Advisory Commission. We have found these meetings with them to be very worthwhile and have been 

productive of a good deal of understanding and of assistance to us in forming our policies regarding 

organization and in bringing down the legislation which is proposed for this session. In 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

11 

 

fact I might say that quite a few of their suggestions that were advanced at these meetings have been 

accepted by the government in regard to these things. 

 

I would like to take this opportunity to thank publicly these people who have made this contribution to 

municipal reorganization in this province. They have given their services freely. They are not paid for 

their time in regard to this and I wish to thank them for the time they have taken and the work they have 

done in this regard. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wood: — It is our intention, Mr. Speaker, that boundaries of the local government areas will 

be set up as we receive the advice from the Municipal Advisory Commission, when they make up their 

minds as to what they feel are the best possible boundaries for local government in the province. It is our 

intention that these boundaries will be proclaimed and made available to the people of the province to 

reorganize their local governments if they see fit and so wish. I believe in view of the recommendations 

that have been made to us by committees and commissions, in view of the example of neighbouring 

provinces and states, and it is up to us to make these things available to the people of the province if they 

so desire. It is not our desire in any way to weaken local government in this province but to strengthen 

and to revitalize it. I believe it can be done by making these things available and allowing the people to 

move forward in this way if they so desire. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wood: — I believe that we should press forward, alert to the possibilities of new ways and 

new things and at the same time, Mr. Speaker, cherishing the best traditions of the past and profiting by 

the experience of what has gone before. 

 

At this time there is another matter that I should like to mention in regard to the situation which due to 

the short crop last year may prevail in a good many areas of our province. I realize that many farmers 

this spring find themselves short of the finance they need to put in their crop and to do their 

summerfallowing and to do their farm work as it should be done. The government is again this spring 

making available to these people assistance through The Seed Grain and Supply Act. 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

12 

Under this act the rural municipalities pass a bylaw which is approved by the Department of Municipal 

Affairs and then the municipality may go to a local bank and borrow the money which they need and 

make these advances to the farmers and the provincial government is prepared to guarantee 75 per cent 

of any ultimate losses. It is our desire that sufficient finance be made available to all the farmers of the 

province for their farming operations during the spring and summer. 

 

There are quite a few more things, Mr. Speaker, that I would like to speak on in regard to our grid road 

program this coming year which will be going forward. We have now some 7,100 miles of road out of 

our proposed 12 thousand miles and we propose to carry on our program this year under this proposed 

budget the same as was done last year, in spite of the rather restricted financial position that the 

government finds itself in. I feel that this grid road program is a very good one and one that is well 

accepted by the people of this province. In fact we have out of some 296 municipalities, we have 287 

taking part in this program as well as eleven LID‟s and a good many towns and villages. 

 

With these few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I hope I have made it clear that I cannot support the amendment 

but I will support the motion. 

 

Mr. Frank Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, before entering this debate I wish to go along with 

others who have spoken in this house since yesterday afternoon and add my condolences to the family of 

the late Mr. McIntosh. We who have been associated with him through the years have grown to love him 

and to admire him for his kindly nature, for his sincere belief, and his friendly advice. We, his friends, 

will miss him in months and years ahead as I know his family will. 

 

I would first like to congratulate the Provincial Treasurer on the bringing down of his first budget. I 

think that his delivery was outstanding and I might say that of all the budgets that I have heard brought 

down in this house, his was the easiest to follow. This budget, that I believe is based on the philosophy 

of the CCF — New Democratic Party, proves the Provincial Treasurer‟s faith and his visions, and his 

confidence in Saskatchewan, and its people. 

 

Before going any further I would like to thank my colleague the Minister of Highways. I was quite 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

13 

 

pleased, and I am sure my constituents were pleased when they heard his announcement on the program 

of highway improvement in Touchwood for the coming year. I would like to say that I certainly am 

pleased, and I am sure that all residents realize that the oiling of No. 35 from the valley to Lipton to 

Junction No. 22 is a most important move. Anybody who had travelled that road on a Sunday or a 

holiday weekend knew that the dust conditions were terrible. I also want to congratulate him on the new 

program that he announced of sharing the costs of making the highways through villages and towns dust 

free. I am sure that all residents of villages and towns who have this done will certainly appreciate it. 

 

I listened closely to the financial critic‟s remarks a week ago Monday and although his presentation may 

have been better than usual I will say that it was practically the same cracked old record of by-gone 

years. Thinking back I would have imagined that after the Liberal Party lost the elections in 1952, 1956 

and 1960, they would have dreamed up a new red herring to drag in front of the people of Saskatchewan. 

I was especially amused, Mr. Speaker, when he started off by saying there were certain things that he 

agreed with the Provincial Treasurer on. After listening to him I found out that the only thing he agreed 

with the Provincial Treasurer on was when the Provincial Treasurer criticized the federal government. 

This is a little different then — a few years ago when there was Liberal government at Ottawa. Now he 

finds it is quite easy to agree with the Provincial Treasurer on any criticism that is made of the federal 

government. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Different government you bet. 

 

Mr. Meakes: — But he did make a few remarks that I feel I must challenge. In his usual wild and 

irresponsible manner . . . 

 

An Opposition Member: — Here we go again. 

 

Mr. Meakes: — . . . he made a lot of statements which I consider of necessity were not all facts. He 

went on and he blamed this government for the financial plight of local governments and he said, “This 

provincial government has refused to share with local governments the monies received from Ottawa.” 

Mr. Speaker, I say that this statement is not true. Let us look at the 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

14 

record. Last year the provincial government received from the federal government around $41 million. 

What was done with this money? First, in education, the provincial government spent $41 million in 

advancing education, in comparison to 1943-44 when it was less than $3 million. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, 

is this neglecting local government? 

 

I noticed that in 1961-62 this government spent $6½ million in agriculture in comparison to $493 

thousand in 1944. Again I ask is this neglecting local government? 

 

Mr. MacDougall: — What was the total budget? 

 

Mr. Meakes: — In 1961-62 there was $9 million spent in municipal affairs and grid roads in 

comparison to $400 thousand in 1943. This certainly is not neglecting local government. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — What is the percentage? 

 

Mr. Meakes: — In 1961-62 there was $29 million spent on health in comparison to less than $2 million 

eighteen years ago. There was $14 million spent on social welfare in comparison to $4 million in 

1943-44. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — What about the percentage? 

 

Mr. Meakes: — Mr. Speaker, I say to this Assembly that this is not neglecting local government. 

 

Mr. MacDougall: — That is the speech you read last year. 

 

Mr. Meakes: — No. I am not reading it this year either my friend. You can come over and look at my 

notes. 

 

He then went on and he referred to the good policies of previous Liberal governments. I would like to 

know what these good policies were. When this government took over in 1944 they found that there had 

been no highways or no buildings that had been paid for and that we still owed all of it. Is this the good 

policies that our hon. friend the financial critic is referring to? 

 

I say that the rural people of this province appreciate what this government is doing. For instance 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

15 

 

in grid roads: In 1955-56 when I was campaigning in my constituency I was afraid to drive anywhere 

after a rain because I was getting stuck half the time. Now if I can get two miles to a grid road I can go 

any place regardless of what the weather is. When I go back and think of 20 years ago and the education 

facilities of the rural children I marvel at the progress. I know that when I went to school that for the 

average child, if he got Grade VII or Grade VIII, this was a good education. Today with transportation, 

better schools, we are finding that rural children have the opportunity to finish their high school 

education. If they want to continue there is assistance from this government in helping them to continue 

on to university. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — Let us look at what this government has done in the electrical field, electrification of 

rural communities, and I am not going to say much about this because the people of Saskatchewan know 

and appreciate it. I am going to use the words the Minister of Agriculture used one time — that the rural 

electrification program had not only lit up the farms of Saskatchewan but it had lit up the hearts and the 

souls of the farm people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now we are going into a plan of sewer and water which again is another plan to try and keep the rural 

people of Saskatchewan on the farms by giving them a few more of the amenities of life. Mr. Speaker, 

the financial critic wandered all over the world but he did land at one time in Western Germany. He 

made the statement that in Western Germany prosperity was unequalled in the western world. I am not 

going to challenge this statement, but what he didn‟t do — he didn‟t tell us that Western Germany has 

the highest taxes in the western world. Western Germany has had a medical care program for all its 

citizens since 1870. He didn‟t point out that since the last war the United States, (and I am not 

condemning this) the United States is pouring billions of dollars into Western Germany to make it the 

showcase of the western world. Again, I want to emphasize, I am not criticizing, but he didn‟t tell us 

this. Of course, Mr. Speaker, he didn‟t mention the fact that in Sweden and Denmark and Norway — all 

with democratic socialist governments — unemployment is practically unknown. He poked fun at the 

word „togetherness‟. He said it was only good for a cold night. Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan for the last 50 years or more have been noted for their togetherness. In the early 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

16 

part of the century the people got together and built rural telephones. They got together. Then they 

started building schools and they got together with togetherness. It was not only good on a cold night, it 

was good anytime. 

 

Mr. MacDougall: — They left the province together too. 

 

Mr. Meakes: — Then coming up into the mid-twenties and the thirties they formed the anti-tuberculosis 

league. Again the people got together with government and municipalities and by working together they 

were able to fight the scourge of tuberculosis. Again I would like to say it is good not only on a cold 

night but good anytime. The people of Saskatchewan were the first to have free medical care. Again they 

got together with government and attained free medical care and it was good not only on a cold night but 

good anytime. I think of another example — hospitalization. The people of Saskatchewan by sharing and 

paying a fee got together and they were prepared to pay one another‟s hospital bills. Again I know that 

the people of Saskatchewan realize that it is not only good on a cold night but it is good anytime. 

 

Then the financial critic went on and he made a statement that I cannot let go unchallenged. he 

proceeded to give his verbal support to the co-operative movement but then made the statement that he 

thought that private enterprise should have the same break as the co-ops did in the income tax 

concessions. Mr. Speaker, I suggest that this shows not only the thinking of the hon. financial critic but 

of the Liberal Party. I would like to point out that there is only one income tax act in Canada — only 

one. The same act for co-operatives as for private enterprise, and if any company wants to — and some 

companies have — pay back refunds or dividends to their customers they do not have to pay tax on this 

money they have paid out. Let us get this matter straight once and for all. Co-operatives have no special 

consideration as far as income tax is concerned. Co-operatives do pay tax, the same taxes as any other 

business and I suggest that the hon. member and the Liberal Party are doing the co-operative movement 

in this province and of this country irreparable harm with their irresponsible talk. Of course these 

remarks sound very much like the remarks of their friends the Chamber of Commerce. This is the same 

insidious propaganda that is being spread endeavouring to destroy the co-operative movement. Of course 

the Liberal Party gives lip service to the co-operative movement but lip service only. 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

17 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — You are wrong. 

 

Mr. Meakes: — . . . but behind the backs of the co-op they will use the knife. 

 

I want to say that the attacks of the Liberal Party on men and women of this province who have spent a 

lifetime working in the co-operatives has forced these people to support this government. The attacks of 

the Chamber of Commerce and their friends the Liberal Party . . . 

 

Mr. MacDougall: — You are talking about the dealers now are you? 

 

Mr. Meakes: — . . . will force the co-operative movement to take political action the same way as the 

attacks of the Liberal Party on labour forced them to take political action. If the Liberal Party continues 

to act as they are, spreading the propaganda of the Chamber of Commerce then it will be too bad for 

them. This was the reason that the co-operative movement in England, going back to 1921, decided to 

take political action, because they realized that the only political party in England of that day who had 

the same friends and the same enemies was the labour party. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: — Trying to get on the band wagon. 

 

Mr. Meakes: — Mr. Speaker, a friend of mine made the remark in talking about whether co-operatives 

pay taxes or not he emphasized it this way. “Some people own a dog and pay taxes. Some people don‟t 

own a dog and don‟t pay taxes.” 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to suggest to you that the Liberal Party is no longer liberal with the 

ultra-conservative leadership that they have in this province. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I thought we were socialists. 

 

Mr. Meakes: — I want to say to them that if there are any of those small „l‟s‟ left with the Liberals, I 

suggest that they would be better to leave that party and to join a dynamic political movement, the New 

Democratic 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

18 

Party, under the provincial leadership of our Premier who is respected and loved across this province and 

under the leadership federally of not only whom I believe, but many others believe, the greatest living 

Canadian in government, T.C. Douglas. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — We wouldn‟t let you defect over here. 

 

Mr. Meakes: — Mr. Speaker, I am going to support this budget and I am going to vote against the 

amendment because I believe that this budget represents the philosophy and the belief of the political 

party which I represent in this house. I am sure that the majority of the people of my constituency want 

me to support the budget brought down by the Provincial Treasurer. 

 

Mr. James E. Snedker (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, first I wish to associate myself with those words of 

sympathy that have been extended by my colleagues to the family and friends of the late Hon. Mr. 

McIntosh. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the year 1961 was one of the most disastrous crop years that this province has gone through 

since 1937. In the winter of 1960-61 snowfall was light, spring run-off didn‟t fill the sloughs and in my 

country it was obvious by the middle of May that unless timely rains came to save the situation the hay 

and the grain crop would be complete failures. By the first of June complete cereal and fodder crop 

failure in the eastern part of the province was obviously inevitable. By the 15th of June it became 

apparent that the drought conditions affecting the eastern part of the province would be prevalent over 

the greater part of the entire province of Saskatchewan. All farmers and those closely in touch with 

farming realized by the 20th of June that the whole province faced a major disaster and that feed, both 

roughage and grain with which to feed a greatly expanded livestock population was going to be in 

shorter supply than ever before since the thirties. 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I did on the 21st day of June write to the Minister of Agriculture in the 

province of Saskatchewan, drawing his attention to the 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

19 

 

supply position of oats in this province, which according to the Board of Grain Commissioners‟ figures 

at June 7, 1961 showed total bushelage of oats in storage in the province of Saskatchewan as being 

3,016,0363 bushels. In view of the drought and the potential scarcity of feed oats I urged that all stocks 

in elevator storage be frozen by the government in the interests of our farm economy. I further drew the 

minister‟s attention in my letter to the fodder situation. I quote herewith my letter of June 21, 1961 as 

follows in part: 

 

“I also urge an immediate survey of all available and potential supplies of feed in order to insure 

conservation and also that a financial and transportation program be set up for the purpose of moving 

feed surplus to deficit areas.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, while my suggestions in regard to the movement of fodder produced some results my 

proposals in regard to the freezing of all available oat stocks in elevators in Saskatchewan, pending 

clarification of the situation, was not acted upon. The government refused to act and passed the buck to 

our rural municipalities suggesting that they assume storage charges which under the circumstances I 

think hon. members and particularly farm people will agree they could ill afford to do. As of June 21, 

1961 at the eighteen shipping points in the Saltcoats constituency there was in . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — On a point of privilege. The hon. member mentioned that we passed the storage 

charges to the municipality. I know he wouldn‟t want to be incorrect. We shared the costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That is not a point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — The minister made the suggestion that they assume the storage charges and that is what 

I said. Mr. Speaker, I will continue where I left off when I was so rudely interrupted. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It was the Speaker who interrupted you and not the member. 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

20 

Mr. Snedker: — My apologies to you, Sir, and what I said goes for the other party. As of June 21, 1961 

at the eighteen shipping points in the constituency of Saltcoats there was in off-farm storage in the 

elevators at that time 72 thousand bushels of oats. Now the wheat board price basis No. 1 feed at an 18¢ 

freight rate point at June 21, 1961 was 71¢ a bushel. 

 

That is what anybody could have gone to any elevator in that area and bought those oats for at that time. 

Had the government frozen or bought the oat stocks at that date, they would have cost 71¢. Now 

presuming that the government would have had to hold those oats for six months, until farmers gathered 

up enough money to pay for them, and until they saw what their needs actually were, we must add to that 

price six cents a bushel or a cent a month storage charges. We then come up with a figures of 77¢ a 

bushel. Now at the present time oats are being shipped into my area and are being sold at 80¢ a bushel. 

The government, had they taken the action I recommended, could have saved my farmers at least three 

cents a bushel without any cost whatever to the government, but that is not all the story. 

 

The government is presently paying approximately 22½¢ per bushel transportation subsidy on the oats 

that are being shipped into my area. Now when we take that into consideration and I wouldn‟t expect the 

government to pay both the storage and the subsidy, but when we take that into consideration, there is 

the possibility that had the government followed my advice, had they done what I suggested there would 

have been a net saving to farmers in my area of 19¢ a bushel for all the farmers in my area on the total 

amount of oats that were available in storage in the area at that time. Had that policy been adopted 

farmers could have obtained oats at 60½¢ a bushel instead of 80¢ which they are now paying. The 

saving on 72 thousand bushels of oats at 19½¢ a bushel would have amounted to $17,280. That much at 

least could have been saved for the farmers in my area. That situation might also have been duplicated in 

other parts of the province because at the time I mentioned there were three million bushels of oats in 

storage in elevators which should have been made available to the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now let us look at the other side of the coin. I refer to grain that is being shipped into the municipalities. 

Let us take a look at the wheat board prices. The wheat board sale price then and the wheat board sale 

price now. The wheat board price of No. 1 feed oats 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

21 

 

at an 18¢ freight rate shipping point, basis No. 1 feed today was 88¢ a bushel, that is what you could 

have gone to the elevator and bought it for. The June 21, 1961 price was 71¢ a bushel, and that is what 

the government could have frozen them at. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — May I ask the hon. member a question? 

 

Mr. Snedker: — No. Mr. Speaker, he can‟t ask a question. He can ask all the questions he likes when I 

get through. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — All right. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — When we add eight cents a bushel for storage, allowing storage from June 1st to 

February 1st or for eight months, we find there is a possible saving there of nine cents a bushel at no cost 

to the government at all under those circumstances. Had the government been willing to pay the same 

subsidy on stored as on imported oats, of 22½¢ a bushel, the saving would have been 31½¢ a bushel to 

the farmers in my area. In other words wheat board oats that would now cost out of the elevator 88¢ a 

bushel, had the government of the province of Saskatchewan followed the policy of freezing oat stocks 

in storage at the time I recommended it be done would cost farmers 56½¢ a bushel, instead of the 88¢ it 

is costing in the elevator now, had the same government transportation subsidy been taken into 

consideration. 

 

Surely instead of passing the buck to our rural municipalities in regard to storage the government could 

and should have taken action to freeze these oat stocks, and see that they remained available to our 

farmers. They didn‟t do this — they proceeded blindly down the road of waste, spend and tax. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, just in connection with waste. When I came to this house last year I went down to the 

cafeteria in the basement to get a meal, one of the first things I beheld at the bottom of the stairs was a 

very good but old fashioned platform scale. The same type and the same kind that farmers have weighed 

thousands and thousands of bushels of grain on for years and also other farm produce as well. I have 

used one on many occasions. It was a good scale, there was nothing wrong with it, it weighed to an 

ounce. I weighed myself on it, and it worked very well, I can guarantee this. Then we passed through one 

of the worst summers we ever had, and all the 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

22 

members of the government said that we were entering into a period of austerity and that money was 

getting tight. But what did I behold when I went to the bottom of the stairs in front of the cafeteria at this 

session of the house — a brand new nicely painted streamlined Toledo scale, costing $152.50 of the 

peoples‟ money. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — You broke the other one. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Mr. Speaker, a government that is wasteful in small affairs would be equally wasteful 

in large matters. Some of my people are having to pay as much as $50 a ton for hay in my area to try and 

keep their cattle alive, and you squander money like this. The economic situation that the farmers are 

facing is becoming desperate and in this budget they have been viciously taxed by a rapacious 

government in order to support a gigantic propaganda machine with which to perpetuate a hide bound 

hierarchy of socialists in power. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — I turn now to expenditures in regard to the highway system in the province of 

Saskatchewan. The nature of our economy, the products which we produce and the vast area of our 

province makes effective transportation of vital necessity to our people. Last year, Mr. Speaker, I drew 

the attention of the government to the request made to the Board of Transport Commissioners by the 

railroads for the abandonment of railroad lines in the province of Saskatchewan. The Canadian Pacific 

Railroad has submitted requests to the Board of Transport Commissioners as I understand it, for 

permission to abandon during the next five to twenty years 1,129.8 miles of railroad. The Canadian 

National Railroad has similarly submitted requests to the Board of Transport Commissioners at Ottawa 

for permission to abandon within the next five to twenty years 1,237.3 miles of railroad. The grand total 

of mileage involved which the railroads have requested permission to abandon is 2,267.1 miles. Mr. 

Speaker, the people who live on those lines which are proposed to be abandoned, run into the thousands. 

The number of delivery points on the Canadian National Railroad is 194, the number of delivery points 

on the Canadian Pacific Railroad is 196. The total number of delivery points on the railroads which are 

proposed to be abandoned is 390. These points will be without rail service should the proposed 

abandonment proceed. Abandonment of railroads, Mr. Speaker, makes it all the more imperative that we 

have an efficient highway network for the fast 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

23 

 

and speedy transportation of saleable products, and the means of production, particularly in our outlying 

areas. 

 

Last year in the highways‟ program the government disregarded my warning which I have just repeated 

by making fabulous expenditures adjacent to the city of Regina. On the minister‟s own statement last 

year the Regina to Lumsden road, a distance of eighteen miles, was estimated to cost $3 million, for an 

average cost per mile of $166,666. The Regina to Balgonie road was estimated to cost $1,200,000 for a 

distance of fourteen miles, or an average cost per mile of $131,255. The all-inclusive total of 32 miles of 

road was to cost $4,200,000 or an average cost per mile of $131,250. All, Mr. Speaker, within a 21 mile 

radius of the city of Regina, to construct two lane, limited access highways. Almost one third of the 

entire capital expenditure budgeted for last year or $4,200,000 was spent within this twenty mile 

perimeter of Regina. The sum of $13,789,000 was budgeted for capital expenditure; $4,200,000 was 

expended that close to this city, for a type of highway which one would expect to find, not leading to a 

city of only 110 thousand people, but to cities such as Kansas City, Chicago, St. Louis, or other cities 

with populations in excess of one million people. The tremendous expenditures in 1961 on highways 

adjacent to the city of Regina were a major cause of the neglect of our highways in other parts of the 

province. It has had the effect of forcing more and more traffic from the highways which are built and 

maintained entirely at the cost of the government to the grid road system, the capital cost of which is 

borne roughly 60 per cent by the government and 40 per cent by our rural municipalities. The 

maintenance costs of our grid road system are borne entirely by our rural municipalities. 

 

Now traffic, like water, Mr. Speaker, always follows the line of least resistance. The life expectancy of a 

road is in direct relationship to time plus traffic volume. Having neglected our outlying and extensive 

highway network in the past year, the government in its present budget is making a desperate effort to 

stave off massive highway deteriorating in the province of Saskatchewan, by a program of expediency of 

too little and too late, a thing of rags and tatters and bits and pieces, a few miles here a few miles there 

and nothing connected together in the middle. The government this year has made no provision for new 

highways and inter-connecting links which are so needed an necessary, and by their failure to do so are 

placing an every greater strain on our grid road system. 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

24 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I can almost sympathize with the Minister of Highways, I am sorry to see that 

he is not in his seat. He finds himself in the embarrassing position of trying to administer a department 

of government in a government which in my opinion is being operated by remote control. 

 

The estimates for highway maintenance last year, ostensibly due to the so-called austerity program, a 

program which bit deeply into essentials but left the dissemination of propaganda untouched, slashed 

almost $1 million from the maintenance estimates. 

 

This should have been the very last department for any government facing rough financial weather to 

cut, for quite obviously if money is going to be short, and highway construction has to be curtailed, then 

of course the highways we have should have been maintained and kept in as good shape as possible. 

Already massive deterioration of our existing highway system is becoming evident, as a result of last 

year‟s maintenance appropriation reductions. This year there is to be a further reduction in the highway 

maintenance department of $351,630. The total decrease for maintenance in the fiscal year 1962-63 in 

comparison with the fiscal year 1960-61 will be the massive sum of $1,451,510. Here again the 

government is economizing at the expense of our rural municipalities by allowing the highways of our 

province to deteriorate still further and forcing a still greater volume of traffic from the highways to the 

grid road system. The maintenance of the grid roads does not cost the government a cent. 

 

The rural municipalities made a just and a fair request when they asked that the government pay a 

percentage of the costs of maintenance of the grid road system. I wish, Mr. Speaker, to pay tribute to all 

the reeves, councillors and secretaries of the rural municipalities of the province of Saskatchewan for 

their excellent and able administration. They serve our people well regardless of personalities or political 

affiliation and for no personal gain. The municipal convention which we have just witnessed is a true 

and democratic voice of our people. No wonder the socialists seek to destroy it, for the end of the 

socialists is to destroy that which they cannot control. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Snedker: — I can do no other but oppose a budget which shifts the rightful obligations of the 

provincial government 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

25 

 

from the government to the backs of our rural municipalities and onto our farm people. Mr. Speaker, the 

amendment which we have submitted to the budget is as follows: 

 

That this Assembly urges the government to give consideration to such policies as will (1) avoid 

budgetary deficits; (2) reduce the public debt; (3) reduce the huge annual interest payments thereof; 

(4) reduce excessive administration costs; and (5) reduce the heavy and oppressive provincial 

taxation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I shall not support the budget. I shall support the amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — The hon. member said I could ask a question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Point of privilege? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — The hon. member said I could ask him a question when he sat down. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mrs. Mary J. Batten (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think that I am going to be so offensive on 

the air that the hon. minister has to take up my time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish first of all if I may, extend my congratulations to you. I don‟t know if I can promise 

to be the best behaved member in the house, but I can promise that I will be better behaved than the hon. 

Attorney General — but I realize this might not be very cheerful news to you. 

 

Being a neighbour of yours in constituency as well as seat I will try and stay on your good side, Mr. 

Speaker, and obey the rules of the house and your rulings. 

 

I wish too, Mr. Speaker, at this time to add my condolences to the family of the lat Minister of 

co-operatives. I know I speak for all members on this side of the house and the people of Saskatchewan 

when I say that we shall miss this good and gracious man, and Saskatchewan will be the poorer for his 

death. 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

26 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have found it very difficult to get up and speak in this budget debate. I think maybe 

because when you get to my age, and are of the feminine sex, you get to feel more maternal than 

anything else, and looking across the way at these people I can‟t help but feel a great deal of motherly 

pity for them. The poor things are deserted by their leader, they have put forth a most depressing and 

depressed budget, and their whole attitude this session has been of sorrow and weeping. You can 

understand therefore it is very difficult to get up and criticize them, after all you don‟t like to kick 

anybody when they are down no matter how gently you do it. I will endeavour to be gentle. 

 

I think actually, Mr. Speaker, all that needs to be said about this budget, in fact about this government 

was said by the hon. member from Arm River (Mr. Danielson) when he said that “any blank fool can 

spend money,” and I think this describes the whole thing adequately, distinctly and sincerely, and he 

added, and I certainly agree with him, that it takes a socialist fool to hire experts to help them spend 

money, and these socialists have certainly done that. I say, Mr. Speaker, that this is a depressing budget 

because this is the kind of budget that is brought forth by a government after eighteen years of socialism 

in this province. 

 

As I said these people are sorrowful because they have been deserted by the former Premier, at least I 

hope they are deserted by the former Premier. The hon. member from Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) just 

referred to Mr. Douglas as Premier of this province, and I am wondering if he is still governing by 

remote control, or if there is some spiritual affinity whereby he is giving instruction to the people across 

the way. The hon. member from Arm River (Mr. Danielson) used to say, “them Gold Dust Twins”, when 

Mr. Fines and Mr. Douglas were here. Well the gold has obviously gone or we wouldn‟t be in debt and 

we can‟t see the twins for dust, so this is a depressed government in this situation. 

 

In addition to this the government is strait-jacketed in its own socialist theory, and be they democratic 

socialists, or be they any other kind of socialists, if they are truly socialists and adhere to socialist 

economic principles, they are in a strait-jacket. This government, Mr. Speaker, and this budget shows the 

effect; is burdened by debt, debts contracted by this government but of course borne by the people of 

Saskatchewan. This government is carrying the full weight of Parkinson‟s Law. 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

27 

 

They have accumulated civil servants for civil servants for civil servants. This government is torn by 

suspicion, racked by self-doubt, and by an internal struggle for power. All of this shows up very plainly 

and I am sure the debate has demonstrated this most aptly. If these people are socialists of course, Mr. 

Speaker, they don‟t really feel they are to blame, they believe in the behaviourist theories of child 

psychology. It is true that the Hon. Premier certainly does and I imagine he has convinced the others. 

They are really the result and act according to their environment. They really haven‟t too much will 

power to do anything about this, and being the result of their environment you can understand why 

things are so pathetic across the way, and why this budget is a pathetic attempt. Sometimes I wonder 

when I see Mr. Fines is missing and no longer able to control the Attorney General, and I notice how 

different the Attorney General has been this session, I wonder if he has now become the spokesman for 

the party opposite, and if so, if the government is going to be run by him, we will probably be governed 

by the Hon. Attorney General‟s ulcers and I can understand the bitterness that is going to result. 

 

Now sometimes when I look across the way it reminds me a little bit of East and West Germany. I think 

there are a number of people over there who would like to come across, but there is this invisible wall. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Sometimes I think the people across the way realize this, certainly the hon. member 

from Canora (Hon. Mr. Kuziak) has the habit of yelling “fascist” to everything that is said that isn‟t 

socialist, exactly as the people over in East Germany do. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — You are expounding. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Everything we have said that was at all good about West Germany has been combatted 

on the other side by crying, “Oh the American dollars, the American dollars.” There has been very little 

credit given to the good sense of the German people in the free enterprise society under which they are 

operating. 

 

Now the sad state of affairs here is a contrast and a very depressing contrast, to the virility 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

28 

of the people outside of this house, and I was very happy to take a day off from this house and go back to 

my own constituency to a Rural Life Conference that was held there. There were people there, Mr. 

Speaker, of every political color, of every type of religion, who sat around and calmly and 

conscientiously and sincerely sought for a solution to the problems that are facing rural life and the 

people living in the rural districts of this province. They wanted to help themselves, they wanted to help 

others, and for one day it was simply wonderful to hear no mention of politics and I didn‟t hear the word 

Hazen or Argue mentioned once. This certainly was a change from being in the house, and sometimes I 

think it is most essential that the hon. cabinet ministers get back to the country once in a while, to have a 

breath of sanity and good sense instilled in them, and this would certainly show in better government and 

a better budget. 

 

Unfortunately in this budget debate, Mr. Speaker, and due to the lack of time, we debate only general 

principles, and sometimes I do think that people that are in the country, and who listen to this debate on 

the air, wonder what is really being done about their money and the budgeting of it. They don‟t realize 

we are going to go into estimates where item by item, when the opposition will have an opportunity to 

scrutinize the spending or the contemplated spending of the government and where we will be in a 

position to give constructive criticism as to what this government should do. 

 

The budget sets out the general principles governing the spending and the debate of course covers these 

general principles. What are the general principles set out by the new Premier of Saskatchewan and the 

new Provincial Treasurer? First of all, and this is a theme on which the new Premier can wax very 

eloquent, they say we should be very proud to pay taxes. Perhaps they have something there, but I think 

most of the people of Saskatchewan would agree with me when I say that I could be twice as proud for 

half the money, if they only spent it reasonably. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Well you would hardly call me big business if you saw my bank overdraft. I think we 

speak for all the people in Saskatchewan. I don‟t think this is a matter of class distinction. I think this is 

a matter of common interest. The cost of government should be as light as possible, because the cost that 

goes out of the pockets 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

29 

 

of people to pay for government is not spent by them usefully in other purposes to bring new wealth into 

being. I think this is an economic fact that most people in Saskatchewan have faced even though the 

government hasn‟t. 

 

The Hon. Attorney General told us yesterday that services are free only because the taxpayers are 

prepared to pay for them. Now this is quite a change. You know, I do think our new Premier and the new 

Provincial Treasurer have had some effect on the Hon. Attorney General, because Premier Douglas, or 

Mr. Douglas, when he was Premier promised that we wouldn‟t have to have taxes, not the ordinary 

common people such as you and I — the only people that would pay taxes, according to Mr. Douglas, 

and he is saying this now in the federal field, are mortgage companies, big corporations and the rest of 

the tab should be picked up by the crown corporations which would be creating new wealth for 

Saskatchewan because we would be turning wheat into plastics, and dirt into oil. All these technological 

advances were predicted by him and promised by him prior to 1944, and are being promised by him 

today on a national scale, and yet today after eighteen years of socialism in this province, the Hon. 

Attorney General suddenly wakes up and says, services are free only because the taxpayers are prepared 

to pay for them. Now this is really a change. The crown corporations were going to pay for all social 

services, and if you will remember some of the speeches of the ex-Premier, all medical care including 

dental and drugs, was going to be paid out of the terrific profits of the crown corporations, instead of 

going out of this province into the hands of the greedy capitalists. Then the Hon. Minister of Municipal 

Affairs said last night, “My! These crown corporations are wonderful, they have returned $13 million to 

the people of Saskatchewan.” Well, Mr. Speaker, that doesn‟t even pay the interest charges that the 

people of Saskatchewan have to pay in one year. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mrs. Batten: — These mortgage companies that were going to pay all the taxes, these big corporations 

today are going to account for $10 million, according to the Hon. Provincial Treasurer in his budget. 

They expect corporation tax to amount to $10 million. Surely this is not going to pay for very many 

services. People are still going to be taxed. Now the technological changes, the manufacturing, the 

employment, the vast industry that was going to be brought into this province — I 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

30 

will go into detail with this later on, but I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, that today the per capita income 

in Saskatchewan is $1,309. this isn‟t very much money, this is less than the Canadian average, and it is 

out of this money that the bulk of this budget is going to come. This is not the promise that the socialists 

made us originally. 

 

The Hon. Attorney General last night got a little confused, or maybe he was trying to be confusing, it is 

very difficult to tell, but he said, after telling us that all this comes from taxes, he said, “But you know it 

doesn‟t all come from taxes; some of it comes from borrowing.” I was most amazed to hear this because 

it reminded me of when I first met my mother-in-law. She went to Regina on a trip and when she came 

back she was loaded down with gifts for everybody. We were all very pleased, but my father-in-law said 

to her, “Now, look dear, you only had $50.00, how did you bring all these things home?” She replied, 

“Oh, they won‟t cost me anything.” He said, “They won‟t?” She said, “Oh no, I charged them.” And this 

is exactly the thinking of the Hon. Attorney General. That this borrowing is something that is free. 

Surely the Hon. Provincial Treasurer is going to have to take him in a corner and tell him a few facts of 

life. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, any budget must be judged not by the principles of the person judging it, but by the 

principles of the person proposing the budget, because after all if it is a good budget according to the 

socialists‟ principles you should accept it as such. After all the people did vote this government into 

power. The efficiency of the government certainly could not be criticized if they lived up to the 

principles that they expressed in the budget. Let me read to you what the Hon. Provincial Treasurer and 

apparently the rest of the cabinet agree should be the principles underlying this budget. He says: 

 

“We have set ourselves a twofold task — one to stimulate and develop the economy in order that the 

promise of more abundant living may continue to be fulfilled.” 

 

Now let us just take the first one — this is the tenet that socialists hold, that only the state can utilize 

money for social purposes. This is true, you read your own budget and you see this is exactly what you 

are propagating. The thinking of socialists seems to be that if anybody else is using money, they are 

using it wastefully, extravagantly and for selfish purposes. 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

31 

 

Only the socialist, according to the socialists, only the government can use money for public purposes, 

and I will go on with your second principle, and I will show you that you are saying exactly that. Now let 

us take this — had this government done this, had they carried this out, the question has to be judged 

according to what they have already done. 

 

Let us look at Saskatchewan after eighteen years of this kind of thinking, and see whether it has resulted 

in an economy that has been stimulated and developed so that everyone has an abundant life. I don‟t 

think I have to say very much about that because the hon. member from Pelly (Mr. Barrie) pointed out 

exactly what an abundant life those of our people who most need government help have. This 

government after eighteen years of planning, after eighteen years of socialism, says to the poor people in 

our society, those who are dependent on the government for their very livelihood, for their very daily 

bread; they say, “You can have $25 in the bank or in your pocket, but if you have anything over $25 then 

you will not get any more aid from the government.” “Use that up first, unless of course you can prove to 

us that you are going to die very soon!” Of course, this is planning. I suppose it is absolutely stupid for 

people to die unexpectedly, the socialists expect them to plan this, unless the government knows in 

advance, they are not allowed to save up this money. But where they are going to get the money out of 

the allowances made to them for funeral expenses, I don‟t quite know, and the Hon. Minister of Social 

Welfare didn‟t explain that to us. But can you imagine saying to a widow with a young son, as the hon. 

member from Pelly (Mr. Barrie) pointed out last night, “You give us a doctor‟s certificate to prove to us 

that your life expectancy is very short, that there isn‟t much hope of you lingering on and we will let you 

keep your own money for funeral expenses.” Humanity first, socialist planning and abundant life. The 

very people you were elected to protect, the very people you should cherish, because they helped elect 

you, believing your promise, and this is the way you treat them today. The old, the aged, those who need 

supplementary allowances, the widows, the orphans, the people in the geriatric centres. Your planned 

economy has not resulted in very equal treatment for those who need geriatric treatment, and I have 

today received a letter from a group of people in Saskatoon, the members of the health committee of the 

Saskatoon Council of Women, who have finally had to turn to the members of the opposition. I am sure 

they did this with a great deal of reluctance in order to convince the Hon. 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

32 

Minister of Social Welfare that something had to be done in this province to meet the needs of the 

chronically ill citizens of this province, and especially for those who do not qualify for care within a 

provincial geriatric centre, but who are unfortunate enough to require continued institutional nursing care 

and accommodation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if the Hon. Provincial Treasurer, and his predecessors in this government had done as 

they promised to do, and had been as skillful in giving us a well-balanced economy, an economy where 

everybody is wealthy and everybody is equal, we wouldn‟t need geriatric centres; we would have nursing 

care right around the clock in every home. We wouldn‟t be short of accommodation for our aged, if we 

all lived in large mansions, we could look after our own grandparents. Because the Hon. Provincial 

Treasurer has failed we have to turn to the Minister of Social Welfare, and this is the only reason we 

need social welfare. How badly we treat these people. These people in his own constituency who over 

and over again have asked for a change in the regulations of the geriatric centres, who have asked for an 

investigation of the geriatric centre in Saskatoon, and who have been turned away time and time again, 

who set this out in a letter. I will not read these cases. I am sure the hon. minister has already had all 

these pages, where there was actual neglect, where there was pain and suffering and where nothing was 

done about it. This is the resolution they are putting forth to this government. 

 

They are asking first of all, I can summarize it rather than reading the whole thing, they say, “We believe 

it is imperative that the geriatric centers have local governing bodies,” and this seems logical. To hear 

the speakers on your right, Mr. Speaker, they are very much in favor of local governing bodies. They are 

in favour of having the government close to the people, and yet they refuse to have local governing 

bodies in these geriatric centres, where complaints could be brought to them and where sometimes 

something could be done about them. They say secondly, “We believe it is imperative that patients in a 

geriatric centre have free choice of doctors.” Surely these are not very heavy requests, and I think there is 

a third one which says there should be a full investigation of the geriatric centre in Saskatoon. 

 

There is no equality or social justice there. There is no abundant living. 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

33 

 

Hon. Mr. Nicholson: — Will you tell us who sent the communication? 

 

Mrs. Batten: — I will be very pleased to. You don‟t want it now do you Mr. Nicholson? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nicholson: — I think it should be on the record if the hon. member wouldn‟t mind. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — I would rather not put it on the record for the reason that the last time names were put 

on the record, the hon. minister got up and gave a terrible harangue about two people who happened to 

be of Conservative politics, and I don‟t like to expose these people to that type of harangue. These two 

people were not of my political faith; they are not personal friends of mine, but I didn‟t appreciate sitting 

here and listening to an attack on them, when they weren‟t here to defend themselves, when they only 

tried to do something for the poor people in that geriatric centre. If you insist, Mr. Speaker, and that is 

the ruling, I will of course give the names, but I prefer to give it to the minister afterwards. 

 

I think it has been made abundantly clear by previous speakers, that this abundant life has not been very 

equitably distributed among the people of this province, that this abundant life exists more in the 

government than it does in the citizens of this province, and that this is not the kind of abundant life that 

our people will continue to vote for. 

 

The second objective which the Hon. Provincial Treasurer set out was “to provide through government 

those services which are so important that they should not have to compete for the consumers‟ dollars in 

the market places. These services are well enough known; education, the development of our culture and 

public health and welfare.” Then he goes onto elaborate on that theme. 

 

This is a very strange statement to me, Mr. Speaker, because the hon. minister knows as well as I do, that 

all these things that he has named, although certainly they need government help, I think can only be 

done by individuals, things that touch the very core of each human being who inhabits this province. 

This is a matter of an individual right that is being challenged when the 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

34 

government takes over completely and says this is a government function, because things by their very 

nature cannot be taken over completely by the government. Now at the Rural Life Conference one of the 

speakers got up and interpreted the papal encyclical in a way contrary to what the speakers on your right 

would have had you think last fall and this year about the papal encyclical. You will remember there was 

so much reading of the papal encyclical on your right that I thought everyone was converted to the 

Roman Catholic church for awhile. Somebody was interpreting the papal encyclical at this particular 

meeting and said, “Surely there are not people in this province who want the kind of welfare state that 

perform all but the most personal physical functions for you,” and surely this is not the case. Surely we 

still have some things in Saskatchewan that we like to do by ourselves on our own. 

 

In this connection I would like to read one paragraph from a book called “Orthodoxy” by G.K. 

Chesterton, he puts this much better than I can. He is talking about democracy and the fact that he 

believes in democracy, and he says: 

 

“There are some things that a man wants to do for himself even if he does it badly. I am not arguing 

the truth of some of these concessions I know that some modern people are asking to have their wives 

chosen by scientists, and they may soon be asking for all I know have their noses blown by nurses. I 

merely say that mankind does recognize his universal human conscience and that democracy classes 

government among them. In short the democratic base is this; that the most terribly important things 

must be left to ordinary men themselves; the mating of the sexes, the rearing of the young, the laws of 

the state. This is democracy and in this I have always believe.” 

 

I would add this is Liberalism and this we will always believe. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mrs. Batten: — It was just yesterday that one of the hon. members on your right was quoting Dr. Brock 

Chisholm 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

35 

 

as being a socialist and saying that here was a man who was learned and he could prove that socialist 

planning was necessary. I don‟t know whether this gentleman realizes that Dr. Brock Chisholm has also 

preached for years that the state should plan your family, tell you how many children you should have 

and when you should have them. If this is socialism, I wish you people would come out in the country 

and say so. I don‟t think there are too many people who would want to listen to you. 

 

This government seems to think that by this planning they can give us a healthy economy. Well let me 

look at the healthy economy they have given us for the eighteen years they have been in power, because I 

don‟t think the Hon. Provincial Treasurer is such a conceited man that he thinks he is going to do very 

much better than his predecessors, for whom he has a great deal of respect an reverence, and I won‟t go 

into the question of minerals and oil. I think that has been well covered and will be well covered by 

experts in that field. I want to say though that I was called out of the house the other day when the hon. 

member from Souris-Estevan (Mr. MacDougall) was speaking by . . . 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — You mean the expert. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — . . . a lawyer from Calgary phoning me and he asked me what the hon. members were 

talking about in the house, and I say, “Oh, we are just demanding that the socialists produce some oil,” 

and he said, “Mrs. Batten, that is ridiculous,” and I said, “It is,” and he said, “Certainly! Don‟t you 

realize that our Premier has a covenant with the almighty that all oil is to be found under Alberta?” 

Apparently the socialists haven‟t even got an “in” with Him, because they haven‟t done as well as 

Alberta has. 

 

But let me talk about another resource, and this to me is the most deplorable failure of this government, 

and it shows up and it can‟t be argued away. I wish it could, as this is the most important resource that 

we have, that any province has. We hear a lot of talk about it at convocation and we say to our young 

people, you are the richest resource of this province. You are the future of the country, and what have we 

done to our future? What have we done to our richest resource? 

 

Under this socialist government, year after year, we have failed to retain even our natural increase. We 

have lost enough population to equal the four major cities of this province. 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

36 

Mr. Berezowsky: — They are so good they are taken away. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Every single year we have voted millions of dollars to help education, we have 

prepared our young people, and then we have turned our backs on them and said, there are no 

opportunities here for you, you must go elsewhere. If there is any sin of omission and commission that 

this government should feel guilty for, should be labelled with and should never be allowed to forget, it 

is the fact that they have driven our young people out of this province, year after year. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Government Members: — Nonsense! 

 

Mrs. Batten: — It isn‟t nonsense. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — The Liberals drove the bulk of them out. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — From June 1944 to Jun 1961, Saskatchewan had a natural increase in population of 

274,000. In addition to that there were immigrants from outside of Canada who came into 

Saskatchewan, and these numbered 52,000 which gives us a total increase that we should have had of 

326,000. We would have just held our own without attracting from any other province, and yet the 

census figures show we have an increase of only 81,000. This means we have lost a population of 

245,000 people, and these, Mr. Speaker, are mostly young people. These are the people that have cost 

the taxpayers of this province millions of dollars and these are the young people who could contribute to 

this province, who could build up the wealth of this province, who could contribute to our spiritual and 

cultural heritage and yet we haven‟t been able to give them the opportunity for employment, the 

opportunity to make their own life in Saskatchewan, and they have had to move out. Every single family 

in this province has somebody who has had to leave. This is a loss, not only materially, but this is a loss 

in spiritual and human factors, because these families have had to break up simply because there was not 

room for them all in Saskatchewan if they were going to make a living. There has been no answer given 

to this by the budget. There is nothing in this budget to indicate that things are going to be different from 

now, on that in itself should be sufficient reason why we could not support the budget. 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

37 

 

There is no doubt that our economy has become more varied during the years, this is inevitable. The way 

we can compare it is to compare it with other provinces and here we see how far we have lagged behind. 

I have the figures here for new investment and manufacturing which is expected in 1962, and this is 

given by the Department of Trade and Commerce, and this is how we compare: Manitoba expects in the 

next year to invest in manufacturing $35.2 million; Alberta expects to invest $72.8 million; and 

Saskatchewan expects to invest $15.4 million. This is the booming economy, this is the development 

that is promised by this budget and by this Provincial Treasurer, and they expect us to support the 

budget! 

 

The distinguishing feature in this budget and the government is their faith in government planning. This 

“planning business” is an old word, and every single farmer I know of has made use of it; every 

businessman I know has made use of it; every student that ever went to school made use of it. But the 

socialists think this is perfectly original, that it was never heard of until the socialists captured the word. 

It is not as vicious as socialism so they like to use it, and they have a plan for everybody. They insist they 

can plan better than anyone else in this province in every field. Now let us look at their record of 

planning. Let us see how efficient their planning has been. Look at the crown corporation — they have 

been a failure right down the line, and the famous debate at Mossbank proved that one once and for all. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mrs. Batten: — I was glued to the radio like the rest of Saskatchewan and I heard it. 

 

Let us look at co-operatives. This is where really great work was supposed to be going on during the 

sojourn of this government. Now what has happened? They have tried to infiltrate and perpetrate their 

political thinking, thinking colored by their own political faith, to the point where co-operatives have lost 

a lot of the respect in many ways that they had. The people that are in co-operatives and have worked 

there for many years are shocked to find that they are being labelled as socialists merely because they are 

in co-ops. Unless these people have the courage to clean that type of thinking right out of co-operatives 

they will be hurt 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

38 

and they will hurt badly to the detriment of themselves and this province. This is the kind of thing that 

goes on under this government — this is their planning. 

 

I have told you about the inequalities that now exist. You heard the socialists before they came into 

power — there was going to be equality in economic status, and all that has happened is the poor are 

poorer and the rich are richer, and some of them have left for Florida. This is not social justice, this isn‟t 

the type of equality that we want. Mr. Fines made no bones about the fact the he hoped there would be 

many millionaires in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — He was a good example. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Look at the treatment of unions by this government, by this party. First of all they are 

willing to trample on the rights of the individual union man and buy his vote on a wholesale scale, and 

secondly they turn around to another union and they do things they would consider most despicable if 

management ever tried to do it. Have you ever heard of a union putting up with the management going to 

each individual union man and saying, “You write us a letter telling us how you dislike the people on 

top, and we will keep it secret, we won‟t let your name be known.” And this is exactly how you people 

have treated the College of Physicians and Surgeons. You have called them a union; you said they were 

a powerful union. You only like the unions that are affiliated and paying dues, and if they don‟t, it is too 

bad. You don‟t hold with union rules then. Then there are no holds barred and you can approach the 

individual and you can try and corrupt a union organization, you can try and have member act against 

member. You would destroy the executive if you could and as management set up your own union in 

that case. 

 

This is quite all right if they don‟t go along with your way of thinking. Such inconsistency! Yet this is 

your government planning. This is the government that you hold up as a type of God, that people can 

look up to because it is incorruptible. It can do things that any capitalist would certainly be spit upon 

even by other capitalists if he did, and yet this government can do it and sit here in judgment of private 

individuals. 

 

I have another word or two to say while I am talking about the College of Physicians and Surgeons. Yes, 

I guess you thought I might. After all the balderdash the Hon. Attorney General said the other night, I 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

39 

 

am going to try once more to set the records straight. I know it is hopeless because I know that he and 

others like him, but I hope not all of you, will go out and speak everyplace you can find anybody to listen 

to you, and say that the Liberals oppose the Medical Care Plan and yet every single Liberal member in 

this house has got up and said, we support a comprehensive medical insurance plan for all the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — But not this one. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — What one? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Not this plan. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Well I don‟t know what it is, and neither does anybody else in Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Look at the act. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — And you, the Hon. Attorney General, Mr. Speaker, can go out in the country, as he 

apparently did, at least so he reported the other night, and tell people, “You know it took us hours and 

hours to get this bill through.” Three weeks I believe the Hon. Attorney General said. It is going to take 

years probably to get it through. Now it is going to be the fault of the Liberals. 

 

If this government had listened to the Liberal opposition, they would have had a bill that would have 

been acceptable to the doctors and to the people of Saskatchewan. They would have had a bill that could 

have been made law and carried out. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mrs. Batten: — And, Mr. Speaker, we would have had comprehensive medical insurance in this 

province today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Poppycock. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — And that is the only reason it took three weeks, because we spelled out laboriously 

amendment after amendment, and when one was turned down we hopefully submitted another to make 

this a good act, to make this a good law. 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

40 

The minister can laugh about it — sincerity is often laughed at by those who don‟t know what it means, 

who don‟t know what it is in their own lives, but we were sincere, Mr. Speaker. We do want a 

comprehensive medical care program in this province; we want medical insurance. We have had it in our 

platform, we have worked toward it steadily when we were government, we will continue to work for it, 

and we will have it when we are the government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Your sense of humor is . . . 

 

Mrs. Batten: — An all the laughing in the world certainly isn‟t going to help the Attorney General in 

the next election unless he can convince the people of Hanley who don‟t read the newspapers, who don‟t 

listen to the radio, then he might be able to convince them that the Liberals did oppose this medical care 

plan. 

 

These are the instructions that the hon. member‟s party has given their workers in the country, to divide 

the people and make them think it is the doctors that have failed to give us a plan and this is exactly the 

type of thinking and propaganda that is going out into the country. I don‟t know how many people are 

going to be fooled by it. You won one election by this type of division, with this class hatred that you 

managed to stir up. I don‟t know if you are going to be able to win another. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — . . . people know what they are voting for . . . 

 

Mrs. Batten: — I think you think that. I think the hon. members across the way actually think the people 

don‟t know what they are voting for. I disagree, I think they do, and we will see when the next election 

comes about. 

 

Now we have the same matter coming up with the county system. I don‟t know what stories the hon. 

members across the way are going to tell the people about the county system, because over and over 

again members in this house got up on the government side and said they would not give people a vote 

on this issue. 

 

Government Member: — That is not true. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — They voted against a resolution that we submitted . . . 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

41 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Cite one instance. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — . . . and this went on for year after year until finally they saw this was going to be quite 

a dangerous issue that they were not going to get away with it, and now apparently they are prepared to 

give the people a vote, and there isn‟t any question in my mind it is only because of the opposition in the 

country, and the opposition of the Liberals in this house who are able to express the views of the people 

in the country. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Now we are going to go into detail. Mr. Speaker, I have no great desire to carry on a 

conversation with the Hon. Attorney General privately and I am certainly not interested in carrying one 

on publicly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Can you speak with authority. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Shall I go back to the beginning of my speech — I have figure after figure . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — You made the statement here that members of the government had repeatedly 

denied this. There should be a vote of ours . . . 

 

Government Members: — Is she willing . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mrs. Batten: — This authority is your own words — all you have to do is look up the Journals and you 

will find where every single one of you that was in the house at the time voted against the resolution 

brought in by us that there be a vote given . . . 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — You know better than that. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — I realize there is little coordination between the hon. Attorney General‟s tongue and his 

feet, but he was up on his feet on that vote, and we asked for a standing vote, so certainly we didn‟t miss 

him when we counted. 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

42 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — . . . that vote had nothing to do with this question. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — No. He . . . it has nothing to do with the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, . . . for 

the records . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Let the hon. member continue her debate. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — I don‟t want to keep members here any longer, and I am sure parts of this have been 

rather unpleasant for everybody to listen to. Certainly I have not enjoyed saying them. 

 

Basically let me summarize what this budget does: First of all it provides for excessive taxation; it 

provides for an expenditure of $1,071,826 and this, Mr. Speaker, must be paid by 925,000 people. If we 

had kept our population, this budget would not have been excessive, it would not have been difficult for 

us to carry out. First of all we would have achieved a type of industry that would have given us 

additional revenue. We would have achieved a higher standard of living and higher wages for our 

people, higher income for our young people. It would have been very easy to raise this money, but in a 

depressed agricultural situation with our small population it isn‟t going to be easy. Then in additional to 

this, this budget provides for a debt, a lovely debt situation. The hon. Attorney General says he is very 

proud of it, there is going to be more next year. 

 

We have a gross debt now of $505 million — well the hon. Attorney General says it is going to be at 

least $50 million more next year. Interest payments alone are going to be $22,674,000. This means that 

every man, woman and little child owes as a result of this budget $546 and must pay this year interest 

charges of $24.50 — in interest charges alone, and not calculating the amount of taxes that must be paid 

on a per capita basis. This budget, Mr. Speaker, has given no equality or hope of equality in the matter of 

education; it hasn‟t proposed any foundation system; it has voted a lot of money for education, but it 

isn‟t even paying 50 per cent of the total cost of education, not even paying as much as local 

governments are going to be paying towards education, let along the parents of children. This budget, 

Mr. Speaker, is not going to give our people who need social aid any relief whatsoever. It is beggaring 

them worse year by year, and offering them very little hope of 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

43 

 

rehabilitation. This budget, Mr. Speaker, makes no distinction and gives on equality, no social justice, 

between the people in rural areas and the people in city areas. There has been no equality, no promise of 

better services for our people. In addition to this, it gives us no hope, Mr. Speaker, in the attraction of 

industry or population to this province, no hope of stimulation to either industry, population or 

development. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t want to end on that sad note. There is one ray of hope. There was one 

beautiful thing in this budget. You have to wait until you get to the very end to find it, and here the Hon. 

Provincial Treasurer says as follows: 

 

“In this connection I would like to make special mention of the Wascana Centre project. I believe this 

to be one of the most imaginative, exciting developments of its kind in North America.” 

 

Now I agree, this is only imaginative, exciting thing there is in this budget. I don‟t know that we can 

afford it — I don‟t know if we can afford to ignore it. I think certainly we have to have some plans for 

capital expenditures, for government building expansion and I think it is a fine thing that the Provincial 

Treasurer and the Hon. Premier have now bent their energies towards building a monument for 

themselves. It reminds me a little bit of that bridge that we all drive and walk over, and the Anderson 

government has since been forgotten for the bitterness it generated, but people still talk about Jimmy 

Bryant‟s bridge, and after this government has gone, very shortly, maybe they will still talk about the 

Lloyd Wascana Centre. Maybe this is a good thing — that there will be something left. maybe that high 

mountain that they are going to bring in and put across the lake there will make people look up and say 

“Remember when we had the socialists here — the socialists who tried to infiltrate every organization; 

who tried to destroy unions, who tried to destroy co-operatives, who did their best to destroy local 

government, a thing that no other party would every indulge in,” and I quote from the Star-Phoenix of 

November 6, 1961, when this founding convention or amalgamation convention met (I am not sure what 

it was). 

 

“At the CCF and NDP convention in Regina, it was held that they as a party should organize 

municipal elections.” 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

44 

That they should bring party politics where there have never been party politics in the history of this 

province, where neither Conservative nor Liberal would stoop to bring in party politics. In my own 

constituency, where of course even the socialists are sensible people, we wouldn‟t think of bringing 

party politics into our local government, and I don‟t think there are very many across the way, Mr. 

Speaker, in spite of that convention, in spite of those leaders who are so hungry-power-mad, that they 

would do anything to stay in power. I don‟t think there are very many of those who are honorable back- 

benchers that would stoop to bring politics into the local government arena, who would vote for a man 

because he belonged to a political party, whether or not he was capable of carrying out the office or 

councillor or school trustee. I hope there aren‟t and I trust there aren‟t. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I sit down allow me to say that I will support the amendment and I will not support 

the budget. 

 

Mr. J.H. Staveley (Weyburn): — I have no intention at this late date of attempting to cover the entire 

budget speech which was so ably presented by the Hon. Provincial Treasurer. This was done in a very 

capable manner by my hon. colleague, the member from Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) and other members 

of the opposition. 

 

However, there were a few items and some rather glaring ones on which I would like to comment, but 

before doing that I would like to take a moment or two to do three things: 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, I too would like to add my personal sympathies to Mrs. McIntosh, to those that have 

been expressed before this afternoon, on her sudden sorrow and on the sudden passing of the late Hon. 

L.F. McIntosh. 

 

I might say, Mr. Speaker, that the late Mr. McIntosh was the first minister of this government with 

whom I became acquainted when I was carrying certain civic responsibilities in the city of Weyburn, and 

later with the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association. Mr. McIntosh was always most friendly 

and co-operative to me. I have at all times had a very high personal regard for him, and I am sure he will 

be missed not only by members of his family and the members of this legislature, but also by his many 

friends throughout the entire province. 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

45 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to add my congratulations to those already expressed to the Hon. 

Provincial Treasurer for the very fine presentation he made of his rather complex document. I even 

admired his tie, Mr. Speaker, which from this distance glowed with splendor and was one of the few 

bright spots connected with the budget. 

 

Third, I think it was yesterday afternoon, I was interested in one or two statements made by the Hon. 

Minister of Municipal Affairs, one particularly when he said that the was proud of the success that this 

government had made in its efforts in the business world. Of course this is a matter of personal opinion, 

Mr. Speaker, and I must admit that my opinion does not coincide with his. He mentioned the fact also 

that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation had reduced the power rates so terrifically. Well, it just so 

happens that I have here three power bills on domestic rates. One for the city of Calgary, one from the 

city of Edmonton and one from the city of Estevan in our own province. These are all small bills, Mr. 

Speaker. The rate in the city of Calgary is 1.05¢ per kilowatt, the rate in the city of Edmonton is 1.48¢ 

per kilowatt, the rate in the city of Estevan is 2.1¢ per kilowatt. Now the difference between 1¢ and 2¢ 

may not seem very great but here we find that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation rates are twice what 

they are in the city of Calgary, and 35 per cent greater than they are in the city of Edmonton. I think that 

this is just another example, Mr. Speaker, of the fact that government is not as efficient in business as 

private enterprise is and the members of the opposition have said this many, many times. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am not particularly interested in personalities in politics; I am much more interested 

in policies of government — but there is a connection between these two to this extent, that the 

personalities responsible for these policies must accept the responsibility for their actions as individuals, 

and so I am not going to make any comments whatsoever with respect to the national situation, but I 

would like to confine my remarks entirely to the provincial scene. I would like, in beginning my 

comments on the budget, to refer to a statement the Hon. Provincial Treasurer made concerning private 

investment. He said this: 

 

“Another serious weakness may lie in the field of private investment. Although industrial production 

has been increasing, there is some fear that the increase may not be great enough to provide any 

substantial stimulus to new investment capital.” 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

46 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this reference of course is to the national picture, but if it is true nationally how much 

more does it apply to our own province. I want to quote just a few figures from the budget speech and I 

think you will realize why I am concerned about private investment, which is so sadly needed in this 

province. And I am sure you will appreciate, Mr. Speaker, that these are not my figures — these are 

figures that are contained in the budget booklet and are the figures of the government. Primary and 

construction industries down $1 million from three years ago; manufacturing down $11 million form 

three years ago; utilities down $3 million from three years ago; trade, finance and commercial services 

down $1 million from three years ago; housing down $16 million form three years ago. Now these 

figures reflect a decrease in private investment in Saskatchewan and do you wonder, Mr. Speaker, why I 

am concerned about this situation. But I am not the only one that should be concerned. Certainly every 

hon. member across the way should be much more concerned than I am because these hon. gentlemen 

are responsible for this situation. These are the people whose avowed intention it was to destroy an 

economy based on private capital, and it was their leader, their former leader, who described those with 

investment capital as “hucksters and quick buck artists.” That was a sad day for Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. I think even the former Premier realized that he had gone too far, because he changed his tune 

and he said, figuratively speaking, that there is room for everyone and that the soundest economy is that 

based on government capital, co-operative capital and private capital. As far as major private investment 

capital is concerned, he might just as well have recited that old nursery rhyme, “Come into my parlour, 

said the spider to the fly.” Could my hon. friends in the government hope that private investment capital 

would come into this province as it should under these conditions, when its position is so insecure due to 

the attitude of this government, to the type of legislation we have and also to the possibility of 

government subsidized opposition? I think that the figures that I have just quoted have given the answer, 

and that this situation will not be corrected until the proper political climate is provided. That will never 

be provided by a socialist government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think that my hon. friends in the government side of the house are living in a fool‟s paradise today — 

their house of cards is just falling about their ears and they don‟t even know it, or maybe they do. 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

47 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Staveley: — I would respectfully suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the policies which this government has 

promised, and nothing else, are responsible for this deficit budget. These policies are responsible for my 

being in the legislature today and they will also be responsible for the hon. lady and gentlemen presently 

sitting on your left, to be sitting on the right hand of Mr. Speaker, after the next election — and that may 

come sooner than some people think, too. 

 

The Hon. Provincial Treasurer also suggested that in Saskatchewan our economic prospects will again, 

and I quote, “Be conditioned by the state of the national economy, and by the vagaries of the weather.” 

Since agriculture is the largest single unit in our economy, we all realize how vulnerable we are to the 

whims of nature, which determine our crop returns. We have no control over nature, but I would suggest, 

Mr. Speaker, that as a government, the hon. members across the way are in a position to make many 

changes and to have some control over these other factors. Because they could do this by constructive 

policies — policies which could strengthen our society and our economy instead of weakening them, and 

they are being weakened. The largest public debt in the history of Saskatchewan, deficit budgets — are 

these signs of economic strength? The so-called welfare state being promoted by this government, and 

this “cradle-to-grave” policy is weakening the moral fibre of our people and the hon. members across the 

way know this — but they encourage it. They are not interested in a strong self-reliant people, they are 

interested in a strong autocratic government, a socialist government. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Staveley: — We are a young province in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, with untold wealth in our 

fields and in our forests and with untold wealth lying beneath our fields and forests. But what about our 

people — the lowest rate of population growth in the Dominion of Canada except possibly Prince 

Edward Island and the people that we are losing are our young people, as was pointed out earlier by the 

hon. member for Humboldt. We are young province, and with the proper leadership by government we 

could also be a strong province. But we are not getting the leadership, and we will not get the kind of 

leadership we need, from the present government. Mr. Speaker, we 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

48 

need bold policies which will encourage private enterprise and which will not stifle them. We need bold 

policies which will bring major private investment capital into our province. The wheels of economic 

progress would then turn again in Saskatchewan, and our young people would not be deprived of their 

right to remain in the province of their birth. Now if the hon. members of the government had the 

interests of the people of Saskatchewan really in their hearts they would probably resign their positions 

today. But they will not because they know that the Liberal Party will form the next government. The 

people of this province will then be in a position to see the difference between the milk-and-water 

leadership which is being given by this present government and the dynamic leadership of responsible 

government with free enterprise as the basis for the economic development of this province . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You boys won‟t even be the opposition. 

 

Mr. Staveley: — . . . which we are missing today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would now like to draw your attention to some of the results of the crown corporations as 

shown on page 12 of the budget booklet and covering the budget speech. There are some very interesting 

situations here. Certainly I was interested in them and I think that the hon. members of the government 

will also be interested in them. I note that the advances at the year end total $8,352,688 and the surplus 

for the year totalled $854,729 which, on the basis of these figures, shows a net profit of 10 and a fraction 

per cent. This makes very nice reading but of course this does not include the power corporation or the 

Saskatchewan Government Telephones, so let‟s lump them all together and get the complete picture. We 

find that the advances at the year-end amounted to $388,378,330 and the surplus for the year amounts to 

$24,325,180 and this is not quite so good. This is only 6.35 per cent. But, Mr. Speaker, this is before any 

interest charges whatsoever and we don‟t know what the interest amounts to and so as usual we do not 

have the full story of the operation of the government. 

 

A week ago I asked two very simple questions in this house and I have not received an answer to either 

one yet, and they were very simple questions. I wanted to know what the accumulated investment capital 

of the crown corporations amounted to as of March 31, 1961 and I just wanted to know the amount of 

interest that was 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

49 

 

charged to or paid by the crown corporations during the fiscal year of 1960-61. Certainly with all the 

planning experts that this government employs and with the elaborate and expensive administrative set 

up, did the hon. minister mean to say that he cannot get an answer to two simple questions like this 

within a week‟s time? What kind of records does this government keep? Or is this just another case 

where the government doesn‟t feel that it is in the best interest of the people to know these things and we 

will not get the answer. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I would draw the hon. member‟s attention that those questions that he asked are still on 

the motion paper as an order for return, but they are still before the house to be debated at a later date, so 

we can‟t debate them at this stage. 

 

Mr. Staveley: — I appreciate this and I will not be making any more comments — except that I would 

have expected that I could have had the answers within this time, Mr. Speaker. But I think that maybe 

we can get part of the answer without any help. If my hon. friends in the government want to check the 

list of debentures issued in 1961, I think they will find there are $12 million of debentures at 5¾ per 

cent, $22 million at 5½ per cent and $16 million at 5 per cent. I think that we would be quite safe in 

using a 5 per cent interest charge in this case, Mr. Speaker. So what do we find? Instead of a $24 million 

surplus on borrowings of $388 million, we have a surplus of only $5 million, or less than 1½ per cent. 

This is not based on the capital investment — this is only based on the borrowings at the end of the year, 

and I would suggest that if the whole truth were known there might not be any returns at all on the 

original capital investment. 

 

Let us just take a look at some of these individual crown corporations to see what we find. Let us take 

the Saskatchewan Transportation Company first. Here we find borrowings of $1,450,000 and a surplus 

of $69,778, before interest. But at 5 per cent there would be a legitimate interest charge here of $73,500. 

And so this crown corporation actually operated at a loss of about $3,000 instead of a profit of almost 

$70,000. 

 

Now let us take the famous timber board, with borrowing of $3,877,000 and a surplus of $71,541. Now 

the interest which should have been paid on these borrowings 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

50 

or at least charged to the corporation in that fiscal year would have been $193,850. And so this timber 

board actually operated at a loss of $122,309 instead of a profit of a little over $71,000. 

 

Then there is the Saskatchewan Guaranty and Fidelity with borrowings of $365,688 and a surplus of 

$24,209 — before interest. Interest payable here at 5 per cent would amount to approximately $18,250 

and so we have a surplus of less than $6,000 instead of a little over $24,000. You know, Mr. Speaker, I 

found a very interesting situation in connection with the Saskatchewan Guaranty and Fidelity and I 

would refer you and the hon. members of the government to the annual report of this company for 1961. 

On page 2 you will note here that the insurance premiums on government properties in Saskatchewan 

grew from $4,680 in 1960 to $46,780 in 1961, an increase of over $42 thousand dollars. In other words, 

Mr. Speaker, public funds were used to create a surplus for this company of roughly $6 thousand from 

an actual operating deficit of $36 thousand. Now I have always said, and the members of the opposition 

have also said, that the people of Saskatchewan have never had a true picture of the operation of these 

crown corporations and I am more sure of this than ever after looking at this budget. I would respectfully 

suggest that the hon. members of this government just take off and throw away the rose-colored glasses 

they have been looking through at this budget, and take another look at the budget in the light of cold, 

hard facts, because they are not fooling anybody but themselves. 

 

I would like to take just a quick look at the revenue side of the budget, Mr. Speaker. I have had a look at 

these figures — checked them over and they are listed as revenues by major source, I believe, for the 

fiscal year ending March 31, 1952-61. I was not particularly interested in a comparison of revenue by 

years, but I was interested in the source of these revenues and I was shaken by what I found. What an 

artificial base on which we build a provincial economy! I would refer you to page 28 of the budget 

booklet and to the chart at the top of the page which is so very attractive to the eye but which is so 

devastating to the mind. I am going to liken this chart at the top of page 28 to a clock because it is so 

very obvious that time is running out for my hon. friends across the way. At the top of the clock — at 12 

noon, we find that 20.66 or approximately 1/5 of the total budget revenue comes from the education and 

health tax — 1 o‟clock approximately 1/7th of the budget revenue comes from the gasoline tax. At 3 

o‟clock about 1/8th comes from the 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

51 

 

natural and mineral resources of the province of Saskatchewan. At 4 o‟clock 1/12th of all of our budget 

revenue comes from liquor profits which are mostly taxes again, and at 5:30 about 1/20th from motor 

license — another tax. From 6 or a little past 6 o‟clock to 7:30 slightly over 10 per cent of the budget 

revenues listed as other revenues and then from 7:30 on, the rest of the day, between ¼ and 1/3 of all of 

our budget revenue comes from federal, provincial tax collection arrangements — more taxes. 

 

Do you know what this means, Mr. Speaker,? This means that less than ¼ of all of our budget revenue 

comes from our natural wealth and production. The balance, over ¾ of approximately $175 million, 

comes from the pockets of the farmers, the business and professional men, salaried workers and from the 

teapots that their wives keep in the kitchen cupboards. That is a fine basis for a provincial economy, isn‟t 

it? If ever an economic house was built on sand it is the economic house of Saskatchewan, built by this 

socialist government. 

 

I have heard a lot of talk since I have been in the legislature about togetherness and I think this afternoon 

my hon. friend from Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) dwelt on togetherness at some length. But I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that the most enlightening example of togetherness is shown right here in this budget. When the 

government says that our net debt is $19,500,000 and our interest is $22 million, I think that is about as 

cosy as you could hope to get. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Staveley: — Now, Mr. Speaker, very little has been said in this budget, or in the budget debate, 

about the sharp increase in the budget of this year over the last — an increase of approximately $25 

million which we must find somewhere to pay for the irresponsible dreaming of this government. The 

hon. ministers and members say that the people of this province should feel privileged to pay this extra 

$25 million in taxes but I feel that these figures represent a privilege without which our people could do 

very well. Let us examine some more of these government figures and try to find some economic basis, 

or some reason, for spending an additional $25 million. I think that we would hope to find an increase in 

our economy to justify the actions of this government, but what do we find? My hon. friends across the 

way tell us that industry is expanding in a wonder way — that 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

52 

the crown corporations are pouring money into the treasury and taking the tax lead from the shoulders of 

our people and that our oil and mineral production is booming. Well, I am very glad to see that our 

mineral production is booming. Well, I am very glad to see that our mineral production is up almost $9 

million from about three years ago. But our spending is up about $41 million in that same time, Mr. 

Speaker, and in that same time our private investment is down about $32 million — our commodity 

production as shown by your own figures is down in that same time $184 million — and here is 

something that should really shake my hon. friends across the way — personal incomes within the past 

year have dropped by $198 million. Now, Mr. Speaker, where do you think that the people of 

Saskatchewan are going to find the money to pay all these taxes which the government says we should 

feel so privileged to pay. 

 

I want to say just a few words about taxes before I close this and I want to refer to just one more 

statement made by the Hon. Provincial Treasurer during his budget presentation. I want to quote as 

follows: 

 

“I can readily anticipate that some hon. members will oppose it, and if I am correct they will oppose it 

on three main grounds, namely that the taxes that are levied are too high, that the borrowing program 

is too large and that the level of services to be provided is loo low.” 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Staveley: — That statement, Mr. Speaker, I accept as being absolutely correct. We do think that the 

taxes are too high; we do think that the public debt is too large; and we do think that the level of services 

is too low. The Hon. Premier and the Hon. Provincial Treasurer have both either said or implied that 

members of the opposition have stated that services to be supplied without taxes — and I challenge 

either one of them or any member of the government to state one instance when any member of this 

opposition has ever said that services could be supplied without taxes. I think the hon. gentlemen across 

the way are just a little bit mixed up, Mr. Speaker — it was their former leader who coined the phrase 

„without money and without price.‟ 

 

We have been told in this house that the opposition stated that it would reduce taxes. This we 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

53 

 

will do, Mr. Speaker. We have been told in this house that the opposition has stated that it will maintain 

an increase in services and this we will also do. We have been told in this house that the opposition has 

stated that it will reduce the public debt and this also we will do, Mr. Speaker. The hon. ministers and 

members of the government have either deliberately or inadvertently omitted the key to the solution of 

the economic plight in which we find ourselves in the province of Saskatchewan today. And that key, 

Mr. Speaker, is the burning and consuming desire of this socialist government to perpetuate itself in 

power — and that purpose has been carried out in a program of waste and extravagance by this 

government, paid for by the people of Saskatchewan, and by the creation of unnecessary and high 

salaried jobs for many of its friends. I would suggest that this will be changed. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Staveley: — This afternoon we have been travelling on probably the roughest highway in 

Saskatchewan — our financial highway and I think it is only fair to warn the hon. members of the 

government that the road is washed out just about 2¼ miles ahead — and I sincerely hope that they will 

stop this irresponsible spending before we are all wrecked. 

 

Now I think, Mr. Speaker, from what I have said this afternoon, I am sure that there is no doubt as to 

how I feel concerning this budget, I shall vote for the amendment. I will not support the motion. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT: HAZEN ARGUE’S NOMINATION 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege before the minister starts, I wonder if I might 

speak on a point of privilege. I am sure my hon. friends would be interested to know that Mr. Argue on 

the first ballot received the Liberal nomination in Assiniboia by a 10-1 majority. 

 

Opposition Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 

Hon. A.G. Mr. Kuziak (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this 

debate I want to first associate myself with the other members of the house in extending my personal 

sympathy 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

54 

to Mrs. McIntosh and the family. Mr. McIntosh was one of the finest, kindliest and most diplomatic men 

that I believe I have ever met in my life. He was loved and highly respected by all who knew him, he 

will be missed and remembered by thousands of people in the province. 

 

Since this is the first time that I have had the opportunity to rise in the debate, I want to congratulate you 

on your elevation to the high office of Speaker. You have already over the past few weeks proven 

yourself more than worthy of the confidence that we placed in you. 

 

I want to take this opportunity to congratulate our new and youthful Provincial Treasurer. He made a 

magnificent job of preparing and delivering his first budget speech. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — Mr. Speaker, as usual following the bringing down of the budget, the financial 

critic starts out with the debate and since then many from both sides of the house have participated. The 

debate I understand will be concluded this week. 

 

May I take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, of expressing my candid impressions on the participants that 

have already taken part in this debate. The opposition speeches, as far as I am concerned, have been 

loaded with wild exaggerations, inaccuracies and half-truths. The opposition seems to be instructed to 

follow about the same line of attack and the line seems to be criticize, undermine and sabotage and 

repeat the same process over and over again. They seem to have taken the attitude, pay no attention to 

being accurate or in any way substantiating your statements, pronouncements or charges. On the other 

hand from the government side you have heard a number of minsters refuting some of the outstanding 

inaccuracies and the inconsistencies of the opposition always with supporting facts and records. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Wonderful! 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — And then they go with the program of their department. I intend to do the same 

thing in this debate. The MLA‟s from the government side of the house have given an intelligent report 

on the popular programs of their constituency and then again if they deviated to the other social fields, 

they usually gave supporting 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

55 

 

authority or record to substantiate their statements or declarations. Every member of the opposition who 

has taken part in the debate has come out repeating taxes, taxes, taxes . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — There are 1,200 of them Alex. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — . . . and I notice that even the new member from Weyburn (Mr. Staveley) has 

followed the same line. The opposition again is hoping to convince the people of Saskatchewan that they 

are paying more taxes than any other province in Canada. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — True . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — By the time I get through I will prove with facts that that is an absolute falsehood. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say this, that I believe that all taxes in every province of Canada have been 

increasing and they have been increasing, I will repeat again, since 1946, when the federal Liberal 

government lifted price control in Ottawa and allowed these sky-rocketing costs and taxes. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Oh! Alex, we are not back to that. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — I know that the opposition is trying in this house as well as on the hustings, to get 

over to the people in Saskatchewan that the increased taxes are a peculiarity of this province only, of the 

province of Saskatchewan. I am going to say that increased taxes are as common as increased costs have 

become under a Liberal-Conservative capitalistic society. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — The financial critic opening the debate stated the hospitalization tax lately was 

increased by 37½ per cent. A half truth, the actual truth is that the hospitalization family tax rose from 

$35 to $48 but $8 was for the purpose of capital hospital construction . . . 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

56 

Mr. Thatcher: — What is the difference, the tax went up. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — It is in a big difference, it was a new service. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — The tax went up. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — And the truth is that the actual hospitalization increased from $35 to $40 or 14½ 

per cent increase and not 37½. Again he did not inform the house that the sister province of Manitoba, 

when the federal hospitalization scheme came into effect, the first hospitalization tax that they brought in 

that province was $72 and not $48 or $40. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — No 5 per cent sales tax though. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — Considerably higher under a private enterprise government. They do not admit or 

inform the house that for Alberta there is a 4 mill levy on all the land of the province of Alberta. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — No 5 per cent sales tax. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — . . . for the purpose of hospitalization. You know the financial critic talked of the 

damaging effect of high taxes on our economy, but he didn‟t say anything about the damaging effect of 

sky-rocketing costs of goods by private enterprise. He wouldn‟t admit that for example the increase in 

hospital construction, 300 — 400 per cent was damaging the economy. 

 

Now leaving that, Mr. Speaker, I am going to go the revenues within this budget. The budget shows a 

total revenue of $171,826,000, and I want to point out that just over 50 per cent of this amount is 

collected in the form of major direct taxes by this government. Some $68 million, and the hon. member 

for Weyburn (Mr. Staveley) just a few minutes ago made mention of some of these taxes, these major 

direct taxes are $35½ million from education and health tax, or will come in; $25,400,000 from the 

gasoline tax and some $8,100,000 from motor licenses — 50 percent of the revenues comes from these 

direct taxes that we levy on the people of Saskatchewan. 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

57 

 

Now let us compare these taxes to the very same taxes levied in the other provinces of Canada. I am 

going to take the gasoline tax that brings in some $25,400,000. Gasoline taxes, and I am going to admit, 

went up from 7¢ to 14¢ in Saskatchewan, 100 per cent increase, this is to provide improved highways 

and grid roads. The financial critic mentioned how bad increasing taxes are on our economy, but again 

he did not point out that there were other increases. For example, private enterprise increased 

automobiles from $1,200 — $3,600. Doesn‟t this have a damaging effect on the economy of the 

province or the country? Combines to the farmers rose from $2,800 — $8,000 — 200 — 300 per cent 

increase. Would this not have a damaging effect on the economy of the province? I am going to go back 

to gasoline taxes. Let us see how these taxes compare with the other provinces of Canada, and see 

whether the statement that was made even a few minutes ago by the hon. member for Weyburn that the 

Saskatchewan provincial tax levy was the highest in Canada is true. May I point out that Newfoundland, 

a Liberal province levies a gasoline tax of 19¢ a gallon, the highest in the Dominion of Canada. Mr. 

Speaker, the hon. member for Humboldt (Mrs. Batten) doesn‟t have to go to West Germany. Talk about 

Canada, talk about Quebec, a Liberal province, New Brunswick, a Liberal province, Newfoundland, a 

Liberal province, talk about Canada not West Germany where the United States has poured in billions of 

dollars to open it up as a show window for the world. 

 

Now going on with gas tax, let‟s take a look at Nova Scotia, a good Conservative province. This 

Conservative province levies a gasoline tax of 19¢ a gallon and has the honour of being even with the 

highest Liberal province. 

 

Government Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — Let us take a look at New Brunswick, another Liberal province. This Liberal 

province levies a gasoline tax now of 18¢. It has the honour of being second highest in the Dominion of 

Canada, the first two of the three Liberal provinces of Canada, the first highest and the second highest 

gasoline tax in the Dominion of Canada. If it is bad on the economy of Saskatchewan to have a 14¢ on 

the gallon, how bad is it in the Liberal province to have 18¢ and 19¢, the highest in Canada and the 

second highest. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — You had better go over and liberate them. 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

58 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — What utter nonsense emanates from the left side, Mr. Speaker. A leopard never 

changes his spots, and I am going to say that a Liberal government in Saskatchewan would not be any 

different than a Liberal government in any other province. 

 

Mr. Guy: — It would be better than the one we‟ve got. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — I want to substantiate my facts. This information, any member of legislature can 

obtain. It is available from the Chamber of Commerce. The opposition has confidence in the Chamber of 

Commerce, therefore, the authority must be right and agreeable to them. 

 

The Liberals in the legislature and on the hustings, criticize automobile and farm truck license fees. May 

I say that automobile licenses have practically not changed at all since 1944. Farm truck licenses have 

been changed slightly in the small trucks and a little more in the more heavier ones. I am going again to 

refer to this automobile manual of the Chamber of Commerce and they claim that their source was the 

Dominion Bureau of Statistics and give you some cold hard facts on licenses in the other provinces. For 

example on automobile licenses on a new Chevrolet, Ford or Plymouth in Saskatchewan you all know 

the cost is $15. In Liberal Quebec it is $29, twice as high, and the heaviest license taxation. The next 

province in line from the highest, you and I see the hon. member from Humboldt (Mrs. Batten) is 

agreeing, moving her head up and down, that it is right. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Not from you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — We go on to the next province and it is the Liberal government of New Brunswick 

with a license on that same Chevrolet or Ford automobile of $26, the second highest in the Dominion of 

Canada. 

 

The next in line is Conservative Manitoba and immediately behind that is Liberal Newfoundland with 

$18 for that same license. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Thank God we were delivered in 1944. 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

59 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — Now let us take a look and compare the farm truck license in the provinces, and 

here I am going to compare to the three prairie provinces of Canada. If you take a ¼ ton farm truck with 

a gross weight of 5 thousand pounds, the license in Saskatchewan is $10. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — What would you do with a ¼ ton? 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — I mean a half ton truck with a 5,000 pound gross weight. In Saskatchewan the 

license is $10, in Manitoba it is $12.50, 25 per cent higher than Saskatchewan, in Alberta it is $15, 50 

per cent higher than Saskatchewan. 

 

Let us take another farm truck, 7,500 pound weight, in Saskatchewan the farm truck license for that one 

is $12.50, in Manitoba it is $20, or 60 per cent higher than Saskatchewan, in Alberta it is $25, 100 per 

cent higher than Saskatchewan. 

 

Let us take another one, 14,000 pound truck, I stated that we had increased the licenses on the heavier 

ones. I am going to take one of the really heavy ones, 14,000 pound gross farm truck, in Saskatchewan 

the license is $20, in Manitoba it is $32.50, or 62½ per cent higher than in Saskatchewan. In Alberta it is 

$35, 75 per cent higher than in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, according to the statistics here that I have gathered from the Dominion Bureau of Statistics 

it shows that as far as automobiles and farm truck licenses, we have the lowest licenses in the Dominion 

of Canada. If, as the financial critic stated, the taxes are curtailing the economy of the province, then 

there is the least curtailment in the province of Saskatchewan, as compared with other provinces in 

Canada. 

 

I want to go a little further, I am going to read from a newspaper clipping. This comes from the Prince 

Albert Herald of November 9, 1961 and I am going to read it, in connection with vehicle revenue rises. 

The newspaper says, and I quote: 

 

“Saskatchewan derived a revenue of $29,630,000 in 1960 from motor vehicle registration, licensing 

of vehicles, drivers and motor fuel taxes, reports the Dominion Bureau of Statistics. Average cost of 

taxes and licenses required to operate a motor 



 

March 20, 1962 

 

 

60 

vehicle in Canada in 1960 was $108, little change from the 1959 average of $107. It cost 

Saskatchewan people an average of $88 as compared to $87 the year before.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it just backs up all the figures that I gave that in Saskatchewan the fuel taxes, the license 

taxes, the drivers‟ licenses are the lowest in Canada. All put together Saskatchewan is $20 less on the 

average that it is in Canada. Therefore, if Saskatchewan is $20 below the Canadian average, there must 

be provinces in Canada that must be $20 above the Canadian average. If you will take a look at those 

provinces, they are the three Liberal provinces. 

 

Now I see, Mr. Speaker, that my time is up. I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:27 o‟clock p.m. 


