



















































Hansard: February 22, 1962


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

1st Day 

 

Thursday February 22, 1962 

3:00 o’clock p.m. 

 

This being the day appointed by Proclamation of His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor, dated the 

Twenty-fourth day of January, 1962, for the meeting of the Third Session of the Fourteenth Legislative 

Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan, and the Assembly having met: 

 

The Clerk of the Legislative Assembly informed the Assembly that he had received a communication 

from the Hon. Everett Irvine Wood, Speaker of the Legislative Assembly announcing his resignation. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor entered the Chamber and took his seat on the Throne. 

 

The Hon. Mr. Walker, Provincial Secretary, then said: 

 

“I am commanded by His Honour, the Lieutenant-Governor to inform you that he does not see fit to 

declare the causes of the summoning of the present Legislature until later today, when the Legislative 

Assembly shall have elected a Speaker, according to law.” 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor then retired from the Chamber. 

 

The Hon. Mr. Lloyd, addressing himself to the Clerk, moved seconded by the Hon. Mr. Brockelbank, 

that Frederick Arthur Dewhurst, Esquire, Member for the Constituency of Wadena, do take the Chair of 

this Assembly as Speaker. 

 

He said: It is again our duty to elect a Speaker. Consequently, I propose, as one fit and proper to occupy 

the position of Speaker the name of Mr. Frederick Arthur Dewhurst, member for Wadena. 

 

All of us will have in mind that the office of the Speaker is the highest gift of the legislature. The 

Speaker is our presiding officer. He is of course much more. It is his responsibility to reconcile 

differences of opinion with regard to procedure. In so doing he exercises not his own but our authority, 

which we as a 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1962 

 

 
2 

legislature have given to him in order that there may be provided here orderly and fair discussion. In 

addition to this he is the custodian of the rights and the privileges of all members and of each individual 

member. He is the interpreter of the traditions of the parliamentary procedure which are vested in this 

legislature. All of us are aware of the fact this tradition is indeed a valuable part of our heritage. His 

main responsibility is to preserve that tradition and to respect and to protect those rights. Our 

responsibility is none the less because we have given it to him. 

 

The Speaker must be one who is familiar with the procedure of the house, and this is difficult and 

complicated. All of us will agree that any mere mechanical application of this procedure is indeed not 

enough. He must also be one who fully appreciates the principles of parliamentary government on which 

the procedure is based. This legislature, I know, will want to exemplify those very precious principles of 

the freedom and fairness of speech; of the respect for others; of the respect for truth, and particularly of 

the recognition of the value and indeed the necessity of honest and vigorous debate with regard to public 

issues. 

 

When I placed Mr. Dewhurst’s name before you in this regard I do so because I repose in him my 

confidence of practice. He is one of our senior members in the legislature in terms of service. In regard 

to that service he has taken a place as chairman of many of our senior committees. 

 

Mr. Clerk, It is my pleasure then to move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Brockelbank, that Frederick Arthur 

Dewhurst, Esquire, member for the constituency of Wadena, do take the Chair of this assembly as 

Speaker. 

 

The question being put by the Clerk, it was 

 

Resolved, That Frederick Arthur Dewhurst, Esquire, do take the Chair of this Assembly as Speaker. 

 

The Clerk having declared Frederick Arthur Dewhurst, Esquire, duly elected, he was conducted to the 

Chair, where, standing on the upper step, he returned his humble acknowledgements to the Assembly for 

the great honour they had been pleased to confer upon him by choosing him to be their Speaker. 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1962 

 

 
3 

Thereupon he took the Chair, and the Mace was laid on the Table. 

 

3:15 o’clock p.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor re-entered the Chamber and took his seat upon the Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker then addressed His Honour to the following effect: 

 

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR: 

 

The Legislative Assembly have elected me as their Speaker, although I am but little able to fulfil the 

important duties thus assigned to me. 

 

If, in the performance of those duties, I should at any time fall into error I pray that the fault may be 

imputed to me and not to the Assembly whose servant I am. 

 

The Hon. Mr. Walker, Provincial Secretary, then said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, 

 

I am commanded by His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor to declare to you that your words and actions 

will constantly receive from him the most favourable construction. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor was then pleased to open the Session with the following Speech: 

 

MR. SPEAKER, 

 

MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY: 

 

It is my privilege to welcome you to the Third Session of the Fourteenth Legislature of Saskatchewan. 

 

The rate at which the national economy expanded during 1961 was not significant. This resulted from a 

slowing down of capital investment in Canada, relative declines in consumer expenditures and crop 

failures in certain areas. The most important single feature which affected the economy of our Province 

last year was the 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1962 

 

 
4 

failure of the 1961 harvest. Wheat yielded only 8.3 bushels per acre — the lowest per acre yield since 

1937. Net farm income was less than one-half the 1960 figure. Higher Canada Wheat Board and Prairie 

Farm Assistance payments and substantially larger livestock marketings accounted for an increase in 

farm cash income. 

 

The almost total failure of the hay crop required emergency action to be taken. Special incentive 

payments were made to encourage the harvesting of cereal crops for fodder. A programme to assist 

farmers to transport haying equipment, fodder and feed grain was initiated. As a result there was no 

serious liquidation of cattle herds. My Government appreciates the co-operation of the farmers, local 

government officials and the publicity media as well as the financial contribution made by the 

Government of Canada. 

 

Indication of the growth of the non-farm sector of the provincial economy are plentiful. New industries 

were established. Expansion of a number of established companies took place. Manufacturing output 

was well above the level reached the previous year. The total value of mineral production increased. The 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation met the increased demand from home and industry for more electric 

power and more gas. Electrical generating output increased by more than twenty-one per cent. Thirty per 

cent more natural gas was consumed. More than nine thousand new telephone installations were made. 

 

Saskatchewan has not escaped the impact of chronic unemployment which has plagued Canada in recent 

years. Although there are fewer persons in Saskatchewan unemployed than there were one year ago, 

some twenty-seven thousand of our labour force are without work. Far-reaching action on the part of the 

Government of Canada is needed to create employment in all regions. My Government has deliberately 

followed, wherever possible, a policy of creating and maintaining general employment. It has attempted 

to alleviate the hardships which unemployment imposes on families and children. Government 

construction contracts provide for work to carry on during winter months. Community work creating 

campaigns are encouraged and assisted. Municipalities have been urged to take advantage of financial 

assistance available for the construction of public works projects in off-season periods. Technical and 

vocational training facilities have been expanded. Additional classes have been established to enable 

unemployed workers to improve their educational qualifications. 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1962 

 

 
5 

The past year has seen notable advances in the development of our natural resources. Excellent progress 

has been made on the South Saskatchewan River Project. Construction of the main dam and reservoir 

proceeds on schedule. Detailed planning of the most suitable land for irrigation development is 

advancing. Plans for the development of the five hundred mile reservoir shoreline for recreation and 

other purposes are receiving attention. Proposals for further substantial provincial investments in the 

multi-purpose project will be submitted for your approval. 

 

Emphasis continues to be placed on the conservation and development of our agricultural resources. 

Additional community pastures have been established. Additional acreage has been prepared for 

irrigation projects. To meet a water shortage emergency special crews were engaged to locate sources of 

water and to fill farm and municipal water reservoirs. You will be asked to approve amendments to the 

Department of Agriculture Act to facilitate the study of prospective water development projects. 

 

The Roads to Resources Programme has been responsible for the opening up of resource areas. The 

Otosquen Road will be completed this year. The Hanson Lake Road is now open to winter travel. 

During the past year the Governments of Saskatchewan and Canada shared the costs of an aeromagnetic 

survey over nineteen thousand square miles at the north end of our Province. This programme will 

continue on the same co-operative basis. 

 

More than a million acres of forest land were ravaged in the worst fire season experienced in our history. 

Timber operators are co-operating in salvaging some thirty-five million board feet of timber damaged in 

the fires. 

 

The growth and development of our Province has demanded the further improvement and extension of 

highway and municipal roads. At the present time approximately sixty-five per cent of provincial 

highway traffic is carried on dust-free roads. Through the Municipal Grid Road Programme, Rural 

Municipalities have received assistance to construct more than seven thousand miles of all weather 

roads. New regulations fixing higher load limits for trucks will improve the efficiency of the trucking 

industry. 

 

Rural Saskatchewan has become a better place in which to live. The electrification of farm homes and 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1962 

 

 
6 

smaller communities has contributed more than any other single programme to increasing the standard 

of living of people in the rural areas. Few farms enjoyed the use of electric power when this programme 

began in 1949. Today electricity is available to virtually all occupied farms in the settled portions of the 

province. 

 

One hundred and twelve communities have been served with natural gas. Provision will be made to 

extend the gas system to serve additional communities. 

 

Material and services required for water and sewer systems were made available to almost three 

thousand five hundred farmers under provisions of the Family Farm Improvement Programme. In 1961 

twenty-six urban communities were assisted in the installation of community water and sewer systems. 

 

The programme to improve and modernize telephone service advanced further in 1961. Grants available 

from the Province enabled rural telephone companies to improve their standard of maintenance and to 

replace existing lines. A revised Rural Telephone Act will be presented for your consideration and 

approval. 

 

Emphasis continues to be placed on providing additional and improved recreational areas in the 

Province. Plans for the further development of newly created provincial parks will be submitted for your 

approval. During the past year over one hundred municipalities participated in the establishment of 

fourteen Regional Parks. You will be asked to appropriate funds which will continue to assist in the 

development of local recreational areas. Amendments to the Provincial Parks and Protected Areas Act 

will be introduced. 

 

The co-operative movement continues to grow and serve the needs of the people of Saskatchewan. Of 

special interest is the growth of co-operative activity in the northern part of the Province. Last year 

forty-four co-operatives and credit unions in this area did a combined sales and service business in 

excess of two-million dollars. Good progress is being made in the transfer to co-operative ownership of 

provincially owned fish filleting plants and trading stores in the north. 

 

Credit Unions continue to expand. The twenty-fifth anniversary of the establishment of the Credit Union 

movement in Saskatchewan will be observed this year. Congratulations are due to those leaders and 

members who have made it possible for this movement to grow and to contribute so much to our 

Province. A new Credit Union 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1962 

 

 
7 

Act will be introduced for your consideration. 

 

My Government has decided to proceed with development of boundaries for the use of all units of local 

government. In developing policies on local government, the Province has worked closely with the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association 

and the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, all represented on Local Government Council. 

Legislation relating to new forms of local government will be introduced. 

 

In recognition of the increasing standards and costs of education you will be asked to vote a larger sum 

than ever before for school grants. The Legislature will be asked to approve plans to maintain the Grade 

Twelve Scholarship and the Teachers’ Scholarship programmes. Provision will be made for the erection 

of additional modern school buildings in Northern Saskatchewan. 

 

With the continued expansion of the Province’s resources skilled tradesmen and technicians are required 

in greater numbers. The Government is taking advantage of assistance under the Federal-Provincial 

Technical and Vocational Training Agreement to meet this need by developing new programmes and 

facilities. Greater attention will be given to the need for vocational training in agriculture. 

 

My Government is continuing to give strong emphasis to the importance of preventive medicine and 

public health services. The entire area of the Province is now being served by full-time public health 

personnel. 

 

Saskatchewan’s mental health programmes have resulted in the modernization of mental hospitals, the 

establishment of training schools for mental defectives and the addition of psychiatric wards and mental 

health clinics to certain general hospitals. Important psychiatric research supported in large part by 

government funds is being carried out at the University. This record of achievement has had 

international recognition and has gained for our Province a reputation as a leader in the field of mental 

health. 

 

During the public hearings in Saskatchewan of the Royal Commission appointed by the Government of 

Canada to examine the need for health services, my Government urged the establishment of a federal 

programme for the 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1962 

 

 
8 

provision of comprehensive health services including the provision of medical care benefits on a prepaid 

insurance basis. 

 

The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Commission was appointed early in January and is 

proceeding as expeditiously as possible with preparations for the introduction of a plan of medical care 

insurance. This plan will represent an important social advance for our people. 

 

Saskatchewan welcomes the increase which has been granted to recipients of the Old Age Security 

pension. Provisions will be made to share the payments of Old Age Assistance, Blind Persons’ 

Allowance and Disabled Persons’ Allowances up to an amount of sixty-five dollars for those persons 

eligible. 

 

The Province, through construction and maintenance grants, continues to assist local organizations to 

provide adequate housing for their senior citizens. At the beginning of this year there was 

accommodation in self-contained housing units and hostels for nearly four thousand persons. 

Construction had been started on additional projects providing similar accommodation. 

 

The second report of the Royal Commission appointed by the Government of Canada to study 

transportation problems has been made public. This report will be studied in detail in order to ascertain 

the effect which changes recommended by the Commission would have on Saskatchewan. To assist in 

this study the Government will seek the co-operation of farm organizations, the co-operative movement, 

the business community and local governments. 

 

During the past year the Government, the University of Saskatchewan and the City of Regina engaged 

the services of a renowned Architect-Planner to prepare a proposal for the development of 

approximately one thousand acres surrounding Wascana Lake in our Capital City. This proposal 

provides a unique concept for an area for government, education, recreation and the cultural arts. 

Legislation will be introduced at this Session to establish a Wascana Centre Authority to implement 

these proposals. 

 

Saskatchewan will celebrate its sixtieth anniversary in 1965. In 1967 our nation will celebrate its 

centennial year. These are occasions which the people of Saskatchewan will wish again to 

commemorate the achievements of the past on which an even greater future can be built. 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1962 

 

 
9 

Legislation will be introduced establishing a committee to assist and encourage the adequate observance 

of these events. 

 

It is gratifying to note that the possibility of establishing a grid for the long distance transmission of 

electric energy from one province to another is to be the subject of a conference involving the 

Governments of Canada and the Provinces. Saskatchewan proposals in this field, which have been 

formulated over the past several years, together with the experience acquired in exchanging power with 

Manitoba, will be made available to this conference. 

 

As the area of public activity increases there are occasions when all levels of government must acquire 

an interest in property owned by the individual citizen. In some cases resort must be had to the 

machinery of expropriation many procedures of which have remained basically unchanged since 

constitutional government was first established. My Government proposes to review these procedures 

during the next year, and in doing so will seek to enlist the co-operation of various professional and 

community organizations with a view to evolving uniform and fair procedures for determining and 

protecting the property rights of the individual citizen, when expropriation becomes necessary. 

 

The Mechanics’ Lien Act was first passed in the Province in 1907. My Government believes that it is 

now appropriate to review this legislation in the light of modern economic conditions. The Honourable 

Harold F. Thomson has been commissioned to hold hearings on this question and to formulate 

recommendations. 

 

My Government has taken part in a series of conferences with the Government of Canada and the other 

provinces for the purpose of seeking a means of amending our constitution in Canada. It is hoped that 

some mutually acceptable formula can be devised to make this possible. My Government views these 

negotiations as an opportunity and a challenge to devise a constitutional framework which will 

guarantee human rights, give due recognition of the two cultures in Canada, and upon which we can 

build social and economic progress. 

 

My Government believes that any proposal to incorporate a new amending formula into our Constitution 

should be made known as widely as possible among the citizens of our country and should be proceeded 

with 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1962 

 

 
10 

only after they have had ample opportunity to consider and discuss such proposals. 

 

For the second year in succession My Government has introduced a new technique for obtaining capital 

for its construction programmes. Each week the Province is selling one million dollars of ninety-one day 

Treasury Bills, the first time that any Canadian province has undertaken the regular issue and sale of 

such securities. The Province will repeat in 1962 the sale of Saskatchewan Savings Bonds. 

 

The Public Accounts for the last fiscal year, together with estimates for the year beginning April 1, 1962 

will be submitted. 

 

I leave you now to the business of the Session with full confidence that you will favourably discharge 

your duties and responsibilities. May Divine Providence continue to bless our Province and guide the 

Legislature in all its deliberations. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor then retired from the Chamber. 

 


