




















































Hansard: March 14, 1963


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

21st Day 

 

Thursday, March 14, 1963. 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On Orders Of The Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are proceeded 

with I would like to draw your attention to the group of school children, in the west gallery, from the 

North Park School in Saskatoon, with their teacher, Mr. Fogarty. I am sure all members will join with 

me in saying how delighted we are to have them with us today, and hope their trip to the capital city will 

be an enjoyable one, and an informative one. 

 

SHORTAGE OF DENTISTS 
 

Mr. W.R. Thatcher (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, may I direct a question to 

the Minister of Health? Is the government considering any action, or has it taken any action in an effort 

to alleviate the very critical shortage of dentists in the province at the present time? 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, the positive action to alleviate the shortage 

of dentists in the province at the present time, was announced by the Provincial Treasurer in his budget 

address, and was mentioned a good number of times during the course of the debate. I refer, of course, 

to the very extensive bursary program; other proposals for providing more extensive dental services are 

currently under discussion between the government and the College of Dental Surgeons. 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

2 

ESTABLISHMENT OF VETERINARY COLLEGE 
 

Mr. J.E. Snedker (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I wish to ask the 

government when we may expect the tabling of correspondence relative to the establishment of a 

veterinary college, agreed to by most of this house, on February 21st, last. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders, Mr. Speaker, this is one of those orders 

which requires not only consent on the part of the government, but the obtaining of consent on the part 

of a number of other governments, in other parts of the country, the federal government may 

conceivably take some time, I’m not sure where it is at the moment, but will be facilitated as much as 

possible. 

 

EXTENSION OF CATTLE BRAND INSPECTION 
 

Mr. Thatcher (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day I wonder if I might direct a 

question to the Minister of Agriculture. Has the department given any consideration to the extension of 

cattle brand inspection, to cover all parts of the province, in an effort to protect farmers and ranchers 

more effectively from rustling. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I don’t think that question comes within the scope of orders of the day, it could 

be asked on estimates in committee work, but it is not a question which comes within the orders of the 

day. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Very respectfully, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of cattlemen who think it does. They 

are losing cattle very frequently from rustling. The farm union and other bodies have asked. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I realize there may be a lot of significance and importance to the question, but 

it does not comply with the rules for questions on orders of the day. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Very respectfully, Mr. Speaker, could I ask you in what way does it not comply. 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

3 

Mr. Speaker: — A question on orders of the day must be something of an urgent nature which couldn’t 

wait for forty-eight hours for an answer. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Where does it say that? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — In Beauchesne. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — Before the orders of the day are proceeded with, Mr. Speaker, I 

should like to draw to your attention a statement that was just made by the hon. member for Rosthern 

(Mr. Boldt) a few moments ago. He was asking me where we get all these pretty girls in the gallery, I 

should like to mention that these girls come from Coderre high school. They are 45 in number, girls and 

boys, of course, they are accompanied by their teacher, Mother Mary Edward, and another teacher, Mrs. 

Bourget. There were also driven down here in 9 cars, and some of the drivers, like Mr. Johnston, who is 

the vice-president of the fastest growing credit union in the North American continent, (as quoted in the 

credit union papers), as well as Mr. Ferrari, Mr. Cosette, Miley Wurgess, Pierrot Pepin, Nelson, and Mr. 

Mitchell. 

 

You will notice, of course, that they are sporting a brand new jacket, and these students are very, very 

proud of it. The green and the gold; the green represents the green grass of our prairies in the early 

spring, and the gold represents the golden wheat as it sort of waves on the prairies in the fall. 

 

There is probably some embarrassment to one of the students in there, I am also quite proud introducing 

them, but my daughter being one of them, I felt that I should take a particular moment in introducing 

them. 

 

Their principal has arranged a very interesting tour of some of the businesses in town and places, such as 

the creamery, steel mill, airport, restoration centre, museum, and many more. But I am sure that their 

stay here, short as it may be this afternoon, will be most interesting and educational. And I am sure that 

all members of this house will welcome them here today, and I am sure that their stay will be very 

pleasant, because I will be leading off in the debate this afternoon. 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

4 

Mr. Coderre moved: 

 

That this assembly urges the government of Canada to speed up the authorization and the making of 

loans by the Farm Credit Corporation. 

 

He said: I make a request to this assembly that we urge the government of Canada, to speed up 

authorization and the making of loans by the Farm Credit Corporation. 

 

Now, there are several reasons for my making this request, and I strongly recommend that this assembly 

unanimously assent to the motion. 

 

I should probably qualify my reasons for introducing this resolution — one of the reasons is the farmers’ 

inability to easily qualify on leases as well — another thing that prompted me to present this resolution, 

was the fact that the government has been, remiss in its duty to assist the small farmer in this respect. 

Time and time again, Mr. Speaker, half-section farmers have applied for farm leases for crown lands, 

and the administration has, more or less, often giving lame and weak excuses and arguments that the 

farm is not an economical unit. 

 

Now, I ask you, Mr. Speaker, and the members of this house, how in the world can we expect the farmer 

to develop his operations into an economical unit, if he doesn’t have a chance to start somewhere? 

 

Now, here are some of the reasons given by the administration why they won’t help and assist in leases. 

For example, the argument given is the inability of a farmer, as a farm manager. Well, Mr. Speaker, how 

can a person show his ability as a farmer, if he is not on a large enough unit to support a family? It is 

rather difficult to be economical and show exceptional good management if the unit is too small. 

Inadequate resources is often-times another reason given by the administration. How can you have 

adequate resources if it takes all you earn on this uneconomical unit to earn your living? The need for 

land and the facility of the land to the person who requires it, is another question that is often raised. Is 

not the need more pronounced when the unit is too small, when the home unit is too small? Is there not a 

need required for additional land? For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, and many more that I probably could 

mention, let’s consider the resolution. 

 

I think the blow that very definitely convinced me that I would present the resolution in question, was a 

weak, lame, answer on the part of the provincial government in a letter written to the Canadian Legion, 

in regards to assistance to a farmer in order to get a step by step assistance, 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

5 

in order to put him on an economical unit. 

 

I have a letter here, Mr. Speaker, which deals in why it qualifies me for that. Here is one of the answers: 

 

“Our committee felt that in regards to Mr. A. (and I am only quoting an excerpt from the letter) whose 

obligation did not specify what resources he has with which to operate the land immediately, his 

managerial ability as a successful farmer could not be considered, in view of the fact that he was 

already 47 years old.” 

 

Isn’t that a weak answer, Mr. Speaker? When a person applies for such assistance — in view of the fact 

that he is 47 years old. How can a farmer, whose farm unit is too small to be a complete success, when 

his age is a factor, he cannot get assistance. This man had spent five years of his life in the service. Was 

that held against him? 

 

On the other hand, we have a different situation. “That his managerial ability as a successful farmer 

could not be considered in view of the fact that he was already 47 years old.” 

 

But then on the other hand, we have another farmer, 46 years old, who applies for a lease, and what 

happens? His age was a factor in this particular case, but on the other hand we have a different situation. 

He is 46 years old, he applies for a lease, but it was denied him and was given to a person who is 70 

years old and given a 33 year lease. In the one case he is too old and in the other case he is too young. 

One is too old; one is too young. This makes us wonder just what is wrong and you wonder why . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — On a point of order. I’d like to know if the hon. member is talking about the federal 

farm credit corporation, or what is he talking about? 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Mr. Speaker, I said when I started this speech that I wanted to qualify the reasons why 

I bring in this resolution. I had to show the discrepancies, and the ways and means that this government 

has made, to put that effect on the farmer, and that is the only recourse he has, is by going and by 

applying through the farm credit corporation. Now I would like to bring into focus, the Farm Credit Act. 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

6 

The original reason, Mr. Speaker, that the act was brought into effect, was to assist the small farmer, to 

establish himself on an economical unit. It’s predecessor, the Canadian Farm Loan Board, came into 

being in 1929, where appointments were made to the board, but the Act itself came into effect in 1927. 

 

At one time in this province, Mr. Speaker, we had a farm loan board, but this administration has done 

away with it. You’ve done away with it. Surely, Sir, if we are anxious to maintain the continuity of our 

family farm, a young man must have the opportunity to start somewhere with a small unit. You can’t 

start from nothing and become a completely economical unit. We have had several usable methods. We 

have had farm leases from farmers to other people themselves; this for some reason or another is not 

being carried out as much as it used to be done in the past. Then we have had farm leases by the 

government, and the buying of property on one’s own merits. These have been dropped out one by one. 

Now, what with the higher cost of living it became more apparent that a young man could not save 

enough money to start on his own. He had to look somewhere to have an opportunity to better himself. 

 

Well, the act worked very well from 1929 to 1957, then inflation developed. In 1957-58-59, it was 

necessary to increase the maximum amount of the loan from the ceiling of $15 thousand to around $25 

thousand and the farm credit corporation came into being. 

 

Now, I ask you and the motion is almost self-explanatory why should an appraiser walk around a field, 

after the snow is gone, in order to properly appraise the value of the land? I’m sure that the farm credit 

corporation could check with the assessment board this province, in conjunction with a rural municipal 

council and all information that they would require, insofar as the productivity of the land, the ability to 

grow, the conditions, could be had, and then we wouldn’t have to wait until spring. 

 

Now, as I mentioned the Act went very well. We introduced this new Act in this farm credit corporation, 

but there are still discrepancies in it, and there were quite a few. Now, the Act as it was, originally, made 

it almost impossible for a half-section farmer, or a three-quarter section farmer, to get a loan for an extra 

small unit. This has been proven by this administration, where they established assistance in that respect 

under the co-operative credit society. The administration of the Act stated that the half-section farmer 

purchasing another quarter-section of land, it would not put him on a sound 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

7 

economical unit. Now, I submit that in the normal process of trying to improve yourself, and put 

yourself in an economically sound farm unit, you have to do that on a step by step basis. 

 

Now, Hazen Argue, the M.P. for Assiniboia, saw this situation arise and has successfully convinced the 

people at Ottawa, that changes should be made to allow quarter-section, or half-section farmers, to 

qualify. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — And then there was a question of an appraisal fee of $50.00 that was charged in order 

to get your land when you applied for a loan. This $50.00 was not returnable. In some cases it did create 

a hardship and particularly where he did not get the land. Again, the hon. member for Assiniboia, at that 

time in the House of Commons, did convince the House of Commons that it was not a good thing, and 

they did reduce the amount to $10. Some people are concerned with the farmers’ plight and condition 

and are doing something about it. Now from then on it was a simple matter for a farmer to qualify, but 

the finalizing of the authorization by the loan was a different matter. There was a question of the 

appraisal value. This is quoted from the Act: 

 

The appraisal value shall be based on the value of the land for agricultural purposes, insofar as 

possible, and on the productive value as shown by experience and no other basis. 

 

Well, then, how can an appraiser going on the land in the spring, know what the productivity of that land 

is, just by having a look at it? Your municipal men, Mr. Speaker, are in a better position to give proper 

recommendations, and this appraisal has always been left to spring. And it has created undesirable 

effects. Many a farmer has applied for a loan, he is already qualified for it, but then he has to wait until 

spring before it is appraised. During that time, the person who wants to sell can pick up another farmer 

who has already got the cash, and the land is sold under this individual’s nose. 

 

This delay is creating inconvenience and is not truly promoting the intent and purpose of the Act. I think 

that we must do something that we can assure the opportunities for these farmers to establish themselves 

on an economic unit. This is something that we have always been concerned with, Mr. Speaker, and I 

submit to this house, Mr. Speaker, that the more farmers that we have on the land, the better it will be 

for us businessmen and laborers as well, because the whole economy will benefit by it. 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

8 

We have in this province a good understanding of the assessment and there is no reason why we do not 

take advantages in this respect for the appraisal of the land in the spring. It is sad, indeed, that our 

provincial government is not doing what it should, that is without political bias in favoring of farm 

leases. The only avenue, Mr. Speaker, of settlement that farmers have in establishing themselves on a 

more economical basis is through the well established farm credit program, put on the statutes by a 

Liberal government in Ottawa, and improved by farm interested persons in Ottawa since. 

 

There are still some weaknesses in the Act, Mr. Speaker, and our resolution, which is self-explanatory, 

will go a long way to help. 

 

Therefore, I move, seconded by Mr. McFarlane: 

 

That this assembly urges the government of Canada, to speed up the authorization and the making of 

loans by the Farm Credit Corporation. I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ESTABLISHMENT OF A DENTAL COLLEGE 

 

Mr. Foley moved: 

 

That this assembly respectfully requests that the government, in consultation with the Board of 

Governors of the University of Saskatchewan, immediately give consideration to the establishment of a 

dental college in Saskatchewan with a course leading to the degree of doctor of dental surgery. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the establishment of a dental college in Saskatchewan, will solve one of the 

greatest and most pressing problems, that we have in our province at the present time. The major 

elements of that problem being the high level of dental disease, universal need for dental care, and the 

critical shortage of dental personnel. 

 

In a brief submitted to the committee on medical care, in January of 1961, the Saskatchewan Dental 

Association, assessed the problems in these words: 

 

Dental disease is rampant across Canada. Tooth decay has been seen in one year old children. By the 

age of 19, nearly 99 per cent of our population have suffered some type of dental disorder. Despite 

these appalling facts, only a minority of the families have the opportunity of one visit a year to the 

dentist. In Saskatchewan during 1960-61, it is 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

9 

likely that no more than about 28 per cent of our population will visit a dentist for even the most minor 

type of treatment. 

 

If we examine the dentist population ratio across Canada, we find that at the end of 1962, Saskatchewan 

ranked only eighth, having about one dentist for every 4700 people. To achieve the Canadian ratio 

which is one dentist for every 3100 people, Saskatchewan would require 298 dentists. To achieve British 

Columbia’s ratio, which is one dentist for every 2400 people, and the highest in Canada, Saskatchewan 

would require 385 dentists. Yet at the present time in Saskatchewan, we have only 191 dentists on our 

registry, three of whom practice outside Saskatchewan, and several others whose practice is restricted, 

because of advanced age; thus leaving us with about 175 full time dental practitioners, to serve the needs 

of our whole province. 

 

To achieve the Canadian average, we would require immediately an additional 123 dentists; to achieve 

British Columbia’s average we would require an extra 210 dentists. 

 

The most alarming feature of all, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that during the last ten years, the number of 

dentists in Saskatchewan, has decreased by 11 1/2 per cent and has not kept pace with the number of 

deaths, retirements, and relocations of dentists to other provinces. 

 

If we examine the concentration of our present dental personnel throughout the province, we find an 

ever increasing number practicing in our larger cities, and more and more of our larger towns without 

dental service of any kind. 

 

At the present time 47 dentists are located in the city of Regina and 38 dentists in the city of Saskatoon. 

Prince Albert and Moose Jaw are next in line with 13 dentists each; North Battleford has 8; Yorkton and 

Swift Current, 7; Weyburn and Maple Creek, 3; Lloydminster on the Saskatchewan side and the city of 

Melville, 2; while Estevan, one of our Saskatchewan cities, has only one dentist at the present time. 

 

Among our larger towns, Melfort is in the lead with 4 dentists; Maple Creek, 3 dentists, but one of them 

is a regional dentist for the health region; Humboldt, Tisdale, Canora, and Nipawin, each have two, and 

thus we find that approximately 141 dentists are centred in our cities, comprising then 80 per cent of the 

supply of dentists for the province, centred in our cities; about 15 more in the next half dozen larger 

towns; leaving only about 20 dentists residing in other parts of the province. 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

10 

The situation in north-western Saskatchewan, where one dentist at Meadow Lake, and one dentist at 

Shellbrook, are attempting to serve a very large rural area, is, I believe, typical of many other parts of 

the province as well. 

 

People from my constituency of Turtleford, and from surrounding areas, must drive nearly 100 miles, in 

some cases, for dental treatment, and must often wait several months to obtain an appointment. 

 

For many years, folks in my area, enjoyed the services of a very fine dentist in the community of 

Turtleford. When he left, about 1957, every effort was made to obtain a replacement, but to no avail; 

even though an excellent office and residence continued to be available. This same difficulty has been 

experienced by many communities throughout the province, and serves to emphasize the critical 

shortage of dentists today. 

 

In view of this it may be somewhat surprising to learn, Mr. Speaker, that the number of Saskatchewan 

residents entering dental college in Canada, and in the United States, compares very favorably with that 

of other provinces. During the past four academic years, from 1958 through to 1961, Saskatchewan 

ranked third or fourth in the ratio of dental students to population. In 1961-62, forty-eight residents of 

our province attended dental college, with 29 of them enrolled in the university of Alberta, and 12 in the 

university of Manitoba. Unfortunately, however, the majority of the graduates, originating from 

Saskatchewan, are not returning to the province and this fact largely explains the decline of the number 

of dentists presently practising in Saskatchewan. 

 

I might say that the end of the graduation year of 1962 we received in Saskatchewan seven additional 

dentists but during the same period of time we lost five due to retirement or dentists leaving the province 

for other places. Our net gain, then, Mr. Speaker, was two. 

 

There may be a number of reasons why we are not getting our fair share of graduate dentists, 

particularly in the rural centres of our province. It is often difficult to find suitable office facilities in 

towns and villages. The distances from their former colleagues and from centres offering post-graduate 

courses makes further formal and informal education in dentistry difficult and expensive. Professional 

and personal associations are established in other provinces around dental faculties. Many of our 

graduate dentists marry and set up homes around 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

11 

centres such as Toronto and Montreal, where they have obtained their training. All of this, Sir, points to 

the urgent need for encouraging more Saskatchewan residents to enter dentistry, to attract more 

graduates to our province, especially our own dental students, and to assist dentists to assist practice in 

our towns and villages in order to bring about a favorable distribution of dental services in particular 

throughout the rural areas of our province. 

 

In this regard a bursary program was initiated in 1959 by the Department of Health, to provide four 

bursaries of $1,000 each to students in the fourth and final year of dentistry. These bursaries were 

repayable by the recipient in the form of a term of service of two years of practice in the province, other 

than in the four major centres. In the first year of the program only four students applied and all were 

granted bursaries. In the second and third years only two applied in each of those years and the four 

students received bursaries. Thus of the six students that I referred to, four are currently practising in this 

province as a result of the benefits of those bursaries. 

 

It is regrettable that in each of those two years, two bursaries went begging for the lack of applicants. It 

is indeed gratifying to note this year, Mr. Speaker, that the government has announced that it will 

provide 35 dental bursaries of $750 each for interested students. And I trust that some of these bursaries 

will be made available to those in their second and third years of training, rather than in their final year 

only. 

 

The next logical step which I believe should be taken by the government is the establishment of a dental 

faculty at the University of Saskatchewan. Many of the prospective students would be Saskatchewan 

born and thus many of the graduates would elect to stay and practice in their home province. 

Saskatchewan dental students could obtain their dental training much more economically here, instead 

of travelling to other provinces. We could have a post-graduate centre, a dental school would facilitate 

the training of auxiliary personnel for technical work under the supervision of a dentist. And, finally a 

scholarship program could be set up to further encourage enrolment in the study of dentistry. 

 

Thus, in September of 1961, the College of Dental Surgeons in Saskatchewan made the following 

recommendation in their brief to the advisory planning committee on medical care, and I quote: 

 

“It is the opinion of the College that the number of students entering the dental profession would be 

increased if students did not have to travel beyond the provincial borders of this province to receive 

their education. The number of students which would settle in the province after graduation 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

12 

would increase substantially. If a new type of dental auxiliary is trained in Saskatchewan, this training 

should only be given at a recognized dental school. This would necessitate the development of a dental 

school within our own province. 

 

The College, therefore, recommends that consideration be given to the establishment of a dental 

faculty at the University of Saskatchewan.” 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, we have six dental faculties operating in Canada at the universities of 

Dalhousie, McGill, Montreal, Toronto, Alberta and, most recently, Manitoba, which was opened in 

1958, and whose experience serves very well to illustrate the very beneficial effect on the recruitment of 

dental students, by the establishment of a school within the boundaries of their own province. A year 

before Manitoba opened their school they had only 21 students in training. By 1961-62 the year in which 

they had their first graduating class of dentists, the number of Manitoba residents enrolled in all four 

years of dental training had risen to 79, of whom 71 were attending the University of Manitoba. This 

substantial increase in enrolment moved Manitoba from ninth to first position among the provinces in its 

ratio of dental students to population. Thus in 1957-58 Manitoba had a ratio of 2.9 students per 100,000 

of population, which increased in 1961 to a ratio of 8.7 students per 100,000 of population after the 

dental faculty was established. In contrast Saskatchewan in 1957-58 placed only seventh with a student 

population ratio of 3.9. In 1961-62 they had 5.2 and were in fourth place in all of Canada. So you can 

see, Mr. Speaker, the influence that a dental faculty had in the province of Manitoba, 2.9 students per 

100,000 in 1957 and that rose to 8.7 students, and I am referring to dental students taking training of 8.7 

students per 100,000 of population in 1961/62. 

 

Even with a vigorous recruitment program and substantial financial assistance it is very doubtful if the 

present six dental schools could accommodate a greater number of applicants from our province. 

 

1962 enrolments were up about 15 percent over 1961. Taking all the schools together, their first-year 

enrolment of 320 students in 1961-62 was only 18 less than full first-year capacity which at that time 

was 338 students. Manitoba had a full enrolment of 33 first-year students; Alberta only lacked 5 to meet 

their full capacity of 55 first-year students. I am now advised that all of the schools are operating at full 

capacity during this present term and that some applicants were turned away at several of our dental 

colleges. 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

13 

It is important also to note, Mr. Speaker, that even though the University of Alberta has doubled the 

capacity of its school recently, and the University of British Columbia is in the process of building a 

new dental college at the present time, enrolment trends indicate that there would be little if any room 

for prospective dental students from Saskatchewan in ensuring years. The fact that in the present dental 

class at Manitoba out of 93 students, 71 of those are from within the borders of Manitoba, indicates 

clearly that most schools enrol mainly from their own geographic area. Many students also are unwilling 

to enrol in Eastern schools because of the added expense and the distance factor involved. The 

establishment of a dental school in Saskatchewan would provide an important opportunity to relate 

dental training to dental practice in our province, since many students plan their future careers sometime 

prior to graduation and would have first-hand knowledge of our own opportunities here at home. 

 

In addition, any form of public dental preventive and treatment service for our children could benefit 

most materially from the establishment of our own dental faculty. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, may I turn for a moment to the matter of cost. 

 

I am sure that all hon. members will realize that the establishment of a dental faculty at our university 

will be a costly undertaking. But an expenditure which I submit, Mr. Speaker, will bring more benefits 

to every man, woman and child in this province than any other project that I could think of. 

 

I have here with me a report of costs prepared by Dr. J.W. Neilson the Dean of Dentistry at the 

University of Manitoba. I would like to review its contents briefly at this time. Now, I realize that the 

construction in Manitoba took place several years ago, 1958-59, and that costs have risen since but these 

are the figures submitted by Dr. Neilson with regard to the construction of the dental faculty in 

Manitoba. Land $130 thousand; construction $1.3 million; equipment and furnishings $600 thousand; 

for a total of $2.03 million. Further equipment and building modifications in the following year raised 

the total for the physical plant and equipment in 1959 to $2.16 million. 

 

The operation expenditures for the year 1961-62 for the operation of the Dean’s office, for clinical 

operations in the library $196.35 thousand; for the teaching of dentistry $55.34 thousand; restorative 

dentistry $79.99 thousand; the teaching of the basic sciences $82.01 thousand; the total operation costs 

$413.69 thousand. 

 

During the same period of time Dr. McNeill mentioned a clinic income of $6200, $2700 from the 

installation of dentures by student dentists at the clinic. 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

14 

The University of Manitoba also received $12 thousand capital expenditures and $38 thousand for 

operating expenditures over a four-year period from the Kellogg Foundation. Dr. Neilson reports further 

that the Manitoba government has agreed to pick up the tab for the operating expenses in increasing 

annual amounts and that eventually they will provide a $15 thousand annual grant to maintain this 

school. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we all realize that the cost of construction, the cost of equipment, the salaries of 

professional staff have all risen in the past few years, and have risen since the Manitoba school was 

established, but I believe, Mr. Speaker, that a total cost figure of between $2 1/2 and $3 million is not 

unrealistic for a similar school providing similar facilities here at the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Several years must elapse in the erection of the necessary space for a dental teaching program; the 

recruitment of a faculty; and the four years of training for our first graduate dentists. Thus the cost can 

be spread over a number of years and would be one of the finest possible expenditures as one of our 

contributions as a province towards the celebration of Canada’s centennial in 1967. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in closing I am pleased to note that as recently as the 11th of February the College of 

Dental Surgeons met with our Minister of Health in discussions related to this motion. I was also pleased 

to note a further statement from the Minister of Health and the government stating that the establishment 

of a dental faculty is under serious consideration. The Minister is quoted as stating that the measures 

taken so far to ease the dental manpower shortage in Saskatchewan have fallen somewhat short of 

expectations. So, Mr. Speaker, I feel this is a very timely motion. Speaking to various officials of the 

Department of Health I learned that a good many communities have been in consultation with the 

minister on this matter. I could not too discuss dentistry at this time without paying tribute to the dentists 

and other officials throughout the province, the members of the Dental Association, who have given 

such fine service throughout the years. I know that all members here will join with me in expressing our 

gratitude to one of the finest professions in Canada today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Foley: — Thus, Mr. Speaker, in the interest of the many Saskatchewan communities who are 

without dental service, in the interests of our children whose dental health is such 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

15 

a precious commodity, in the interests of the present and future dentists in our province, I deem it an 

honor to move, seconded by my colleague the member for Melville, (Mr. Gardiner) that this assembly 

respectfully request that the government in consultation with the Board of Governors of the University 

of Saskatchewan immediately give consideration to the establishment of a Dental College of 

Saskatchewan with a course leading to the degree of Doctor of Dental Surgery. I sincerely trust, Mr. 

Speaker, that this motion will receive unanimous approval of all hon. members of our legislature. 

 

Mrs. J.E. Cooper (Regina City): — Mr. Speaker, I have listened with a great deal of interest to the 

address by the hon. member for Turtleford, (Mr. Foley). I know that the people of Saskatchewan are 

very gravely concerned with the shortage of dentists which is apparent in our province, and also in every 

province of the dominion of Canada. And I know that not only the people are concerned, the 

government is concerned too. A great deal of thought and consideration has been given to what would 

be the best possible method to overcome this difficulty of a shortage of dentists, and I was thinking as I 

listened to the member from Turtleford that if it does come about that in the future we do have a dental 

college in Saskatchewan I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that Regina campus would be a very suitable 

location for such a dental college. The medical college is in Saskatoon and I think that if a dental college 

is provided, Regina would be a very good location. 

 

Now, there are a great many things to be considered in this matter of a dental college and the whole 

matter of the shortage of dentists, and so, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say something further on it, and I 

ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

BRANCH LINE ABANDONMENT 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Thurston, (Lumsden): 

 

That this Assembly urges the Federal Government to continue to suspend all applications for branch 

line abandonment until a complete study has been undertaken by the Federal Government of all the 

social and economic consequences that would result. 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

16 

Mr. K.F. Klein (Notukeau-Willowbunch): — Mr. Speaker, in speaking to this resolution introduced 

by the member for Lumsden, (Mr. Thurston), I want at the outset to commend him for the fine 

presentation he made to this house in regard to rail line abandonment. I have also read the statement 

made by the Premier on the occasion of the federal-provincial conference in Ottawa on February 1, 1963 

and I would like to commend him for the remarks he made at that time. 

 

Now, I am happy that since these things have taken place we have received some assurance from the 

Prime Minister that piecemeal rail abandonment will not take place and that should give us some 

consolation to realize that we have a brief period when we might be able to do something about looking 

at the whole picture. 

 

I also realize that this resolution requests that a study be made and because it does it would indicate that 

the problem is an extremely complex one without an easy answer. We are today glibly making the claim 

that to ship wheat over long stretches by means other than rail supposedly would cost the farmer more. 

Now, it may be proven when this study has taken place that by a better or more centralized system of 

grain handling we may save enough in the grain handling to compensate for the losses that may take 

place as a result of the long haul in grain. And, therefore, because of these many factors that are 

involved and because the study has not taken place it is not appropriate at this time to express an opinion 

as to what ought to happen. 

 

However, I am afraid that by requesting the federal government only to look into this whole matter we 

may be overlooking the vital role that we here in Saskatchewan might play to cease abandonment of 

railroads. I have stated before in this house that I consider one of the tragic things that is happening is 

this migration of people from rural areas to city centres. Now, since 1956 this migration has totalled 

something like 65,000 people from the rural to the urban centres. This would, indeed, keep several rail 

lines busy to supply the people with goods and services. I am not suggesting that these 65,000 people all 

left the areas that are now affected by threatened rail line abandonment, some of them have come from 

those areas. 

 

I also think that this government, who are going to be expending $188 million on behalf of programs for 

the people, certainly can either begin trends in the province or halt trends that are taking place. This is 

indeed a huge economic force within this province. 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

17 

I think another reason why we are faced with this threat of abandonment of railroads is that the 

government programs over a period of years has been city centred. Now to illustrate what I mean by the 

influence that the program of the government can have in halting rail line abandonment, may I suggest 

that if the training school which is now located in Moose Jaw had been located in Willowbunch, or 

Rockglen, or Bengough, or any of the areas which are threatened by rail line abandonment, if that 

institution had been located there, this proposal of abandoning the rail line to that point would never 

have come up. This, I think, would necessitate our taking a good look at some of the programs we are 

pursuing in this province in order to see what we can do to stop this trend of rural migration to city 

centres and as a result suffer some of the threatened abandonment. 

 

I was pleased to hear the Minister of Health announce that in his approach to mental health he is now 

considering building smaller cottage type residences. This is commendable, indeed, because we in the 

opposition have proposed this move as far back as 1957 and I think we can still approve the policy 

today. So I hope when the Minister does undertake one of these projects he would give serious 

consideration to locating these cottage type mental institutions in our rural areas that provide so much 

beauty, space and particularly facilities that would lend themselves in operating some projects in 

connection with the mental home, such as a farm, golf courses, recreational projects in connection with 

it. Now if these centres are located in rural areas it will increase the population of that rural area, an 

increased population which requires goods and services to be hauled by rail or by truck or any other 

method would greatly assist in stopping this trend, both trends, killing two birds with one stone. 

 

Another government program that might consider establishing some centres in rural areas are geriatric 

centres. The peacefulness and quietness of the country would provide an ideal atmosphere for such a 

centre. And if it were located in a rural area it would assist once again the farmers living in that area who 

may be anxious to supply some of the food, eggs, poultry, whatever is necessary to keep an institution of 

that kind going. And again by increasing the rural population the shipments necessary to go to those 

centres would perhaps stop railroads from contemplating pulling up rail lines. 

 

One of the other programs which I think needs serious consideration, not only because of the 

administration angle of it, but because of the ultimate good it is doing for the humans who are so 

unfortunate to have to find themselves in such a position of having to take social welfare. Very often, 

today, people who find themselves in that unfortunate circumstance move into city centres and locate in 

tumbled down shacks and sometimes on the wrong side of the tracks, and all these things add up to so 

many strikes against them that it is 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

18 

difficult for unfortunate families in those circumstances to become accepted in the urban communities 

and sometimes they are referred to as people living in the backward or slum area and they have to 

overcome these things in order to provide their children with the proper education to make them 

contribute the necessary role that they ought to be playing in our society. Now I would imagine that if 

this government, together with the municipal governments, would take a survey of all the empty farm 

homes that are located in the areas now threatened and, together with the local government, look into the 

possibility of fixing up some of those farm homes and purchasing a few acres in conjunction with it, so 

that when a person finds himself in an unfortunate circumstance he has the option of taking up residence 

in a farm location, rather than having to move to a city centre, where this unpleasant environment may 

exist. 

 

We can well imagine that if in the sparsely populated areas we had more families living there, again, the 

threat of rail abandonment would not be so great. And I think ultimately too, that if we pursue a program 

of this kind, we will be doing more good in human values to people by locating them in an environment 

that is conducive to better standard of living. 

 

There are many other programs the government has undertaken to date, that I believe would be better 

done out in rural areas. The boy’s school for example, ought to, in my opinion, be located in a rural area. 

Which one of us has not thrilled when we read the tremendous good that was done by Boy’s Town, 

when these boys undertook to operate a farm, and I think you would do more good in rehabilitating 

these boys by giving them the responsibility of looking after the many and varied projects that can be 

undertaken in a rural area. 

 

Furthermore, they would be removed from the environment that may have caused them to wind up in the 

Boy’s school in the first place. 

 

There is one other thing, I proposed a year or so ago, that this government consider establishing a liquor 

board store in the town of Willowbunch. No consideration was ever given to this proposal; this is one of 

the towns that is now threatened by rail line abandonment. Now, because of your city centering all your 

things, this is another little straw that adds to the fire. 

 

You city-centre all your projects, and your programs, and as a result we see the depletion of rural 

population, as I indicated some 65,000; and if 65,000 leave the rural area, certainly the services that are 

necessary to provide them with the goods they need would perhaps require a railroad to remain in 

operation. 

 

There is one other aspect to this whole problem, and I think this government should not overlook it. And 

I urge 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

19 

them to make strong representation to the federal government for assistance in the building and 

maintenance of highways, that will, of necessity, have to bear the heavy burden if rail lines are 

abandoned. I think this may be the thin edge of the wedge you need to get federal participation in the 

total highway program. Certainly they cannot deny that if rail lines are abandoned, the provincial 

highways will be used a lot more by heavy traffic, than they are now, and for that reason, you would be 

able to present a very strong case to get assistance for building and maintaining those highways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, I might say that I am pleased to receive the assurance that piece-meal 

abandonment will not take place until an overall plan is arrived at. I also hope that this government will 

not sit idly by without bending every effort in working out their own programs to do some of the things 

that in my mind would help to stop this trend from rural to city migration of the population, and because 

of that migration we could avoid the threat of railroad abandonment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support the motion. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

FEDERAL AID TO EDUCATION 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mrs. Strum: 

 

That this house is of the opinion that the federal government should accept a larger share of the costs 

of education in Canada, particularly through an extension of the vocational training program to 1967 

and further aid to institutions of higher education. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I don’t wish to take up too much time of the house on this resolution, because I did 

speak on it the other day, but I have a few suggestions in addition to that, a few observations in 

connection with it, that I would like to make. 

 

You will recall that this house is of the opinion that the federal government should accept a larger share 

of the costs of education in Canada, particularly through an extension of the vocational training program 

to 1967, and further aid to institutions of higher education. 

 

I think I pointed out at that time, that we, on this side of the house, join with this resolution, in 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

20 

approving the program of co-operation between federal government and provincial government, in 

regard to vocational and technical schooling, we think it is a worthy program, and we are happy that 

Ottawa has seen fit to pay 75 per cent of the costs of construction of such schools, and 50 per cent of the 

cost of operating of these schools. 

 

I think I pointed out, and if I didn’t do so, I would like to point out now that we welcome the modest 

start that the province of Saskatchewan has made in this regard. I think that it is budgeted for some $5.8 

million to be spent on vocation and technical schools in the province, of this amount they will get back 

from Ottawa, some $4.3 million. We believe this is a good start. We believe that we should take every 

advantage possible of this program during its life. Therefore, I would like to see this government 

introduce a far more vigorous effort under this program, of getting those vocational and technical 

institutions established in the program while we can get this bargain of purchasing a dollar value for 

twenty-five cents. 

 

I pointed out too that Alberta had allotted a great deal more, practically $25 million for the construction 

of vocational and technical schools, of that amount, Ottawa will reimburse some $18 million. This is a 

great program to assist the provinces all across Canada, to establish these technical and vocational 

schools, not for the interests of the province, but for the interests of education in Canada as a whole. 

 

And I notice that the resolution says “accept a larger share of the costs of education in Canada”. Now I 

don’t know how wide the implication is in that portion of the resolution, but I would like, Mr. Speaker, 

to believe that it is wide enough, that we may suggest to Ottawa, that we believe that in the interest of 

education in Canada today, that we must look at education on the national level. And for that reason to 

build up education in Canada with the belief that Canada will only advance so far, and take her place 

among the nations of the world, insofar as her educational system permits her to do so. 

 

Therefore, education must be looked at on the broad scope of the national scene, and I for one see no 

fear of invasion of Ottawa in provincial rights in the field of education, if we extend it a bit further. 

 

I am convinced that we have had no invasion of provincial rights, in the vocational technical training 

school program, that this resolution deals with; we have had no invasion in provincial rights — Ottawa 

paying a percentage of the cost of operating our university and I think we can safely say to the Canadian 

people that we have opened the 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

21 

door in a broader aspect of co-operation between Ottawa and the provinces, in the national interests in 

the field of education. 

 

And for that reason I think that we should push even further. I think that the time has arrived when we 

cannot be content, worthy as this program may be, with sharing provincial and federal revenue only in 

restricted phases of education. 

 

I would like to see a co-operation here in the legislature and throughout the province, in joining with 

other provinces, in one voice, to ask Ottawa to contribute to the cost of education not only on the 

university level, or on the vocational technical level, but to share the costs of the level of primary and 

the secondary schools. 

 

I’m not going to move an amendment to the resolution, because I think the resolution is probably broad 

enough in scope, that we can cover these arrangements, but I do suggest, Mr. Speaker, that while we 

should put forth every effort to extend the life of this special arrangement for the construction of 

vocational and technical schools, we should be prepared in the interests of education, to look beyond 

that day, and to begin to work for the strengthening of the over all standard of education, by asking 

Ottawa to share with us in the expenses in regard to primary and secondary schools. 

 

I want to reassure the house again, as I see it, and I think as thoughtful Canadians see it, that we as 

Canadians have a broad enough spirit of co-operation and ingenuity, to sit down together and to work 

out a cost-sharing basis in the interests of education for all Canadians, on a national level. 

 

Therefore, I think that anyone who has any reservations or any fears regarding the invasion of provincial 

rights, should take consolation from the fact, that in the extent to which we have progressed today along 

this line, there has been no invasion of provincial rights and we can safely extend it to cover the field 

that I have mentioned and likewise without invasion of provincial rights. 

 

I do support the resolution, I would urge that it be taken in it’s fuller aspect and look into the 

ramification of this whole field of education, not only on the provincial but on the national level, and ask 

for and join with the other provinces so that we can present one voice in Ottawa, as Canadians in the 

interests of Canadian education, not in provincial, sectional, education. 

 

I understand some others would like to speak on this resolution, and I would like to give them the 

opportunity of so doing at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

22 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabaska): — I am pleased at this time, Mr. Speaker, to say a few words in support of 

this motion, asking for federal aid to education, particularly in the vocational-educational field. As you 

are aware, vocational training is becoming increasingly important in our attempts to prepare our Indian 

and Metis population in this province for job opportunities, as they are provided. 

 

In the northern part of our province, we have made some progress in providing recreational and 

vocational training for our residents. In some cases, the training is provided in the local community, in 

other cases we have programs where students are taken out of the community and given this training in 

larger centres. 

 

It has been mentioned by some members opposite on various occasions, that a new approach to 

education of our northern students is needed, and I believe that in most respects this is true. At the 

present time there appears to be two lines of thought in developing these programs. First, that we should 

be training our northern students for job employment outside of their natural environment, because the 

northern part of our province is already too densely populated for the number of resources available. 

 

The second line of thought is that we should provide training that will enable these people to secure or 

create employment in the north. I am afraid that at the present time I must support the second line of 

thought. I have enough faith in the future of northern Saskatchewan to believe that a northern 

development and economic program can be developed, that will in time not only provide work for all 

our Indian and Metis residents, but it will also be necessary to import workers from the southern part of 

our province. 

 

I know that the present government has failed miserably in this regard, but I will not admit that we 

cannot develop our northland until a liberal government gets the opportunity, 18 months from now. 

 

Therefore, I say that at present, we should wherever possible, be training our Indian and Metis residents 

for employment in an environment where they will feel at home, and at the same time the government 

must accept the responsibility of providing employment for these people. It is going to be difficult 

enough for these people to be integrated into our society, in an environment in which they are familiar, 

without asking them to tear up their roots, and move into surroundings entirely foreign to them. 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

23 

A successful vocational program depends on how practical it is, and for this reason, local people who 

are aware of the needs and customs of the local community, should give assistance in planning and 

setting up these programs of vocational and adult education education. Too often, programs are planned 

five hundred miles away from the scene, by people not aware of the local situation. 

 

I would like to give an example of an adult education program, planned by local residents, which 

promises to show how successful such a program can be. Several Metis and Indian men are presently 

attending an adult education in La Ronge, which is being offered by a local instructor, and this is a 

canoe building force. They completed their first canoe a couple of weeks ago, and offers to buy the 

canoe were received before they were half through constructing it, and since then, orders for five 

additional canoes have been received, with the result that they are looking for more men to help in the 

construction of this project. 

 

Now, a program such as this, is providing training and income at the same time, though it’s 

practicability cannot be overlooked. Programs such as this often cost considerable to set up, and for this 

reason it is entirely desirable that federal assistance be given so that these programs in as many 

communities as needed can have them established. 

 

Before closing I would like to say, that although emphasis should be put on practical, vocational, 

training, for our Indian and Metis students and adults, we must at the same time attempt to give as many 

as possible an academic education which will enable them to enter institutions of higher learning, from 

which they will graduate as teachers, nurses, engineers, doctors, bookkeepers, secretaries and so on. 

Because it is these graduates who, speaking the language and knowing the customs and the way of life 

of their own people, can make a tremendous contribution in speeding up the integration of these people 

into our society. 

 

There should never be one of these students denied the opportunity to make their contribution because 

they cannot afford to attend institutions of higher education. 

 

For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to support this resolution. 

 

Mr. J.E. Snedker (Saltcoats): — Mr Speaker, the resolution before the house in this debate reads as 

follows: 

 

That this house is of the opinion that 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

24 

the federal government should accept a larger share of the costs of education in Canada, particularly 

through an extension of the vocational training program to 1967 and further aid to institutions of higher 

education. 

 

Actually, Mr. Speaker, this resolution requests in addition to general assistance to education, that the 

federal government continue the present federal-provincial technical vocational training program 

agreement, under which arrangement Ottawa is paying presently 75 per cent of capital costs and 50 per 

cent of the operating expenses of technical vocational schools built under the agreement. The agreement 

expires on March 31 this year, and the resolution asks that it be extended to 1967, though personally I 

consider that assistance should continue as long as need can be demonstrated. 

 

I had hoped and expected the government would have taken more advantage of the agreement than has 

been done. I consider it most regrettable that when areas of need in our province could have been served, 

the agreements were not utilized to the greatest extent in the increased technical training of our youth, 

and I hope that the government will take prompt action and make the widest possible use of the 

agreements in the time still available before the expiry date. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am fully convinced that in this stage of our national development, the federal government 

should assume an increasing responsibility for general and higher education by means of unconditional 

grants with particular emphasis at this time on technical training, in order to increase and enhance the 

multiple skills of our people to the end that Canada may efficiently and economically produce high 

quality goods for our domestic and export markets. Moreover a versatile population strengthens our 

ability for defence, and an informed, well-educated people, dedicated to the preservation of 

self-government will ensure that this great conception shall not perish from the earth. 

 

In the past, administration of education has been the responsibility of the provinces, and they in turn 

have delegated administrative powers to our locally-elected school boards, and I believe rightly so, for 

local administration is more aware of need, more economical and more efficient than centralization, 

which is extravagant, wasteful and incompatible with out democratic traditions and ideals of 

self-government. 

 

I, personally, do not wish to see any encroachment in the field of administration either by the federal 

government upon provincial authority or by the provincial government upon the jurisdictions of local 

government. That, however, does not in any way remove the obligation of the federal government to 

provide unconditional grants to our province, for federal sources of revenue are derived from all Canada, 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

25 

from every economic sector and from Canadian citizens in general and well-trained students, regardless 

of where they received their primary and secondary, or their technical and academic training, are 

unquestionably an asset to all Canada under all conditions and under all circumstances. This is truer 

today than it was thirty years ago, at which time a child might be born, receive his primary, secondary 

and college education in the same province, and remain there to work all his life. Today, however, it is 

quite possible for a child to be born in Ontario, receive his primary education in Manitoba, his secondary 

education in Saskatchewan, his technical or academic education in British Columbia, and his first 

position in one of the maritime provinces. Years ago such changes would have been looked upon 

askance as signs of instability. Such is not the case today, for a modern and rapidly expanding economy 

demands movement of key personnel from one place of need to another. 

 

Today in Canada, we have progressed into high wage, short work week economy and our exports and 

finished products can only compete successfully in world markets against those produced in countries 

with low wage, a long work week economic structure if our people are highly skilled and our industries 

completely mechanized and fully automated. 

 

Only skilled technicians can operate and service industries of this nature. Hence, if we are to maintain 

and if possible improve our place in the export markets of the world, and in order to increase our wealth 

and maintain our high standard of living, it is essential that the great majority of our population, in fact 

all those capable and willing, receive the widest possible technical and academic training. 

 

For too long our country has been supplying unfinished products and raw materials to the markets of the 

world. Their manufacture in Canada would have strengthened our foreign exchange position and 

expanded both primary and secondary industry, thus removing unemployment, strengthening our 

economy, raising our standard of living, reducing our dependence on others and increasing our national 

status. Today, in every field of endeavor, technical training has become imperative. Agriculture in the 

last twenty years has become completely mechanized. Therefore, those engaging in this profession must 

be proficient in all the modern techniques related to that vocation. 

 

Increases in the use of agricultural chemicals, such as weed sprays, pesticides, etc., emphasize the need 

for expanding educational facilities in the field of chemical agriculture. This need is further underlined 

by our increasing use of commercial fertilizers, which I feel sure will continue to expand at an 

increasing rate through the years ahead, in order that food production may keep pace with a rapidly 

expanding world population, whose pressure on available food supplies is already being felt and will 

inevitably increase. 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

26 

Mr. Speaker, in the year of 1912 alone, pioneer settlers of our province broke 1.2 million acres of virgin 

prairie sod, a feat which will never again be duplicated in this world, there being no longer virgin prairie 

acreage of that size in existence on the face of our globe. True, to increase food production for a hungry 

world we may irrigate the deserts and drain the swamps and this will be done, but at tremendous capital 

cost and over a long period of time. Increased future food production, therefore, in answer to the 

imminent population explosion can only be achieved by producing more with what land resources are 

presently available. 

 

This most certainly can only be done speedily by increased and intensive use of commercial fertilizers 

and other chemical farming aids, the use of which implies the necessity of increased training in order to 

extract maximum benefits from minimum expenditures of time and money. Just as modern agriculture 

demands skilled personnel on farms and in the service industries, so also does our new and burgeoning 

mining refining complex demand the skills of trained technicians. They are vitally important to the 

agricultural and mining refining complex of our province which in turn serves all Canada Mr. Speaker, 

educators and governments are realizing that technical training is rapidly assuming a place of almost 

equal importance to academic education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the world’s greatest surgeon performing in an operating theatre, with equipment that is a 

marvel of man’s inventive genius, could easily lose a life due to mechanical failure, through improper 

installation, maintenance or operation of the technical equipment which modern science has made 

available for today’s operating and recovery room procedures. 

 

The world’s finest architect might place marvels of futuristic, functional construction on his drafting 

board, draw the blueprints with great care and minute detail, but when this architectural marvel is to 

serve its purpose and stand through the ages, it must be constructed by people in the trades who are no 

longer tradesmen in the old sense of the word, but skilled modern technicians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if technical training is necessary in order to ensure increased and efficient food production, 

adequate trained personnel for our expanding mining refining industry, and in order to serve the personal 

needs, desires and aspirations of the people of Canada and to maintain, and if possible improve our 

position in the markets of the world, then how much more important is it, in this great new age in which 

we find ourselves; for we have passed through an industrial revolution and a mechanical revolution — 

which has now become commonplace — into the age of the astronaut, and we stand today on the 

threshold of interplanetary communication. 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

27 

The age which is about to be born, will make the industrial revolution of yesteryear look as old 

fashioned as hoop skirts and high button shoes, and if we are successfully to meet the challenges of this 

brave new world we must formulate challenging new concepts of educational facilities and standards. 

Consider the tremendous demands made upon expert technicians in order to orbit a man in space. A 

scientist might draw the most perfect of plans and engineers perfect every detail, but one technical error 

and one alone will decide the success or failure of the venture. The successful orbit or an incinerated 

space man. 

 

Think then what demands interplanetary communication will make upon the technical training and 

ability of man, and let nobody think these things are impossible. How well I remember as a boy, reading 

what in those days passed as a comic book. It contained the usual serial and believe it or not, the hero 

was actually orbiting the earth in a complicated scientific contraption. My seniors took the book away 

and admonished me never again to waste my time reading such trash, and to think about such 

impossibilities — for man was never intended to fly in space or girdle the globe on self-made wings — 

but rather that I should study my Latin which I would find to be a much more useful and rewarding 

endeavor. 

 

Today, forty years later, man is orbiting the earth and assuredly in the years to come, and before many of 

them have passed, man will explore the universe. His own inquisitive nature will compel it, his very 

survival demands it. For today man holds within his hand the means of his own destruction and the 

question naturally follows — Can we escape the holocaust, and if so, how? I believe that we will escape, 

but then of course I am an incurable optimist, and have an abundant faith in the guidance of a benevolent 

providence. 

 

Let us consider for a moment what I believe to be a somewhat parallel situation in history to our own. 

Just prior to the discovery of this continent, Europe, the cradle of civilization, was a seething, boiling 

cauldron of discontented humanity. Wars raged, incipient revolutions flared up and died down, only to 

break forth again, while the twin scourges of famine and pestilence waited in the wings to destroy 

mankind and his civilization in the early beginnings of man’s struggle for self-government. 

 

Here was a civilization, as much as the world had known, ready even as ours to be destroyed by its own 

hand, and then Columbus discovered the American continent and it became a safety valve, releasing all 

the pent-up population pressures and frustrations of the old world. It is true there were still wars, but not 

as bloody nor as destructive as they might otherwise have been, and those among men who desired 

peace, freedom of thought and expression, freedom of religion and had a burning desire for 

self-government came by every means available to these our shores. The free 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

28 

spirits, the men of big heart, and the inquisitive, took ships from every port, for man had something new 

to investigate. 

 

Man had discovered a new world which he must explore to the full, and a world that was about to 

destroy itself found rebirth and entered upon a great new age. For the discovery of this continent sparked 

a chain reaction which has led to man’s greatest inventions, from sail through steam and diesel to air in 

the field of transportation; in the field of electronics, telephonic communications, radio, television and 

all the dazzling panorama of modern inventions which today challenge the mind and the imagination of 

man. 

 

Its discovery released man’s inventive genius and it can truly be said that from the discovery of this 

continent to the present day we have seen man’s most inventive age. In fact we have been too busy 

inventing so many, many things to pause in our headlong progress and perfect the multiple techniques 

required by our inventions, to do which we must improve and extend our educational facilities and make 

them readily available to all. Today the population pressures are rebuilding. The North American 

Continent has filled up, the old repressions are once again rearing their ugly heads. The stresses, the 

strains, the intolerance are once more appearing and verily man must soar to the skies or die. Now is the 

time and now is the age when in the words of Edwin Markham “man must search the heavens for 

power.” 

 

The spaceman of tomorrow, even as the astronaut of today, must have massive expert technical support 

to take care of the millions of details which will make space flight possible and successful. The sceptics 

may scoff, they laughed at the Wright brothers; the pessimists pre-condemned John Glenn; but, Mr. 

Speaker, this age belongs to the astronaut and those who would soar to the stars. This age, therefore, 

belongs not to the pessimists or the sceptics but to the optimists, for only an optimist can live it and 

remain buoyant, progressive and sane, anxious and eager to see what is going to happen next. 

 

In summation, therefore, I consider federal-provincial assistance for education is justified to enhance 

and increase the multiple skills and inventive genius of our people, in order that our country may be 

strong and wise at home and abroad, remaining independent, dedicated to self-government, and 

excelling in all those things which make for a fuller and richer life, and in order that our people may take 

their rightful place in this great new age; ready and eager to play their part to the full in the exploration 

of the universe. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that I have succeeded in advancing some compelling argument in favor of this 

resolution which I am very happy to support. 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

29 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I want only to add a few words at this time. The topic of 

federal aid for education is one which has interested me possibly partly because of my association with 

educational organizations over a number of years. As far back as 1935, at the Canadian Teachers’ 

Federation, first advanced the idea of federal aid to education was essential. At that time there was 

extremely little support to the idea. I am very happy the support has increased. I am happy that the 

support has increased to the extent that even my hon. friends who sit across the way are now supporting 

the idea. 

 

I do want to say something in more detail about it, Mr. Speaker, and would ask leave to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

Debated adjourned. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Mr. Stone moved second reading of Bill no. 36 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Embalmers 

Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in moving the second reading of this bill I want to assure the members on the 

other side of the house, there won’t be any changes in this Act that will prevent the Liberal party having 

a first class funeral. So, Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill no. 36, an Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Embalmers Act, be now read a second time and referred to the select standing committee on law 

amendments. 

 

Mr. W.R. Thatcher (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, I am not going to prolong this debate either but I would 

like to say in reply to the hon. member for Saskatoon (Mr. Stone) that any political funerals I have seen 

in this province lately have been funerals of my hon. friends in Athabaska, in Turtleford, in Weyburn, 

and in Prince Albert, and I am quite sure that we intend to have a major funeral a year and three months, 

as soon as they get around to calling an election. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! I think we are getting too far out of line altogether. Is the house ready 

for the question? Is it the pleasure of the house to adopt the motion? 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

30 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. C.C. Williams, 

(Minister of Telephones and Labour) 

 

That Bill no. 15, An Act to amend the Fire Prevention Act, 1959 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — I have had a good look at this Bill, and the only objection I have 

to it is the fact that like other similar bills that have been brought into the house, where you establish a 

board or a commission or someone to do or find some dirty work, then you delegate that power and you 

pass it on to somebody else. 

 

In this case it is just a question that your fire inspectors come along and find something wrong and say 

— “You look after it”. This is not the way it should be done. You find the troubles, you should pursue it. 

However I think there is not too much to be debated about it at the moment except that we can deal with 

this problem more thoroughly in the committee as a whole. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd moved second reading of Bill no. 25 — An Act to amend The Liquor Board 

Superannuation Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, a few days ago the legislature gave approval in second reading to certain 

amendments with regard to the Public Service Superannuation Act; Bill no. 25 would make applicable 

the same provisions with regard to the Liquor Board Superannuation Act. Generally speaking, they have 

to do with deferred pensions, the principle of which was established a year ago, and provide for some 

greater flexibility particularly in the event of death. I think the necessary information may be perhaps 

best obtained in committee of the whole. I move the Bill be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank moved second reading of Bill no. 26, An Act to provide for the Establishment 

of the Saskatchewan Public Administration Foundation. 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

31 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this bill to establish a Public Administration Foundation is definitely not a new 

look; it might be called a new hat but it is certainly a continuation of work which has been carried on for 

a good many years, and it is an extension of that work. When this government took office over 18 years 

ago we recognized that it was very important to study administration and to make improvements in 

administration and in administrative procedures and that was done right from the start. There have been 

many changes in organization and methods of operation in this period of time. 

 

Besides doing this work inside, we have had a number of outside consultants do work too — the Public 

Administrative Services of Chicago, Stanford Research Institute, and, more recently, the KCS 

Consultants. They are the firm of consultants that specialize in electronic equipment and worked with 

the installation of the computer centre. But, more important than these studies from time to time, has 

been the constant study by the employed staff of the Budget Bureau. 

 

One thing that was first done was to establish a centralized purchasing agency by an Act of the 

legislature passed at the second session of 1944. I was browsing through the records, Mr. Speaker, and I 

noticed that this Act got third reading on October 31, 1944, and a member in the legislature asked a 

question in the legislature the next day, on November 1, about a certain E.T. Stinson so it certainly came 

to the notice of the legislature immediately. This purchasing agency has certainly been very worthwhile 

and the accumulated savings made by the agency are estimated at something over $6 million. 

 

The Budget Bureau was established in 1946. This is an institution that meets with some opposition in the 

legislature and I think on more than one occasion the members of the opposition have suggested that it 

be done away with. This organization has done about 20 major organizational studies in the government 

service in various departments and agencies. It has done about the same number of procedure or 

methods studies so it has been a very busy organization and it has not had a great staff. An example of 

their work is the work they did when the hospital services plan came into effect and there is no doubt 

that the proper organization in that case meant a saving of probably $100 thousand a year. 

 

They played a part in the reorganization in the land titles system and here making a substantial saving 

annually, probably of about the same amount. It was the studies of the budget bureau that led to the 

establishment of the computer centre which will make savings of something in the neighborhood of a 

quarter million dollars a year and will be capable 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

32 

of more work than could have been done, undertaking more projects than could have been done before. 

 

The medical care insurance commission has got a good deal of assistance from the budget bureau and of 

course their work is, as much as possible, being done on the computer at the present time. 

 

The budget bureau, of course, doesn’t confine itself to studying our own procedures here but they also 

pay attention to reports that are available. For example, they study the Glassco Royal Commission 

report. Again, because we want to find anything in that report which will be useful to us. 

 

I would like to tell the members of the Legislature something about the staff of the budget bureau. I 

would like you to know, Mr. Speaker, the type and the qualifications of the people who work in this 

agency. 

 

First, there is the director, Mr. Wakabayshi. He is a Bachelor of Arts, Bachelor of Commerce, 

Saskatoon, 1953, and a Master of Public Administration from Harvard. He has won a number of prizes 

and scholarships, has had five years with the budget bureau, 3 1/2 years with the Department of Social 

Welfare, and a year and a half on a special project with the Treasury Department. 

 

Then the other employees, the head of the budget division is a chartered accountant with eight years 

experience in commercial and municipal auditing and accounting, 4 1/2 years as tax auditor, 3 years as a 

budget officer in the Treasury Department and a total of 16 1/2 years with the budget bureau. 

 

Another person is a Bachelor of Commerce, Saskatchewan, 1960, with two years experience in the 

budget bureau. 

 

One of the project leaders is a Bachelor of Arts in Saskatchewan, Bachelor of Journalism in Carleton, 

and Master of Arts in Public Administration from Carleton University. This person won the 

Governor-General’s medal and university entrance scholarship after Grade 12. Experience in the 

Department of Transport, 4 years and 6 years with the budget bureau. 

 

Another person has a Bachelor of Arts, Saskatchewan, 1962, with honors in political science. He also 

won a prize in Grade 12 and won political science bursaries at the University of Saskatchewan. He has 

been 10 months, he is one of our new employees. 

 

Another one is a Bachelor of Commerce, University of Saskatchewan; diploma in Public Administration 

from Carleton and Master of Arts in Public Administration from Carleton University. Again he is widely 

experienced in 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

33 

the Bank of Nova Scotia, with the budget bureau, with the Department of Social Welfare and two years 

back with the budget bureau. 

 

Yet another one, a Bachelor of Commerce, University of British Columbia, specializing in economics 

and finance. Scholarship from the government of British Columbia and a scholarship from the Life 

Underwriters’ Association of Vancouver and high mark in the insurance course. He has worked three 

years with Crown Zellerbach Company, one year with the government of Canada on 

dominion-provincial relations and a year with the budget bureau. 

 

Yet another one is Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Commerce, Saskatoon, Master of Arts in Public 

Administration and presently on educational leave at Harvard. 

 

Another one has been a short time with the budget bureau, now has returned to the university on leave to 

complete an Honors year in Economics. 

 

Another a Bachelor of Arts from Queens, with honors in political science. 

 

Another one Bachelor of Commerce, University of Saskatchewan, 1958 and diploma in public 

administration from Carleton — 4 years. 

 

So this . . . 

 

Mr. F.E. Foley (Turtleford): — A point of order. I wonder if the minister could explain the 

relationship between the qualifications of a member of the budget bureau and the Bill which is under 

consideration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I was trying to show that this bill is not a new look but a 

continuation and extension of work that has been done and I thought the members would be interested in 

knowing of the type and qualifications of people who are employed in the budget bureau. If it is out of 

order, I am sorry. I can’t take it back very well. I am finished with that part. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Do you mean they are going to become part of this board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — No, I’ll discuss that a little bit later with my hon. friend. 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

34 

Now, sometimes there is a good deal of talk about whether an organization like a budget bureau is really 

any good and so I would like to quote to you from an article by Harold A. Carroll of Duke University. It 

appeared in the Journal of Politics, Vol. 19, no. 2, and is reproduced with the consent of this Journal. It 

says, 

 

“By far the most impressive development of treasury control has taken place under the aegis of the 

CCF government in Saskatchewan where it is reflected in the workings of both the budget and the 

administrative management division. The former serves as a staff agent to the treasury board which has 

been molded into the most responsible board of its kind outside Ottawa, and as part of its wide control 

over the budget process. The division carries out intensive investigations which embrace not only 

questions of department organizations and utilization of staff, but also analyses of entire administrative 

progress in the light of policy objectives of the government.” 

 

There is a good deal more there that I could read, Mr. Speaker, but I do not want to bore the house with 

it. This was the opinion of an independent person who came from outside and looked at this situation. 

 

Now, I hope that my hon. friend will realize the importance and the value of this kind of an organization. 

We have certainly recognized in the past that good public administration demands constant study. As a 

matter of fact a number of other provinces have sent staff to Saskatchewan to study our budget bureau 

treasury board procedures. You would be surprised, Mr. Speaker, if I could tell you where they came 

from but of course to maintain the good relations between staff of different governments across Canada 

this must remain confidential. 

 

Now, I have already pointed out that we recognize the value of outsiders looking at public 

administration too. And this bill that we have before us at the present time provides for this. 

 

Sorry, Mr. Speaker, to delay you, but the principle of the bill is well put in one section and I want to read 

that section because I couldn’t put it any better. 

 

“The board shall make provision for the making of grants and the payment of bursaries for the purpose 

of assisting persons, groups of persons and organizations in carrying out such research, undertaking 

such studies, preparing such theses and instituting and carrying out such special educational programs 

in the field of public administration and public policy and related fields as will in the opinion of the 

board 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

35 

contribute toward the achievement and maintenance of a high standard of efficiency and effectiveness 

in the public services of Saskatchewan or enlarge the body of knowledge in these fields.” 

 

It is pointed out there that this Foundation is for the purpose of providing bursaries, for making it 

financially possible for graduates of the University to undertake studies of any particular facet of public 

administration. This is a very valuable kind of work. It will also be possible to assist financially from 

this foundation in enabling the university to put on special courses in public administration. I was rather 

disappointed when I attended a part of the meeting of the public administration association of Canada, 

which was held in Regina last year, and didn’t see very many members from this side of the house at 

those meetings, and I didn’t see anybody from the other side of the house. That was a place where there 

was an opportunity for people to learn a good deal about public administration and one could hardly 

accuse that organization of just being a political gathering. My hon. friends would have been quite safe 

attending that meeting. And I was also disappointed that none of the members of the opposition were 

interested in looking and hearing about the operations of the computer centre when we had the open 

house one night a short time ago. It is all right to talk about public administration, but it is also very 

important to try to learn something about it. 

 

There will be other benefits that come from this foundation and its work and I think first of all a better 

public understanding of government with having more students study the question of public 

administration. This should be a good thing for any jurisdiction and for all the people of this province to 

get a better understanding of public administration and of government itself. 

 

Another thing I hope it will do and am sure it will do, it will make more good recruits available for the 

public service and we can do with more good recruits. You know I read the qualifications of those 

people in the budget bureau, but the budget bureau has a problem — these good people are always being 

stolen from the budget bureau by departments. Quite a number of people who worked in the budget 

bureau are now up working in departments, and so the budget bureau itself has need to recruit every year 

some good people in this work. And, of course, many departments every year have need for recruitment 

of good administrators. I don’t think that we should think only of provincial government administration, 

but there should be encouraged also studies of local government administration as well because this is a 

part of the whole picture of government in the province of Saskatchewan. I am very happy to have the 

privilege of moving that this bill be read a second time because I believe that it is another important step 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

36 

forward in the progress toward good, the very best administration in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I move that this Bill be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. W.R. Thatcher (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, I only intend to say a few words at this time and then I 

would like to ask the house permission to adjourn debate on this bill. However, I was interested in one 

or two of the thoughts expressed by the minister. He said that this foundation is really not providing a 

“New Look”. In reality it is a continuation of many of the policies of the budget bureau. Now this is just 

about what we are afraid of. Because though we know that the budget bureau has been set up for about 

18 years, and we know that though one of the main objectives of the budget bureau when it was 

introduced was to control expenditures, to keep the government efficient, to eliminate waste and so on, 

we think it has been completely unsuccessful in performing that task. Since we have had our budget 

bureau, overall government spending has gone up from about $33 million to $350 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think the hon. member will agree with me that if he wants to debate the merits of the 

budget bureau doing a good job or not, that should be done on estimates. I don’t think the minister 

debated the merits of the budget bureau, he was pointing out the work they had done. I think the pros 

and cons should be debated on estimates. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, you may be quite right but you let the minister speak for some five or 

seven minutes on the budget bureau and all I want to tell him is that if this new proposal is no more 

effective than the budget bureau has been in controlling expenditures, it’s going to be almost completely 

useless. Now we think that this Bill which is now before us, while it may have the odd good point in it, 

for the most part is impractical. We think it will be just one more place where the government will have 

another planning board and bury a number of theorist and egg-heads, we don’t think it will be successful 

in doing the job that it should do, controlling government expenditure. 

 

Now we know very well why the government is bringing this up tonight. This is their answer to the 

suggestion the Liberal party made for an independent commission to examine government spending. 

This bill has been brought in for strictly political reasons and we are afraid that it simply won’t work. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, what would this board be. In essence it would be a board of government 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

37 

employees. Who are they going to investigate? They are going to investigate themselves. Undoubtedly it 

would be composed of friends of the government. Whenever they made a report, all they would do 

would be to once again bring in a whitewash. 

 

For these reasons, we are not going to support this bill, Mr. Speaker, when the vote comes. 

 

Now I would like to have a good deal more to say about this. I didn’t know the bill was coming in at this 

time, but I would like permission at this time to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate Adjourned. 

 

Hon. Mr. J.H. Brockelbank moved second reading of Bill no. 31 — An Act to amend the Education 

and Health Tax Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this bill to amend the Education and Health Tax Act is simply to clarify the 

procedures of application of the tax in regard to rental, where people instead of purchasing goods rent 

them and they pay tax on the rental. The Act at the present time provides for that and this is only a 

clarification of it. There is no change in tax rates or anything like that. I think the details of this can be 

considered in committee and I would move that the bill be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. W.R. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, very respectfully, I ask permission to move the adjournment of 

this bill also. 

 

Debate Adjourned. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd moved second reading of Bill no. 32 — An Act to amend The Liquor Act, 1960. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, bill No. 32 is a bill which proposes certain amendments to the Liquor Act. It 

proposes, to begin with, to clarify the definition of public place. I am assured that there is no real 

difference in meaning as compared to the previous definition; it is an attempt to make it a bit more 

viable in the legal sense. There has been some difficulty in enforcement under the previous taking of this 

section and this is hoped to improve it in that sense. 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

38 

On a number of occasions, Mr. Speaker, requests have been made with regard to the number of retail 

outlets in the province. If the hon. members will recall, this number is one which was established by 

legislation and stands at the moment at 80, that is 80 places. May I remind the legislature again that 

while there are several stores in Regina or several in Saskatoon, these count only as one for purposes of 

the limit established in the Act. 

 

A number of communities in the province have grown in size since that number was established and it is 

proposed now to increase the maximum number of stores allowable in the province from 80 to 90. 

Obviously there are some alternatives which could have been followed, Mr. Speaker, I suppose it might 

be argued that what ought to have been done was simply to throw it wide open and not impose any limit 

by legislation whatsoever. However the purpose of the Liquor Act, from the beginning, in this province 

has been one of control and the pattern of limitation of the number of retail outlets by inclusion in the 

Act has always been followed. And, therefore, the proposal is to extend this, this year, by allowing 

another ten stores. It will be appreciated that this presents some difficulty because it will be necessary to 

chose ten new locations, and the Liquor Board inform me they would proceed on the basis of a number 

of criteria: the size of the community, the trading area served, the distance from another location in 

which there is a retail store located, the apparent possibilities of the store operating without being at a 

loss, are all matters which have to be studied and considered prior to the final decision being made. 

 

I am sure that for a period of time, Mr. Speaker, these ten additional stores will probably make me the 

most popular minister in the province. I am equally sure that after the decision is made, I probably won’t 

be nearly so popular with a number of places because there is a great deal of interest in this. All I can 

say is that an attempt will be made to use the best discretion that we have in deciding which 

communities will be given a retail outlet. 

 

Another section of the act attempts to again make possible some more adequate control of some of the 

abuses which have crept up. At this time there is nothing in the Act which in fact prevents the providing 

of liquor to a minor. This has resulted in some problems; we have had some requests from Chiefs of 

Police throughout the province; the United Church of Canada, Saskatchewan section, has made 

representation with regard to it as have various organizations interested in temperance. As a result we 

are providing that, with the exception of parent or guardian or spouse, it will be an offence to provide 

liquor to a minor. I think, Mr. Speaker, those are the main principles which are involved in the bill. 

 

I would move second reading. 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

39 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Premier is bringing this bill forward at an appropriate 

time. There have been many applications to all M.L.A.’s from certain towns in their various 

constituencies to have a liquor outlet. I know in the constituency of Morse there are two or three major 

towns . . . 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Applications will not be accepted in the order presented, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . that have to drive 65 or 75 miles to purchase liquor. Now, I don’t think this is fair. 

If the government is going to have a monopoly I believe it must give proper service. I believe that the 

citizens in Saskatchewan no matter in what size town they live should be given the same kind of service. 

And, therefore, I welcome the increase in outlets from 80 to 90. 

 

I have one further suggestion to make to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. He has intimated that one of the 

problems will face is deciding where those 10 outlets will go. No doubt there will be 50 or 60 towns 

which believe that they are entitled to them. Of course one of the objectives of the liquor commission 

has been to provide revenue for the province and I know that it is sensible for the commission to try and 

open stores that are profitable. I am wondering if it wouldn’t be feasible to do what has been done in the 

province of Manitoba. In that province, where they find a town which they believe should have a liquor 

outlet, it is my understanding, where they think it will not be profitable, is that they may give a drugstore 

permission to sell liquor in a certain limited way. I don’t know why that wouldn’t be feasible; either to 

give it to a drugstore or to a hotel or something of the like, in the odd town where it isn’t profitable to 

open a store. Now, I am not suggesting that we should have wholesale liquor outlets opened all over. All 

I am suggesting, though, is that it is sensible and feasible, I believe, to give the people in our larger 

communities the opportunity to have these supplies available. I think people in the smaller towns 

shouldn’t have to drive 75 miles and in some cases 100 miles in order to purchase their supply. 

 

I simply throw that suggestion out to the Premier. I know he can’t speak again in this debate but I wish 

he would, on some occasion, while the bill is being discussed tell me what the reasons are that that 

might not be feasible. Maybe I don’t know this business, but it seems to me that it would make sense. 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

40 

Mr. Speaker: — Is the house ready for the question? I must inform the house that the mover is about to 

close the debate. If anyone wishes to speak, they must do so now . . . 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the Leader of the Opposition for the suggestion which he has 

put forward in the closing moments of his remarks. I am relatively new in regard to the position of 

retailer of this particular commodity. Sometime during the last year I became aware of the procedure in 

Manitoba, to which the Leader of the Opposition has referred and he is quite right that there are places in 

which it doesn’t seem feasible to establish, because of the economics of the situation, a store, a separate 

building with a full-time vendor, and arrangements are made for sale through the pharmacist, the 

drugstores. I would not like to make any recommendation on it at this session, Mr. Speaker. The 

suggestion has been put forward from other quarters as well and I would just like to look at it a bit more 

before I make a positive recommendation one way or the other on it. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd moved second reading of Bill no. 33 — An Act to amend the Liquor Licensing Act, 

1959. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, bill no. 33 is an Act to amend the Liquor Licensing Act. In general the changes 

have to do with the granting of licences to serve liquor in certain establishments. This is a procedure 

which was introduced some three years ago in Saskatchewan and the qualifying times during which an 

establishment had to be in operation were made reasonably stiff; before a restaurant could get a licence 

to serve liquor with its meals it had to be in operation a certain length of time; before other 

establishments could be given certain rights they had to be in operation for a certain length of time. In 

general the sections of the Act — we can deal with them one by one as we go through them — reduce 

the period of time during which a restaurant had to be serving meals before it can get a liquor licence, 

during which certain other establishments had to be in business before they can received various 

licences under this Act. That is the main change which is proposed in the Act. 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

41 

If I may just extend my remarks a bit, Mr. Speaker, the hour is late, and with regard a principle or a 

problem in the administration about which nothing is being recommended in the Act, I just want the 

members of the legislature to know that it was being considered even though nothing is being 

recommended at this particular time. 

 

Our Liquor Licensing Act and the powers which it gives to the liquor licensing board are similar to those 

which are found in all other acts all across Canada. They have these rights, of which members are aware; 

they are allowed a very wide range of discretion and there is no appeal, it is the final judgement. May I 

emphasize again that this is the situation throughout Canada in each province. This is the way it has 

been in Saskatchewan ever since there was an agency which granted rights to serve liquor in any way 

whatsoever. This does raise a number of problems and there are some advantages as all of us can realize 

to the idea of allowing an appeal from the decision of the liquor commission. There are also some 

disadvantages. Probably the difficulty arises from the fact that the liquor licensing board is an 

administrative agency; it is also in a sense a kind of judicial agency in that it does make decisions which 

are in fact legal decisions. If it were possible to sufficiently differentiate between these and allow an 

appeal on those questions which had to do with interpretation of the law, this I should think would be a 

good kind of procedure. To allow an appeal against every administrative procedure, every administrative 

decision would, however, make for some difficulty. For example, in the matter of determining whether 

or not an applicant is to receive a licence, well if necessary for them to make enquiries as to the 

character of the person, reliability in many ways, if these decisions are to be appealed my information is 

that it would be necessary to state all these matters in writing, perhaps they should be stated in writing; 

members will see some of the obvious problems which do arise. 

 

All I wanted to do in this regard Mr. Speaker, was to again indicate that this is a matter to which some 

thought is being given even though there are no recommendations in the bill which is before the house 

this year. 

 

I would like to say one general word also, Mr. Speaker. I know that there are many people in the 

province who looked with considerable apprehension at the changes to which the legislature agreed 

unanimously, or almost unanimously, some three years ago. I think that the liquor licensing commission, 

have done a very good job insofar as their responsibility is concerned in it. I think too that we owe 

appreciation to the hotel industry who, because of the care with which they have entered into their new 

responsibilities, have made the change one which did not bear out the misapprehensions which many 

people had with regard to changes in the situation. 

 

There is one other change in the act which I overlooked mentioning in the first instance and which I 

should 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

42 

now mention. With regard to clubs, the act now prohibits a licence being given to any club unless that 

club owns its own building. This act removes that as an essential before a licence may be granted. I 

think it is reasonably obvious that this kind of a screen, the requirement that the club be large enough or 

wealthy enough to own a building, it not really the best administrative test. It will be left in the hands of 

the commission to establish the fact that a club is sufficiently responsible to warrant the receiving of a 

licence. Here enquiries will have to be made so the commission is assured of the fact that the club is a 

bona fide one, that it has reasons for existence other than just the fact that it has a wish to have a licence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that I would move second reading of the bill. 

 

Mr. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, with the indulgence of yourself and the house, what 

I have to say will only take probably a half minute or so and I don’t want to hold the bill up for debate. 

There is one thing I would like to . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — One moment please, is it agreeable to the house that we go on for a few more minutes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — It will be a very few moments, and very short. 

 

The only thing that I don’t like about the Liquor Licensing Act, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that due to its 

regulations and methods of licensing, there are many people in the province who become somewhat 

second-class citizens. For example, I like my little rye and water, but I can’t walk across the street to my 

local hotel because we do not qualify for that. It makes it almost impossible. That is why — what I have 

to say in that respect when the bill comes into committee, I do hope that the hon. Premier will have the 

answers to that because I don’t think it is right. Because you don’t live in larger areas that you cannot go 

into your local, let’s call it your local pub, and not have your beverages that you normally drink. That’s 

all. 



 

March 14, 1963 

 

 

43 

Premier Lloyd: — It’s usually people who can’t walk back the other way objected to it. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:03 o’clock p.m. 


