



















































Hansard: February 18, 1963


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

3rd Day 

 

Monday, February 18, 1963 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

H.M.C.S. “SASKATCHEWAN” 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are proceeded 

with I would like to give a brief account of my trip to Victoria, where I had the honor of representing the 

government at the commissioning of H.M.C.S. ―Saskatchewan‖ Saturday afternoon. It was an 

impressive ceremony and everything went off very well. The crew were lined up on the jetty parallel 

with the ship three-deep, with officers in their proper places. Speakers included the Hon. Davie Fulton 

from Ottawa, Captain Mayo, builders of the ship, the clergy and others. Several hundred persons, 

including Mayor Baker of Regina, were present in special seats. 

 

I was interested to know the crew consisted of 226 ratings, and 13 officers, 41 of whom were from the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The young officer who was detailed to look after your Saskatchewan representative was Lieutenant 

Commander S.W. Riddell, who came from Saskatoon originally, and in his younger days played on the 

same hockey team with Gordie Howe, who is now with the Detroit Red Wings. His parents live in the 

city of Regina. 

 

It was quite interesting to know also that the wife of the second in command, Lieutenant Commander 

A.A. Hanley, was expecting a new arrival, almost momentarily at the hospital and sure enough the child 

was born just as the ship was being commissioned. A signal had been arranged and he knew almost 

immediately. The raised finger meant one child, — it wasn‘t twins — and they had some other signal for 

the fact it was a girl. As a matter of fact they have already named her ―Regina‖. 

 

The history of the ship goes back to the time when Mr. Pearkes was Minister of Defence, and apparently 

he was able to get the building of only one ship for the Victoria yards, of which there are two. It was 

arranged that one company, the Victoria Machinery Depot, would build the hull and the Yarrows 

Limited would build the super structure. 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
2 

These two groups put on a dinner for the ship‘s officers and a number of other people, I imagine about 

80, at the Empress Hotel on Saturday night. Included among the guests were Mr. and Mrs. Herb Marsh 

from Regina — some of you may know them. I could tell by the way the presidents of the companies 

spoke that they had had a few battles in the last 3 years and one of them indicated, quite definitely, that 

they would never build another ship under those conditions again — one building one half and one the 

other. Quite understandable. 

 

I was given a number of booklets describing the ship and the commissioning, which I have had 

distributed and I am sure you will find them quite interesting. The ship‘s badge is on the last page and 

provides an interesting and proper setting — the sheaf of wheat and the river. Actually the ship was 

named after the Saskatchewan River, a destroyer of the river class, and is an up-to-date and beautiful 

ship. I heard various estimates of the cost — one was $23 million, another was $25 million and I think 

the Vancouver paper on Saturday said it was $30 million. 

 

The officers wished each member of the legislature to have one of these booklets and you all have one 

now. Captain Mayo, yesterday afternoon, very kindly invited me to lunch which, by the way, was the 

first meal he himself had had on board, and asked me to bring this plaque to the legislature today and 

present it to Premier Lloyd. Will the page boy please take it over to him? 

 

QUESTION RE RECRUITING DOCTORS 

 

Mr. W.R. Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Before the orders of the day are called I should 

like to direct a question to my hon. friend, the Minister of Health. Is the government, or any agency 

thereof, endeavoring at the moment to recruit British doctors for practice in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, the answer to the hon. member‘s question 

is ―Yes‖. The organization which is known as Saskatchewan House, and the office of the Agent General 

in London, being Mr. Graham Spry, has for many years continued and is continuing to recruit doctors 

for Saskatchewan at the request of any group in Saskatchewan who may seek doctors to practice in their 

districts, the said doctors being from the United Kingdom. The office of the Agent General, I am so 

advised by the responsible minister, does in fact receive requests from organizations within 

Saskatchewan and attempts to assist them in recruiting physicians from the United Kingdom. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask a supplementary question? If 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
3 

the government is recruiting doctors in Britain, is not such a policy contrary to the agreement signed last 

August, specifically sub-section 27A. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! You cannot ask a supplementary question and follow it by an argumentative 

debate. The ruling is clear that is just for extra clarification. You cannot bring in another topic on a 

supplementary question. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Very respectfully, Mr. Speaker, I don‘t think I have been doing that. I do suggest that 

sub-section 27A of the bill this legislature passed forbids this kind of . . . 

 

Premier Lloyd: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, we have rules in this legislature and I would ask 

the co-operation of the Leader of the Opposition, to see that these rules are observed. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — It is not up to the Premier to say what the rules are. It is up to Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker was not on his feet. I will listen to Mr. Speaker anytime he rises. I don‘t blame the Premier for 

not wanting that question answered. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — One a point of order, Mr. Speaker. This is a period in which the opposition are 

entitled to ask questions, questions for which the information may be needed immediately and for which 

the . . . 

 

This is not a period of debate and that is what the hon. member is attempting to do and that is what I am 

objecting to. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I do think the point as taken by the Premier is well taken. We cannot permit debate on 

an oral question period, and this could lead to quite a debate on the questions and answers, and I would 

rule it out of order at this time. 

 

QUESTION RE PULP MILL 

 

Mr. F. Foley (Turtleford): — I would like to direct a question to the Minister of Natural Resources. I 

would like to ask him if there are any negotiations being carried out by the government, at the moment, 

in regard to the establishment of a pulp mill in northern Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Eiling Kramer (Minister of Natural Resources): — In reply to the member from 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
4 

Turtleford, I would like to say that any negotiations that may, or may not, be carried on are certainly not 

for public discussion. 

 

Mr. F.E. Foley: — I would like to direct a further question to the Minister of Natural Resources. Do I 

gather then that there has been a change of policy regarding this department, since in the past these 

negotiations have always been made public? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Questions cannot be followed by supplementary questions in a way which may 

precipitate a debate. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon City): — I would like to draw the attention of the house to a group of 

school children from the city of Saskatoon, from the Buena Vista school, accompanied by their teacher, 

Mr. Widennaeir and I am sure all members will join with me in saying how delighted we are to have 

them at the Chamber, and we hope their stay in the capital city is an enjoyable and informative one. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE RICHARDSON CURLING TEAM 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to perform the pleasant 

annual duty which falls to me, to remind the house that once again the Ernie Richardson rink, 

representing Regina Curling Club in Regina city, has won the provincial curling title and the right to 

represent Saskatchewan in the MacDonald Brier Tankard competitions. This is the fourth time in five 

years that the Richardson rink have been successful. 

 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

Mr. Semchuk (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, it is an honor for the people of the Meadow Lake 

constituency to have their member sponsor the motion for the address to reply to the speech from the 

throne. This is the first time that the Meadow Lake constituency has had that privilege and I want to 

thank our Premier on behalf of my constituents. 

 

In opening my address, Mr. Speaker, I should first like to congratulate you on your recent visit to 

Nigeria, where you represented the Saskatchewan branch of the Commonwealth Parliamentary 

Association at the annual conference of that worthy group. I am sure that this assembly was very ably 

represented 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
5 

by you on that occasion. I believe that the people of Saskatchewan are pleased with the appointments of 

the hon. members from Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) and The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) to the cabinet. I am 

sure that the people in northwestern Saskatchewan conscious of our northern resources would want me 

to express their appreciation and thanks for the appointment of the hon. member from The Battlefords as 

Minister of Natural Resources. I have known and worked with this exceptionally capable young man for 

many years, and I am sure that his personal and practical knowledge of the natural resources of our 

province will serve the people of Saskatchewan well. I know that the people want to thank the people of 

Moose Jaw for electing this fine hard working young man, and I am sure they will have more reason to 

be proud of him this afternoon. 

 

I would also like to congratulate a new comer to this house. The hon. member from Prince Albert (Mr. 

Steuart). My sincere hope is that his understanding of the purpose of an opposition in our democratic 

parliamentary system will be of benefit to this assembly. 

 

The speech from the throne outlines the continuation of the constructive and humanitarian programs to 

which the people of this province committed this government when they elected the members on this 

side of the house in June, 1960. These programs are fitting sequence to benefits introduced by the CCF 

since we were first elected to replace the old line parties, and to lead our people towards a fuller life and 

more economical security. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that there are good and valid reasons why the people 

of the three western provinces have found it necessary to spurn the token leadership of the two old line 

parties and have refused to entrust to them the direction of their provincial affairs. As a matter of fact, it 

was the remote control and indifference of the old party politicians to the needs of western Canadian 

citizens, that brought about the Red River uprising and the formation of a temporary government which 

was conversant with the needs of the people. The same indifference and lack of understanding 

precipitated the Saskatchewan rebellion. 

 

The next clash of interests conflicting with the old parties was the elevator issue of 1908, 1911. It 

occasioned a far-reaching debate on the principles of public ownership. It presented the first threat of a 

serious breach between the Liberal party and the organized farmers. It ended in what became one of the 

most important co-operative movements in Saskatchewan. These clashes over the years have convinced 

western people of the need for provincial governments, not dominated by powerful political cliques 

controlled by economic forces entrenched outside the western provinces. In the 1920‘s the grain 

marketing problems were the big issue. The Progressives in Saskatchewan and the United Farmers of 

Alberta created the political pressure necessary to bring in reforms opposed by the old line parties. Later 

the 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
6 

old party incorporated the word ―progressives‖ into their banner, and of course continued to ignore the 

west. 

 

This group had as much respect for the word ―progressive‖ Mr. Speaker, as the same group have for the 

word ―freedom‖ today. As time went by, the old line parties became more and more engrossed in 

building what they thought were indestructible political machines based on patronage and dominated by 

parent parties at Ottawa. A political break away from this domination became inevitable and most 

essential if western Canada was to develop. Each of the three western provinces, British Columbia, 

Alberta and Saskatchewan, regardless of their current political ideology, point with pride to great 

progress after displacing old party government and embarking on programs inspired by western people 

and governments that are not dictated to by a political hierarchy at Ottawa. 

 

Saskatchewan‘s economic progress is spectacular when we take into consideration the wrecking and 

tearing-down tactics of the opposition, our geographic location and extreme climatic fluctuations. We 

must remember, Mr. Speaker, that the CCF inherited a bankrupt province, a province completely 

bankrupt of money and bankrupt insofar as any planned development of natural resources, raw materials 

and electrical power facilities were concerned. 

 

This province was strapped to farming in the southern half, and letting the north half go unattended and 

under-developed. The CCF accepted this challenging situation because of our faith in the pioneering 

spirit and industry of the Saskatchewan people. It was this faith in people, this understanding of human 

needs that started the great surge forward in all sections of Saskatchewan‘s economy. Our economy has 

constantly and constantly gained momentum until today Saskatchewan is expanding its economic 

horizon at an ever increasing rate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Semchuk: — Plans and programs instituted by the CCF government have brought all the people of 

Saskatchewan a more secure and more abundant and more free way of life. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Tell us about the NDP. 

 

Mr. Semchuk: — Permit me to bring to your attention, Sir, just a few of the social and economic 

freedoms that the people of Saskatchewan now enjoy and did not have, or which were limited, under the 

pathetic care-taker governments of former years. The first freedom is freedom from fear. Freedom of 

losing the family farm. This was done by introducing the Farm Security Act. How well many of our 

farmers remember that one, it saved many of our farmers from losing their farm homes and enabled 

them to retain economic independence. The mortgage companies and the Liberals fought this freedom 

but the people won out. 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
7 

The second freedom: freedom to lead a normal life for those less fortunate than ourselves. I refer to the 

aged, the handicapped, the crippled, the widows and the orphans, yes, and able-bodied employable men 

and women who through no fault of their own, found themselves unemployed. A social security 

program based on needs and understanding of the brotherhood of man. One of the truly great freedoms 

won by the people and for the people of Saskatchewan by this CCF government, was the proclamation 

of the Hospital Services Act, in 1947, introducing the hospital services plan. This legislation has saved 

many lives, and saved many a Saskatchewan family from financial ruin by the payment of hospital bills, 

which otherwise were beyond their and the ability of the average family to pay, without serious financial 

implications. I‘m proud to be associated with a party and a government that had the courage to pioneer 

this legislation in spite of the vile, malicious and infamous attacks on this government and this 

legislation by the Liberal party of Saskatchewan. They called it socialist compulsion and they called it 

communism. Nonsense, Mr. Speaker, the Socreds, the Conservatives, and the Liberals in other parts of 

Canada, have since instituted hospital services plans. Now the opposition does not dare to smear this 

program with the old communist brush. I am a business man, Mr. Speaker, I have learned that it is very 

difficult nowadays to tell the merchandise by label. Mrs. Housewife knows that. Quite often the fancier 

the label the poorer the merchandise. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, the word Liberal does not describe the 

party to your left. 

 

The third freedom: freedom from drudgery for our farm families and to our village, our town and our 

city dwellers. A farm improvement program, a water and sewage program, a natural gas program, and an 

electrical power program, that lights up the face of Saskatchewan. More freedom to explore, to develop 

and to utilize the natural resources of our province, by providing one of the most complete radio and 

telephone communication systems in this country, by a network of market roads, resources access roads, 

and highways second to none, in our great plan. From ruts, cow trails and Liberal mud, Mr. Speaker, we 

now have blacktop in a little over a decade. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Semchuk: — Freedom of our young people, freedom of opportunity to the best educational 

facilities ever, right from the rural school house to the university level, technical schools, trade training, 

bursaries and interest free student loan funds, higher school grants, grants to the university, school 

busses, all these and more, have enabled our young people to go to school and to enjoy learning. This is 

proved by the fact that almost twice as many students completed their grade 12 in 1961 as compared to 

1951. 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
8 

Freedom for the pioneers of this great province, by programs of senior citizens‘ homes, freedom for 

educators by better facilities and decent remuneration. Freedom for our workers too, by the fairest labor 

laws in this land. Just in plain everyday work, Sir, more economic freedom and more security and 

dignity, and more abundant life for all of Saskatchewan‘s residents, legislated by a social democratic 

CCF government that is in tune with the hopes, needs and aspirations of all of our citizens. 

Propagandists of the extreme right element in the ranks of the Liberal party in Saskatchewan, screech 

and scream ―We will get rid of that socialism‖. What would we get rid of Mr. Speaker? Would they get 

rid of the things I just mentioned? The people of Saskatchewan will not let them. The people have 

worked too hard and too long to obtain a greater measure of economic democracy in this province to 

permit the extremists to tear it down again. Would our opposition get rid of government insurance? This 

has saved the people of Saskatchewan many millions of dollars every year. Would they get rid of the air 

ambulance service? This has saved many lives of Saskatchewan citizens. Or would the opposition 

wreck, and they tried so hard to wreck, one of the greatest freedoms of them all, won by the citizens of 

this province only a few months ago; the freedom, yes, and the right, of every citizen to the best health 

services available regardless of their ability to pay. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have outlined some of the programs which have been introduced and expanded by the 

government, which make it possible for the people of this province, to share a greater measure of social 

and economic democracy. We believe that it is imperative to have political freedom, and political 

democracy. However, we believe just as strongly that true democracy cannot exist unless the majority of 

the people have economic democracy as well. This means, Mr. Speaker, that the majority of the people 

have the right to expect equal opportunities because all people cannot be equal, but equal opportunities 

must be made available to all of our citizens. With this basic principle in mind, this government 

administers the affairs of this province to the benefit of all of our people; workers, farmers, 

professionals, businessmen and everyone. 

 

All sections of our economy are inter-related and inter-dependent. That is to say that our retail business, 

our wholesale business, our service and manufacturing industry are dependent to some degree on each 

other, and on our basic agricultural industry. Farming still is the largest industry in Saskatchewan. It, 

therefore, follows that a healthy farm economy does much to stimulate our business and industrial 

sectors, and at the same time increase its employment opportunities for our labor force. The government 

is right to concern itself with all sections of our economy, because directly or indirectly, they are 

dependent on one another. For example, Interprovincial Steel, which is a basic industry is doing much to 

speed up industrial development in our province. At the same time this industry is a factor that must be 

considered in our agricultural sector of our economy. Men employed at this plant use the products of our 

farms. 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
9 

This benefits our farming. This steel mill may be the added incentive required to induce farm 

manufacturing and implement manufacturing companies to locate a plant in Saskatchewan. This in turn 

would reduce farm implement costs to our farmers, and this would further, by creating more 

employment, create a greater use of farm products. 

 

The Saskatchewan grid road program is a good example. This program helps out farmers by providing a 

network of grid roads. At the same time it helps our business people in our trading centres, because they 

depend on our rural residents for increased sales and greater profits. Thus, this program is providing 

benefits to our rural people and to our business community as well. Two hundred and eighty-eight out of 

the 296 rural municipalities are participating in this road building program. Also 11 local improvement 

districts, and about 80 towns and villages. Since 1956, 8,304 miles of grid roads have been constructed. 

This government has contributed well over $32 million towards the cost of these roads. This helps our 

municipalities. This government is consciously mindful of increased operating costs to municipalities, 

due to increased prices of machinery, equipment and services. 

 

This is why this government does not hesitate, and did not hesitate to go into the grid road program. I 

might mention that it is various programs of this nature that have kept our municipal taxes at a lower 

level than those of our neighboring provinces. 

 

According to the 1961 annual report of the Department of Municipal Affairs, of the three western 

provinces rural municipal taxes are much lower in Saskatchewan. Alberta‘s average is 89¢ per acre. 

Manitoba‘s average is $1.12 per acre and the Saskatchewan average if 70¢ per acre. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Semchuk: — This government has done much to improve living conditions on the family farm. It 

has helped more than any former government to approve and stabilize our agricultural economy. 

 

Permit me, Mr. Speaker, to enumerate some of the programs which benefit our farmers and directly or 

indirectly stimulate better services from business, promote side-line industrial opportunities and an 

expanded wage field within the province: 

 

No. 1 — rural electrification. Most of our farmers now have electrical power on the family farm. 

 

No. 2 — the farm improvement plan. This program has made it economically practical for our farm 

people to install water and sewage systems. By the end of 1962, 6,173 farm installations were completed 

At this rate over 50,000 of our farmers 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
10 

should have these conveniences within the next few years. 

 

No. 3 — the land clearing and breaking program. This has been very popular with our northern 

Saskatchewan farmers. In many instances, the clearing and breaking program has made the difference 

between a meagre and a good farming operation. To the end of March, 1962 over 369,000 acres of land 

were cleared with government assistance, and 489,000 acres broken. This represents over $9 million of 

an investment for expansion of the agricultural economy. 

 

No. 4 — the agricultural representatives program which locates professional advice right in the 

community. 

 

No. 5 — the conservation and development program which through drainage and reclamation 

development creates better land use. 

 

No. 6 — the community pastures program. These are just a few of the many fine programs expanded 

and legislated by the government to assist our farmers towards maximum production at the lowest 

maximum cost. This is what our farmers have done. They have mechanized and automated our 

agricultural industry to the highest degree of efficiency and are producing abundantly a commodity 

essential to human life, and which is in short supply in today‘s world. 

 

To illustrate the practical benefits of some of these programs I would like to refer to the Meadow Lake 

constituency. While the town of Meadow Lake is still one of the largest grain storage points in Canada 

outside the terminals, this area is also fast becoming one of the major beef producing centres in our 

province. In 1962 approximately 6,650 head of beef cattle were marketed in the Meadow Lake area for 

approximately $1 million. It is this government‘s land policy, conservation and development program, 

ag. rep. services and community pastures program that sparked enthusiasm for farm diversification in 

the Meadow Lake area. 

 

The community pastures west of Meadow Lake and Beacon Hill, and Bluebell and the one east of 

Meadow Lake at Cavanaugh and Sincere will provide great benefits to many of our farmers and are very 

much appreciated. I am convinced there is tremendous potential for increased livestock production in 

northwestern Saskatchewan. There are thousands of acres of land available in this area adaptable for this 

purpose, and many more thousands of acres of low lands which can be economically drained for further 

expansion. Our unfailing water supply and natural shelter are essentials to the livestock industry. 

 

The southern half of our province is semi-arid. Just a few fractions of an inch removed from becoming a 

desert, and with drastic fluctuations between dry and wet years, yet no attempt had been made by former 

governments to conserve or to build up our water supply — the most essential element to plant 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
11 

and animal life. The very nature of our Saskatchewan plains has determined that in order to make a 

living our people must scatter thinly over the land, where past governments accepted these handicaps as 

inescapable, this government has introduced and built roads of modern design, adequate for any summer 

traffic — roads with contours that reduced snow collection to a minimum. Consequently, constant 

winter traffic can be anticipated with a minimum of snow removal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Semchuk: — Our roads and highways programs have made spectacular accomplishment, Mr. 

Speaker. Today we have 8,300 miles of good highway; 3,200 miles of this paved or oil treated; 8,304 

miles of grid road, 2,300 miles of recreational and forest access road; 370 miles of resources road; a 

fabulous total of 19,274 miles of high standard roads in this province paid for in full or in part from the 

general revenues of this province and providing one of the greatest networks of roads in Canada to serve 

our people and to serve industry. Engineers and surveyors have been stressing that concentrating 

western industries on the few prairie rivers is destroying the vitality of these water resources, and that 

we must soon turn to northern Saskatchewan waters to support our expanding industries. This will also 

place industries closer to many sources of raw material. Where past governments left it to private 

enterprises to try and develop hydro-electric power on the North Saskatchewan river and failed, this 

government is preparing in advance a furnished home of electrical power for industry to move in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Semchuk: — It is this assurance of electrical power that has stimulated private searches for 

resources. Saskatchewan has now gone all out to supply power in abundance, derived from coal, from 

oil, from gas, and now hydro-electric installations. In northwestern Saskatchewan, for example, our 

power lines reach as far north as Buffalo Narrows, which is 173 miles north of Meadow Lake, and 

Buffalo Narrows is approximately 533 miles northwest of Regina. One-third of the electrical power 

transmission lines in Canada have been constructed in Saskatchewan to serve our far-flung, sparsely 

settled regions. Our power grid will help to keep the people in their home communities, there to develop 

trade and industries otherwise impossible. Let me cite an example. Electrical power delivered in the 

north will enable the natives to utilize refrigeration and expand his fishing operations and his fur farm 

production. At the same time he will experience more conveniences in the home. This power at the edge 

of the pre-Cambrian Shield is teaching the native how to use tools and devices used by industry. He is 

becoming more self-reliant, he is more familiar with motor boars, diesel equipment and electricity. He is 

prepared to serve industry 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
12 

in the north as it is established. We take pride in the hydro-electric power development at Squaw Rapids, 

again placing Saskatchewan power close to raw material. According to the throne speech hydro power 

from the Squaw Rapids installation will be made available to the people of Saskatchewan within the 

next month or so. 

 

I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that the South Saskatchewan Dam will add many of the essential elements and 

incentives required in the agricultural, industrial and resources section of our economy. One element of 

vital importance is a water reserve. Here again we are developing hydro-electric power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is now gratifying to the people of Saskatchewan who embarked on a program of public 

ownership of utilities a few years ago to behold our trend sweeping across Canada. The Liberal 

government in Quebec is fully aware of our success and is now in the process, Mr. Speaker, of 

converting public ownership to electrical power distribution in that province. British Columbia‘s 

conversion, though still in a state of flux, has already demonstrated the practical use of public 

ownership, the benefits of same. According to a Star Phoenix report of January 3rd, 1963, and I quote: 

 

The Liberal party at its annual meeting in Red Deer last fall, adopted a party program including public 

ownership of electrical power for Alberta. 

 

It is worthy to note, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberals in Alberta are much impressed with the practical 

benefits which have accrued to the people of Saskatchewan through public ownership of our electrical 

power facilities than they are with the destructive propaganda of our opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can point to many other instances and accommodations provided to industry in 

Saskatchewan by this government. Things like the Saskatchewan Research Council, the Industrial 

Development Office, government guaranteed loans and the fine spirit of co-operation between the 

government and industry through the Department of Industry and Information. The Saskatchewan 

Research Council‘s main function is to study Saskatchewan‘s industrial potentials and to have this 

information readily available to any person or company interested. I am happy to note that an addition to 

Saskatchewan‘s Research Council laboratory located on the campus of the University of Saskatchewan 

has been approved. The Industrial Development Fund has done a great deal to encourage new and 

expanding industries by providing loans, guarantees and share capital. Since its inception, the Industrial 

Development Office has assisted over 100 industries in this province. Mr. Speaker, one of the really 

great incentives to industrial diversification and development in Saskatchewan is the sewer and water 

program for towns and villages. The people, their local governments and this 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
13 

government have worked together, until today almost all villages and towns in Saskatchewan with a 

population of over 500 residents have water for sewer facilities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Semchuk: — Only 8 communities in Saskatchewan with a population of over 500 people lack these 

conveniences. This government shows confidence in our people, and in our province, by being prepared 

to buy up to 50 percent of any debenture issue and by giving outright grants to communities installing 

water and sewerage systems. 

 

Industry is people in business. Industry will establish in a community that can provide good spiritual, 

social and economic services, good education facilities, roads, streets, power, natural gas, churches, 

service clubs, recreational centres and other comforts for potential labor forces. All these things and 

many more are considered before industry will invest money in a community. Today Saskatchewan‘s 

smaller communities can compete with the larger centres for their share of industrial developments. This 

was not possible a few years ago. Good roads, telephone communications, electrical power, sewer and 

water have made it practical and desirable to build good homes on farms and in towns and villages. This 

has made life in rural centres more attractive to scientists, doctors, dentists, lawyers, and other 

professionals. Professional people now contribute their services in rural zones as never before. Rural and 

urban dwellers enjoy an equality and compatibility heretofore unknown in this province. Over the years 

this government has improved facilities and opportunities for industrial expansion. The home 

atmosphere and utilities are in fact ready to serve our own and to welcome the newcomer, Mr. Speaker. 

In my opening remarks I said Saskatchewan is expanding its economic horizons at an ever increasing 

rate. This is the conclusion that we come to when we study carefully the throne speech and check 

Dominion Bureau of Statistic figures. Our rate of growth since 1944 in the non-agricultural sectors of 

our economy has been over twice as fast as Canada‘s average. Among all the provinces of Canada, 

Saskatchewan is rated second in the per capita output of manufactured goods. It is rated third highest in 

the construction industry, second highest in electrical power production per capita, and has developed 

the highest per capita growth in the mining industry. 

 

According to Dun & Bradstreet‘s year end report, Mr. Speaker, there were 389 new businesses 

established in Saskatchewan in 1962, from small stores to multimillion dollar industrial plants. This 

means that every day of the year in 1962 — every day a new business opened its doors to serve the 

people in some community in this province and I think this is wonderful. To provide even greater 

opportunity for industry to locate in Saskatchewan, the throne speech mentions new incentives to 

mineral resources exploration, and development of other industry. 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
14 

These incentives added to the preferred position that Saskatchewan industry now enjoys in western 

Canada, will further stimulate and accelerate Saskatchewan industrial development. 

 

The known resources of the southern half of our province are expanding rapidly. Petroleum, natural gas, 

sodium sulphate and potash just to mention a few — some such as agriculture are reaching the saturation 

point. There is no large reserve of arable land left to attract more settlers or to absorb our farm-raised 

children. In order to accommodate our increasing population and stop the export of our young people, 

we are pushing back the frontiers to reveal our northland with its great water resources; its minerals; its 

forests and its beauty, while western Saskatchewan is considered one of the greatest holiday areas of the 

North American continent, we must look to the north for future employment and for output of some of 

our agricultural production. It is in the interests of the entire province to realize and appreciate the 

potential wealth of our northland; roads and electrical power in the north are positive steps taken by this 

government for greater northern resources, exploration, development and use. Our tourist industry has 

made great strides; serving our residents and advertising Saskatchewan to others. The tourist industry 

can do more than most factors to create good public relations, and to reveal to one and all, our northland 

and its resources. In developing our north, we will need some outside capital. However, our resources 

should not be held in reserve for a few monopolies, as has been done in many parts of Canada. Where a 

foreign country secures monopolistic control of investment and industry in an exploited area, others 

cannot enter and that area becomes impoverished and degraded. It is, therefore, much in Saskatchewan‘s 

interests, not to put all our eggs in one financial basket; rather, we should encourage any interested 

country to invest. In this way there will always be a stability of development and progress. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this throne speech expresses justifiable pride and satisfaction with the social and economic 

progress of Saskatchewan, and shows confidence in continued development and expansion. Although, 

time will not permit me to mention all the things mentioned in His Honor‘s speech, I am sure that I have 

indicated why the people of this province, have good reason to be proud of this government, its policies, 

and its programs. We face the future with confidence, so, Mr. Speaker, I therefore move, seconded by 

the hon. member from Moose Jaw, (Mr. Snyder) that a humble address be presented to His Honor as 

follows: 

 

We, Her Majesty‘s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, in Session assembled, humbly thank Your Honor for the gracious speech which Your 

Honor has been pleased to address to us at the opening of the present Session. 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
15 

Mr. Gordon Snyder (Moose Jaw): — I am deeply honored today, and gratified, to be given this 

opportunity to take part in the throne speech, at this particular stage. It is an honor which I choose to 

accept as a tribute to the progressive and friendly people of Moose Jaw, that the hon. Mr. Davies and I 

are pleased to represent in this house. The pride which the hon. member from Meadow Lake (Mr. 

Semchuk) exhibited so sincerely in his own constituency, makes my own job somewhat more difficult 

today, but I can assure him that we, in the south central part of the province, enjoy a similar pride in the 

broad expanse of the best agricultural land that the sun has yet shone upon, and we pride ourselves also 

on a steady diversification of our economy and with an ample share of the amenities of life. Having 

spent a considerable amount of time in the part of the province, which the hon. member from Meadow 

Lake (Mr. Semchuk) represents, I appreciate and understand the enthusiasm that he feels for the great 

north-west with all its natural attributes and its abundance of water and trees that we in this part of the 

province are inclined to envy somewhat. Add to this the fact, Mr. Speaker, that until recent years the 

northern areas of the province received little or no attention from previous administrations, and that 

among the native population, hunger, illiteracy, tuberculosis, had become a way of life, and I think it 

will be relatively easy to understand the pride that was so evident in the hon. member‘s remarks and I 

want to congratulate him most sincerely at this time. 

 

I wish to congratulate, also, the hon. member for Touchwood (Hon. Mr. Meakes) on his appointment to 

the cabinet. His wide experience in the fields of co-operatives has fitted him well for this portfolio. As 

Deputy Speaker of this house and as chairman of various committees, we have come to respect his 

judgment and his ability, and I feel sure that all the members will want to join with me in wishing him 

well at this time. The hon. member for The Battlefords (Hon. Mr. Kramer) is also to be congratulated at 

this time for his deep interest and understanding of the Dept. of Natural Resources, I am sure that his 

contribution will also be a valuable one in this capacity as minister in that department. I congratulate, 

also, Mr. Speaker the newest member of the Legislative Assembly, the hon. member for Prince Albert 

(Mr. Steuart). He joins this legislature with a good deal of experience in civic administration and it is my 

wish that his stay will be a pleasant one and this his contribution will be constructive. I hope that hon. 

members will not consider it an imposition if I use a few minutes to discuss briefly some matters 

pertinent to my own constituency. 

 

There are a number of developments that are worthy of comment, as Moose Jaw continues to assume its 

role as one of Saskatchewan‘s major trading areas, located ideally at the junction of the east-west-north-

south traffic for both rail and highway travel, which makes it the natural gateway to the South 

Saskatchewan Dam. In recent months the extension to the provincial technical institute, which was 

announced during the 1962 session 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
16 

has moved ahead rapidly, and it is due for completion later this winter. This institution of learning is 

offering courses in such things as electronics, auto body, welding, motor vehicle repair, plumbing, radio, 

television and other courses. There are short eight week courses involving such things as bricklaying, 

carpentry, painting, decorating and other specialties. I think some idea of the large degree of acceptance 

of this program can be seen when we note that there were 236 students enrolled for winter courses, 

bringing the total enrollment at the institution to 589, with many applications being rejected, because of 

a lack of accommodation, until the new addition is completed. 

 

Another development in the field of education in Moose Jaw, involves the new $600,000 extension to 

the provincial technical school (not to be confused with the provincial technical institute) with the two 

senior governments bearing two-thirds of the total construction costs on this project. I suggest that the 

work which has been done on the Moose Jaw technical school and Moose Jaw provincial technical 

institute has played a very vital role in keeping Moose Jaw‘s unemployed down to the present level, with 

municipal winter works‘ campaign, of course, assisting also in taking up the slack. There have been 19 

programs planned under the municipal winter works‘ projects, to a total value of $485,000 that will 

provide work for a total of 165 men, something over 9,000 man days. School grants to the public school, 

high school, and separate school districts, have been increased remarkably over the last number of years 

too, Mr. Speaker. This can be seen when we note that the operating grants for the year 1956-57 

amounted to $239,000 as compared to $913,000 this year, or approximately a four-fold increase. Capital 

grants to the city of Moose Jaw up until the first of January, totaled $132,288 which included a $40,000 

building grant for the new 14 room Moose Jaw school unit elementary school which was opened last 

fall. 

 

Because of our expanding population, Mr. Speaker, and the need for summer recreation, this 

government has recognized the need and has rapidly expanded its provincial park development in recent 

years. The speech from the throne, draws attention to three new provincial parks which will be created 

in the province. I believe also that the recent announcement of a new provincial park to be created in the 

immediate Elbow area is welcome news to the people of Saskatchewan and the people of my 

constituency, who are only 65 miles from this new development. With the completion of the South 

Saskatchewan Dam, there will be created at Elbow a reservoir which will bring about a sandy beach, 

which I understand will be the longest of any beach in any of the provincial parks, something in excess 

of 4 miles in length. I believe this to be one of the most exciting and imaginative programs in this 

provincial park development. One of these is taking place in the immediate Moose Jaw area, I refer, of 

course, to the Buffalo Pound Provincial Park, which is rapidly taking shape and is presently serviced by 

an excellent all-weather road into the heart of the park and we are 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
17 

looking forward hopefully, Mr. Minister of Highways, to having oil treatment applied to the access road 

in the near future. 

 

Now, some idea of the extent of the development in the Buffalo Pound area can be seen with $140 

thousand having been spent for the acquisition of land in this area, and with maintenance and 

construction costs being considered, there will be about $170 thousand spent on the part to this date. A 

good deal of the work was done during the past summer with the improvement of such things as picnic 

facilities, boating area, beach facilities and sanitary accommodation. It will place, within 25 minutes 

driving time of our city, a first class provincial park. Newly acquired land brings the total area of the 

park to about two thousand acres and presents unlimited possibilities for future development. 

 

While speaking on recreation, Mr. Speaker, I believe the credit should be given at this time to a group of 

Moose Jaw people, who early last fall received permission from the Department of Natural Resources to 

develop a winter sports area in the provincial park. As a result of a good deal of hard work and 

assistance from the Department of Natural Resources, the Moose Jaw Ski Club is presently providing 

facilities for skiing and tobogganing and two power operated tow ropes take the skier to the top of the 

slope, which I am given to understand is comparable to the ski slope at Banff. I just want to take this 

opportunity to congratulate these people on their initiative and to encourage the Department of Natural 

Resources to continue to assist in tangible ways developing this very worthwhile program. 

 

Now having indicated only a few of the many programs and policies that have been of benefit to the 

people of my constituency and the people of Saskatchewan generally, and which I gratefully 

acknowledge, I want briefly to draw to the attention of the assembled members and particularly to the 

Department of Agriculture, a resolution which was passed by the R.M. of Moose Jaw, No. 161, and was 

later endorsed by Moose Jaw city council. This resolution calls for a survey into the recreational, the 

industrial, and the agricultural potential of Moose Jaw creek. This resolution was forwarded to both the 

federal and provincial Departments of Agriculture. As most of the members are aware, the Moose Jaw 

creek originates in the Yellow Grass area and after passing through Moose Jaw, finds its way into the 

Qu‘Appelle valley. I only mention this to indicate the large area of the province that the Moose Jaw 

creek actually passes through and I suggest that the possibilities for development are immense in this 

area, and the topography of the land is such that there are a large number of areas where water sheds and 

reservoirs could be created with a minimum of expenditure, which I suggest, would change the whole 

profile of the province in this area. I think the benefit of a water storage and a conservation program 

would be invaluable, with the wild animal park reaping an 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
18 

immediate advantage, and the Moose Jaw training school for the first time would have ample water to 

justify a landscaping and tree planting program, which would be of a good deal of benefit and would 

make this institution a functional and a beautiful home for the mentally retarded. 

 

I just want to point out in passing, Mr. Speaker, that one of the reasons that industry has been 

encouraged to establish in other areas of the province rather than in Moose Jaw, has been our lack of 

industrial water in this particular area. I don‘t intend to dwell on the recreational aspects of the program, 

to say that they are impressive should suffice; but I do wish to stress the need for the immediate steps as 

outlined in the resolution, and I suggest that this proposal does deserve the recognition of all levels of 

government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the speech from the throne draws attention to many fields of endeavor that have 

flourished in our province over the past year. It draws attention to a diversification of our economy also. 

The year 1961 could not have been considered as other than a most difficult year, with almost a 

complete crop failure in most areas. A little more than a decade ago, Saskatchewan would have been 

regarded little more than a disaster area, but at the present time with over half of our wealth now coming 

from non-agricultural sources, the blow was a good deal less severe. Saskatchewan‘s transition from a 

predominantly agricultural province to one with a broad economic base has been by necessity a gradual 

one. 

 

Becoming a province in 1905, Saskatchewan was regarded as one of the poor country cousins. It 

remained so under consecutive Liberal and Conservative administrations, through the roaring twenties, 

the hungry thirties, and to the prosperous early, war-torn forties. Then Mr. Speaker, as a result of the 

inactivity, the lack of direction, and the complete disregard for the welfare of little people, the electorate 

of the province, elected a CCF government in 1944 and repeated the performance in successive 

elections. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the first consideration in the development of an industrial province, measured by 

recognized standards, is the provision of adequate power. Until 1944 the theory existed in this province 

that a 32 volt wind charger on a farmer‘s roof was the answer to our electrical problems. As a practical 

alternative to this plan, this administration built power generating stations in such likely stations as 

Estevan, near the source of low-cost lignite fuel; at Swift Current; at Saskatoon, and in March of this 

year there begins a new era in the production of power in this province, when the Squaw Rapids Hydro-

Electric development goes on the line to be followed in about four years by a similar development in the 

South Saskatchewan River, which will provide for urban and rural customers, as well as industry, power 

and progress for modern living. 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
19 

Members of the opposition, Mr. Speaker, have criticized this government incessantly for their borrowing 

program for the extension of publicly owned utilities. They have refused consistently to recognize the 

difference between ―dead-weight debt‖ and ―self-liquidating debt‖. Although they recognize full well 

virtually all the borrowing that has been done by this province in recent years has been for the expansion 

of our publicly owned utilities. 

 

So in this light I believe it might be worthwhile to examine the operations of a privately owned utility, 

namely Bell Telephone Company. They report that between 1945-61 their debt has risen from about $77 

million to $570 million during this 16 year period. They point out, however, that this increased debt is 

not a matter of concern to them, because the additional assets which they have acquired more than 

balance the debt that has been created. In both cases, Mr. Speaker, the debt will be repaid out of the 

earnings of the company. The difference lies in the fact that when the debt is repaid in Saskatchewan the 

utility will be owned by the people of Saskatchewan. In the case of Bell Telephone Company, the 

customer will pay in perpetuity, never to enjoy any of the advantages of ownership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe in the development of a prosperous community or province, there is another 

factor that affects us greatly and this, of course, is the need for the network of good highways and 

market roads on which to transport goods and travel in comfort. A comparison between our present 

highway system and this which existed in 1944 and pre-1944 days, need not be made by me at this time. 

I think it is sufficient to say that whenever possible the traveling public avoided Saskatchewan in those 

days and their example was followed by business and industry alike. 

 

People who now visit Saskatchewan after an absence of 12 or 15 years are agreeably surprised to find 

that they may now travel anywhere in Saskatchewan on a good road. So I suggest as a direct result of 

our highway program, our power development, the work of the Saskatchewan Research Council, the 

work of the Industrial Development office and a great many other factors too numerous to mention, that 

Saskatchewan has made giant strides which have been so remarkable that even the Leader-Post has 

found it impossible to ignore them and they reported in their January 7 issue of new capital investments 

in the province of Saskatchewan during 1962 to a total value of some $648 million. There was a very 

encouraging gain noted in the value of manufactured products to a total net value of $140 million. The 

article pointed out also that the factory shipment value during 1962, had reached an all time high of 

$370 million. With honorable mention given to a host of smaller industrial plants, this Leader Post 

article paid particular attention to the improved financial position and the encouraging outlook for Inter-

Provincial Steel. I am sure that this is also news which will be welcomed by all Saskatchewan. 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
20 

Mr. Speaker, time does not permit a complete analysis into all the aspects of Saskatchewan‘s growth, 

but I think it would be an over-sight if I also failed to mention mineral production in the province of 

Saskatchewan, with oil and potash in particular playing a very vital role in creating a more stable and a 

more buoyant atmosphere in our province. Oil production during 1962 rose by twelve percent, bringing 

our total production to 65 million barrels during the year, which is 30 times our total production a matter 

of only 10 years ago. 

 

One of the seventeen potash companies that is busily involved in development and exploration, and 

production in the province, is located directly east of Moose Jaw in the Belle Plaine-Stony Beach area. 

This company is doing experimental work in the brine method of mining and we are looking at this 

development very hopefully and with a good deal of interest. Some idea of the magnitude of this 

industry can be gained when we note that it has been reliably estimated that the total value of potash 

produced in this province in the next ten years will total some $100 million. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, among the more recent and outstanding achievements of this government, I believe 

that medical care should surely be mentioned at this time. Prior to July 1st, one person in every three 

you passed on the street was without any kind of medical coverage at all. Today every resident in the 

province is covered, regardless of his age, his physical condition, or the weight of his wallet. Today a 

young nephew of mine who was born with a heart condition is now covered by a Saskatchewan plan. 

Today diabetics are treated no differently than other people who are fortunate enough to be completely 

sound in body. A friend of mine who lost a $4,000 equity in his home because of repeated surgery on a 

young son, who was born with a deformed limb, now carries his medical care card in his wallet with a 

certain sense of security. So I suggest that it is most fitting at this time that we consider the success of 

this government in introducing the first medical care plan in the whole of North America. 

 

In introducing this matter, Mr. Speaker, I believe it might be valuable to us, to consider one of the more 

obscure reasons, perhaps, for opposition to this plan, and I offer evidence in part, an article which 

appeared in McLean‘s Magazine of October 22nd, 1959, and I quote: 

 

Canadian health insurance agencies, which lost about fifteen percent of their business in the field of 

health insurance when the government took over hospital coverage, are making a determined effort to 

hold on to what remains. Companies which write 97 percent of all policies have formed a Canadian 

Health Insurance Association, both to prevent what they call further government encroachment, and to 

devise attractive plans to supplement government hospital insurance. 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
21 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that these people, these forces, aided and abetted by others, with reasons of their 

own, were directly responsible for the tensions, the frustrations, and the volumes of anti-medical care 

propaganda that the public was subjected to during those difficult days and months. I suggest also that 

the concern registered by these groups that a public medical care plan would be too costly, and that the 

standard of medical care would deteriorate, were neither genuine, nor were these theories based on facts. 

Dr. Oscar Peterson, a professor of preventative medicine, at Harvard University, when he was speaking 

to the American Sociological Convention in Washington some months ago presented them with the 

results of an analysis covering the United States, Great Britain, and Sweden. Now as members are 

aware, the last two countries named have a public medical care plan. This analysis showed that in the 

United States 5.3 percent of the gross national product is spent on medical care. In Great Britain 4.5 

percent and in Sweden 3.5 percent. This analysis indicated also that the mortality rate per thousand live 

births was 16 per thousand live births in Sweden, 23 in Great Britain, 26 in the United States. I think it is 

significant also, that this analysis indicated that the average life span in both Great Britain and Sweden 

was longer than it is in the United States. So, I suggest that these figures would indicate to us that the 

American free enterprise type of medical care does not necessarily produce a healthier nation. It tends to 

create the image that the opposite is true. So, I think it is valuable then, if we consider for a moment the 

rejection of the Anderson-King bill in the United States which was under fire at approximately the same 

time as this government was introducing its medical care plan here. 

 

We should note first of all that in the Anderson-King bill, while it would have been a step in the right 

direction, was still dreadfully inadequate to fill the needs of the American public. It would have covered 

only about 17 million American citizens over 65 years of age. The benefits would have included 90 days 

hospital care, after paying a $10.00 deductible for the first nine days, 180 days in a skilled nursing home 

to the extent that this service was available. It would have included out-patient diagnostic services after 

paying a $20.00 deductible for each separate diagnostic study and finally 240 visits from nurses and 

therapists to provide health care in the home. 

 

Now, the Kennedy plan, Mr. Speaker, or the Anderson-King bill if you prefer, would not have paid 

doctor bills. It would have done nothing to affect the doctor-patient relationship; it could not have 

affected the choice of physician; it could not have been considered socialized medicine, even in the 

vaguest terms. In spite of this, what was described as one of the most powerful and wealthiest lobbies in 

the history of the United States descended upon Washington with the result that a number of President 

Kennedy‘s own representatives of his own political party voted against the measure, bringing it to its 

defeat. Now, in the past, Mr. Speaker, this government 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
22 

has indicated its concern for the physical and mental wellbeing of the people of this province. Our 

cancer, our mental health programs, our hospitalization plan, and a number of other features too 

numerous to mention are visible proof of this. Saskatchewan‘s medical care plan provides further proof 

which will be measured by its continuing success and its extension all across Canada. 

 

While discussing health care, Mr. Speaker, I believe it would be worth while at this time then to 

examine some of the inferences and attitudes reflected in remarks attributed to the leader of the political 

party seated at your left. As reported in the Leader Post of November 10, 1962, respecting the cost of 

hospitalization he was quoted as having said this: 

 

The day is fast approaching when the provincial administration, regardless of party, will be obliged to 

consider some kind of deterrent charge, if the cost to the taxpayer is to be kept within reasonable 

bounds. 

 

Now this article reported that in a recent interview the same gentleman had indicated that deterrent 

charges might call for a $2.00 a day charge, for a given number of days as in Alberta. 

 

I want hon. members today to consider for a moment the definition of the word ―deter‖. Webster‘s 

definition is ―to prevent by fear or discouragement‖. I suggest that members consider also the 

effectiveness in this kind of a deterrent charge in keeping down the cost of hospitalization. Consider for 

just a moment how completely powerless the patient is in deciding whether he shall, or whether he shall 

not, be confined to the hospital. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — This is a decision, Mr. Speaker, which by necessity, must be made by the attending 

physician. It is he, and it is he alone who can refer the patient to the hospital. What the Leader of the 

Opposition is saying in effect, and all those who conform to this line of reasoning – is that if a person is 

unfortunate enough to be ill and confined to the hospital and suffering at the same time a loss of 

personal income, they are saying that he should be penalized further by inflicting upon him a $2.00 a 

day fine because he is guilty of being ill. Now, I do suggest, Mr. Speaker, that discretion should be 

encouraged among those who do have the power to refer a patient to the hospital. In the meantime I 

suggest that increased costs are best borne by spreading the costs over our entire population, given 

recognition to the ability of the person to pay. This, Mr. Speaker, reflects the basic thinking of the 

political party seated on your right. It is a philosophy that was born 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
23 

at a time when people were forced by circumstances to join together for the common good, because of 

existing hardships and fear of adversity in the future. It is a phenomenon which Premier Lloyd has 

chosen to describe as ―doing things together‖ and while Saskatchewan Thatcherites prefer to preach 

rugged individualism, I believe that it is accepted in these quarters that we are indeed our brothers‘ 

keepers, and I trust that the theory that the rich should help the poor and that the strong should help the 

weak is not an outmoded Biblical idea, but it is rather in Saskatchewan a 1963 ideology which will 

continue to make life less precarious for the unfortunate. 

 

As a member of this legislature, Mr. Speaker, as a trade-unionist, as a citizen of Canada, I want this 

afternoon to deal with another matter, that is of deep concern to me, and I refer, of course, to the 

question of unemployment which now affects about 8.3 percent of our entire Canadian labor force, 

something in excess of half a million people. 

 

In view of the extent to which automation is being applied into industry, unemployment with all its 

implications is going to continue to plague this land of ours until such time as it is dealt with in a manner 

more comprehensive than ever before, and is recognized as one of our basic and social economic 

problems. In the past there has been too great a tendency to think of and deal with unemployment in 

terms of unemployment insurance. It is time that we should take a look at the whole question and decide 

to deal with the cause rather than with the result. Automation is here to stay and it can be a blessing or it 

can be a curse, depending upon our approach to the problem. 

 

While it has been suggested in some quarters that a pool of unemployed is desirable, as providing a 

source of low cost competitive labor, I suggest that it is going to be necessary for us to decide whether 

human beings are more important than an economic system operated for the benefit of a few which too 

often do not hesitate to take their profit and their capital investment to some foreign land where they 

may take advantage of cheap raw material and cheap native labor. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the speech from the throne draws attention to incentives to new industry which have 

shown a desire of establishing in our province and I feel sure that all members will want to join with me 

in welcoming this kind of incentive to new industry. This type of incentive, however, I suggest is not to 

be confused with the kind of tax holiday that has been suggested in some quarters in the past . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — I contend, Mr. Speaker, that blanket tax concessions and financial accommodations do 

not necessarily result in economic 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
24 

growth and industrial expansion at home. Industry does not build new factories where the existing plant 

is only working part time and too often as a result of unemployed workers having insufficient 

purchasing power to buy the products of industry and be good customers. Now, today, Mr. Speaker, 

there is scarcely any limit to the extent to which unemployment is created as a result of automation, 

there is scarcely any limit to the extent to which machines may be applied to replace manpower. Canada 

Packers is an example. It used to take 98 top rated hide skinners to skin 110 steers an hour in the 

processing of this basic foodstuff. It now takes only 47 men to maintain this rate of production. Fourteen 

Corning glass-blowing machines each operated by a single worker, now produce 90 percent of all the 

glass light bulbs used in the United States and all the glass tubes with the exception of picture tubes used 

in radio and television. Raytheon operates a radio chassis assembly line geared to 1,000 sets a day. It is 

operated by two workers when old methods used to require 200 workers for the same amount of 

production. In the last three years productivity in the northern Ontario logging industry has risen by 20 

percent and yet since 1956 8,000 bush workers have lost their jobs due to mechanization. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the fact that goods and services are being produced more cheaply and more 

efficiently by machines is small comfort to those people who have lost their jobs. For these people, 

automation has not created a better way of life. It has lowered their standard of living and it has 

decreased their purchasing power. I suggest that the extension of this trend, without modification, will in 

the final analysis be to the detriment of industry as well as the business community. Finally, there will 

be more and more people unemployed by this process with more of these unemployed workers 

becoming less and less able to buy the products which are being produced by machines. Now 

unemployment insurance certainly has its place to play as an emergency measure but I suggest that it is 

not going to be accepted by Canadians as a way of life in a civilization that has inherited all the progress 

of past ages in a land where we can now produce more wealth than ever before in the history of man. 

And today, as we reap what we have sown and the unemployment insurance fund is just about depleted, 

we are hearing it suggested in some quarters that unemployment insurance must be put on a sound and 

actuarial basis. As near as I am able to gather from remarks that have been made in questions which I 

have asked, the intent seems to be to allow industry to enjoy all the benefits of automation while the 

victim is going to be required to make a greater personal contribution to the unemployment insurance 

fund in the hope that this may some how solve the problem that was not of his making in the first place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — The problem of unemployment, Mr. Speaker, resulting from 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
25 

automation promises to be one of our most troublesome problems in the days ahead. It is going to 

require the courageous motion of a federal government which is willing to search for and apply new 

methods, new remedies and decide whether men were made for machines or whether machines were 

made for man. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when we talk of unemployment and unemployment insurance, we are not talking of 

such things as droughts, floods, or cyclones over which governments and men have little or no control. 

The solution and the abolition of unemployment will be found to be within our competence when due 

regard is shown for the rights, the dignity and the self respect of Canadian people. 

 

The hon. member for Meadow Lake (Mr. Semchuk) has commented on the question of freedom rather 

extensively this afternoon and I wish also to make a few comments on the subject before I conclude my 

remarks this afternoon. My decision to do so is a result of the frequent use and abuse of this term, 

particularly in recent months by individuals and organizations. The inference is clear that these people 

oppose all kinds, all types of public ownership on the basis that it curtails liberty and is less efficient 

than the so-called free enterprise system. I want to reiterate once again, that we on this side of the house 

take second place to no one in defence of the cause of freedom. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — We are in favor of freedom based on a philosophy that will provide the greatest good 

for the greatest number. When people speak of freedom, Mr. Speaker, they should say what they mean. 

Freedom for whom? Freedom to do what? And under what circumstances? True freedom, Mr. Speaker, 

is not just a bill of goods to be sold with an election slogan attached. True freedom is more than just a 

word to be mouthed by people who don‘t practice what they preach. I suggest that when markets and 

prices are rigged, fixed and manipulated by monopolies they destroy the free market which they claim to 

promote. Side by side we see the profession of one moral code and the practice of another by those 

groups who put their own special interests before that of the general welfare and equate freedom with 

the opportunity to take advantage of social structures and their fellow man. Quite recently, Mr. Speaker, 

and in the name of freedom I presume, men established a monopoly which sent their representatives to 

such remote and unlikely areas as North Bay, Ontario, to a bar in Milwaukee which was called ―Dirty 

Helen‖ where these gentlemen communicated by code in order to circumvent the law, fixed prices and 

raised the earnings of their company at the expense of the general public. During the investigation into 

the price fixing conspiracy of a large number of electrical manufacturers, the President and General 

Manager of one of these companies, Mr. A.F. Looke, 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
26 

stated this during the investigation and I quote him: 

 

No one attending the meeting was so stupid that he didn‘t know that the meetings were in violation of 

the law but it is the only way a business can be run — it is free enterprise. 

 

Now if members are interested a good deal of factual and documentary evidence can be found in the 

book ―The Gentlemen Conspirators‖ by John G. Fuller. And of course, Mr. Speaker, this price fixing 

conspiracy of electrical manufacturing companies was not an isolated incident and further evidence to 

indicate the extent to which these price fixing conspiracies abound in Canada can be seen with the 

number of convictions as a result of Canada‘s combine legislation. In the last twelve years, over 200 

companies and individuals have been fined amounts up to $25,000. Combine investigators found that in 

the $120 million cardboard carton industry (which has been described as one of the most profitable in 

the whole of Canada) that between 1947 and 1959, 14 illegal mergers took place and that 26 companies 

and one individual had joined together to form a combine to fix the prices and restrain competition. I 

think it is generally recognized, Mr. Speaker, that in our modern society that our freedoms are associated 

with certain compulsions and restraints. Freedom on the highway has been curtailed since the days of 

the horse and buggy. Drivers on our highways must now conform to prescribed speed limits, traffic 

laws, or be hauled into court and be dealt with in a manner prescribed by law. Most communities now 

believe that compulsory education is a necessary bulwark of community well-being. Parents have the 

alternative of submitting to compulsory education or being hauled into court and being dealt with in a 

manner prescribed by law. Modern society, Mr. Speaker, and the power age calls for an ever greater 

degree of co-operation, inter-dependence and integrated living, where common interests, ideas and 

practices must take precedence over group or class freedom that puts its own narrow interests ahead of 

that of the general welfare. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Mr. Speaker, because the speech from the throne draws attention to a greater 

diversification of our economy, to economic security and measures designed to contribute to the general 

welfare of Saskatchewan people, while retaining the basic elements of individual freedom and dignity, it 

is my particular pleasure to second the address-in-reply to the speech from the throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
27 

Mr. W.R. Thatcher (Morse) Leader of the Opposition: — Mr. Speaker, there is one political fact in 

Saskatchewan today. It is that the government opposite is living on borrower time. After seeing the 

throne speech and hearing the mover and seconder this afternoon we can understand why. Now I should 

like to congratulate the mover and seconder on the way the presented their speech. They did have a 

difficult job with the record they had to extol. Certainly they had a weak case to try and sell to the 

people of Saskatchewan. I know they will excuse me if I say that I couldn‘t agree with very much of 

their material. 

 

Before I refer to the throne speech there are one or two comments I would like to make on some of the 

speeches of the hon. member for Meadow Lake (Mr. Semchuk) and the hon. member for Moose Jaw 

(Mr. Snyder). 

 

The hon. member for Meadow Lake spent some considerable time extolling the virtues of the legislation 

which his government has introduced over the years. And he said, because of that legislation, people 

won‘t let anyone get rid of this democratic government. And he concluded ―we face the future with 

confidence‖. Well, Mr. Speaker, if the Premier has that confidence, we challenge him to go to the people 

and see whether they echo such confidence. The last three by-elections wouldn‘t indicate that the people 

have very much confidence. 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Don‘t shout so loud. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I want you to hear, Toby. So we say to the Premier and the member for Meadow 

Lake, if they have so much confidence let us go to the people for a decision. They won‘t do it of course 

because the socialists know there wouldn‘t be a handful of them returned if an election were called. Now 

the hon. M.L.A. for Meadow Lake, spent some five minutes telling us that the economy in 

Saskatchewan is expanding in ever-increasing horizons. The hon. member for Moose Jaw said the 

economy of Saskatchewan is making giant strides. Well, Mr. Speaker, if our economy is expanding as 

these hon. members have suggested, it is peculiar that our population still remains almost stationary, at a 

time when all the other provinces are going ahead. The latest dominion Bureau of Statistics figures show 

that once again in the past year Saskatchewan was at the bottom of the totem pole. We say that industry 

is stagnating in this province. My hon. friend for Moose Jaw talked for some time about unemployment 

difficulties. He blamed unemployment on automation, on private enterprise. Today, I recall about 20 

years ago when Premier Douglas was campaigning for the first time, he said ―elect a Socialist 

government and we can solve the unemployment problem. Elect us and we will have social planning, 

and socialized industries that will provide jobs. Mr. Speaker, we don‘t say that 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
28 

there is an easy answer to unemployment, but we do say that in 18 years my hon. friends have certainly 

demonstrated that they haven‘t found the answer. On one point the opposition is clear this afternoon and 

that is the quickest way to get some jobs in Saskatchewan and get some new industries is to get rid of 

this administration. Then you will see some industry come in here. Mr. Speaker, the member for 

Meadow Lake (Mr. Semchuk) talked about the farmers for a moment. And he boasted that municipal 

taxes are lower in this province than they are in other provinces. You know that takes me to another 

promise made by the socialists back in 1944. I quote the Leader Post June 2, 1944, Mr. T.C. Douglas at 

Gravelbourg, telling how the taxes on farm lands were too high. I quote: 

 

The CCF would shift the basis of taxation from land and consumption to the profits of mortgage 

companies. 

 

Instead of lower taxes, Mr. Speaker, municipal taxes in Saskatchewan under the administration of my 

hon. friends have gone up 3½ to 4 times. They are still going up and if they go up much higher, my hon. 

friends won‘t have to worry about socializing land. Then the hon. member for Meadow Lake said 

something about how this administration had protected the farmer on his home quarter. What fine 

legislation that was! Here is what Mr. Douglas said in Gull Lake, May 24, 1944 when he was talking 

about this home quarter. He made a definite promise that ―if it could be proved that a single farm family 

lost title to its home under a CCF administration, headed by himself, his administration would resign.‖ 

Yet a CCF government to the end of 1959 had permitted 2,299 foreclosures, 1,156 cancellations of 

agreement for sale. About the main thing that the legislation accomplished for the farmers was to 

prevent them getting any further long term credit. There is no such thing as long-term farm credit for 

thousands of farmers in this province today. I can tell you when a Liberal government returns to power 

better farm credit is one of the first things we will do for agriculture. 

 

Now, just one other matter before I come to the throne speech briefly, Mr. Speaker. I was rather 

surprised at the hon. member for Moose Jaw, (Mr. Snyder) talking about freedom, lecturing the 

opposition about freedom. You know the Saskatchewan people read the newspapers. More and more in 

recent years they have been looking at the two competing systems throughout the world, socialist system 

and the private enterprise system. My hon. friends are always disparaging and deprecating the 

accomplishments of private enterprise. Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, that under private enterprise the 

Canadian people have had one of the highest living standards in the world. Much higher than most in 

most of the socialist countries. Today our Saskatchewan people more and more frequently are 

comparing conditions in East Europe, West Europe, North Vietnam 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
29 

and South Vietnam. Above all they are comparing conditions in East Germany under socialism and in 

West Germany under private enterprise. I ask the hon. member for Moose Jaw (Mr. Snyder) why, if the 

socialist system has so much to offer in East Germany, do they need all those tanks, soldiers, and that 

Berlin wall to keep them in East Germany. Saskatchewan people, as I say, can read and they know that 

no successful system builds a wall to keep people in, to keep freedom out. The Berlin wall today is a 

symbol to socialist failure in the universe as a whole. Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn very briefly to 

the throne speech. 

 

I think the throne speech introduced last Thursday makes one thing crystal clear. Our Premier and his 

government has no stomach whatever for an election. It has been my privilege to be in politics for about 

20 years on and off. I have never in 20 years seen a document that was so devoid of new ideas, so 

colorless, so unimaginative. The throne speech in effect indicates that there will be no major new 

legislation introduced during the coming session. One particular item that I would like to refer to at this 

time — Saskatchewan newspapers for the most part picked it out as the feature of the throne speech. The 

hon. member for Moose Jaw (Mr. Snyder) also referred to it. The heading in the Leader Post Thursday 

was ―Industry to receive government aid‖ and it has been indicated that this government now, at long 

last, is going to come to the help of private industry. If the government were sincere in this desire to help 

private industry most of us would go along with it, and we would welcome it. But I think that the 

Opposition perhaps has some very genuine reason for doubting that the government really wants to help 

private industry at this time. 

 

My mind goes back about 30 years to the Regina Manifesto. The Manifesto for a long time was the 

Bible of the socialists. What did they say in the document about private industry. I quote: 

 

No CCF government will rest content until it has eradicated capitalism. 

 

I have never seen them withdraw that particular objective. I am sure they have not. When they weep 

crocodile tears for private industry in this house I think back to their confiscation of the Prince Albert 

box factory, or the Riverhurst bus line. They weren‘t very concerned about private business then. I think 

also of the way Kerr-Addison was being treated only a year ago, when that company almost left the 

province, because of the treatment they had received from this administration. I think of the way the 

government has treated the oil companies — 1 percent tax on alleged oil under the road allowance and 

under-the-table deals with co-ops. I think of the way this government has treated the gas companies — 

forcing them to sell to the government monopoly at a price considerably below what they could get 

elsewhere. Mr. Speaker, one could go on almost 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
30 

all afternoon telling of the harassment that this government has carried on towards industry and 

business, over the past 20 years. And now suddenly the socialists propose to help business. Well, I think 

business can be pardoned if they are a little sceptical. 

 

You know the amazing thing, Mr. Speaker, this particular promise was announced last Thursday. Half 

an hour before it was announced there was a return tabled in this house, Return no. 3. I hope the hon. 

members will all read it, because while in the throne speech the Premier and his colleagues were telling 

of their proposed good treatment of private industry, Return 3 shows in fact how they were presently 

treating it. This return is one which I asked for the end of last session. 

 

Copies of instructions issued by any department or agent of the government respecting the making of 

purchases from co-ops. 

 

I would like to mention three or four quotes, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I cite the Assistant Director of 

Revenue to all car operators of the government. This is dated August 28, 1957. 

 

A memorandum has been received by Mr. Drummond from the Premier requesting and emphasizing 

that purchases of gasoline and oil, etc, should be made from co-operative associations wherever 

possible. 

 

I go on to the next quote: — this one comes from the office of the administrator of estates 

 

This is to remind you that the government of Saskatchewan has ordered that all departments and 

agencies shall use co-op petroleum products wherever possible. 

 

One more quote: 

 

The bus company goes on to indicate that directive went out not only gasoline but also hardware, drugs 

and all other products were to be bought from co-ops. 

 

This is a government which says now it is going to help private enterprise. Mr. Speaker, let me make the 

position of the Liberal party very clear on this matter. The Liberal party has no objection to the 

government buying from the co-ops when the price is competitive and when tenders are called. But we 

feel that every taxpaying citizen should be given the same privilege of competing for government 

business. There are indications today that this government is paying substantially higher prices in some 

cases for merchandise when it gets it from the co-op, then it otherwise might obtain if it was making 

these purchases from private business. There are many indications that they are 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
31 

paying more to the co-op than they could get some products through private business. 

 

Hon. Frank Meakes (Minister of Co-operation and Co-operative Development): — Prove it. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — All right, you say prove it. I will. I quote from a directive of the Power Corporation 

June 23, 1961, also in the Return. This is a letter which came from Mr. Clipsham, addressed to J.E. 

Mollard, gas engineer in Regina. I quote: 

 

I am informed by Mr. Whelan (I don‘t know whether that is the hon. member for Regina or not) that 

gas construction has been adhering to an understanding that purchases of motor fuel should be made 

from co-ops where possible, and has been paying as much as 26¢ for diesel fuel at co-ops when it is 

obtainable from Imperial Oil on a charge basis for 17¢. 

 

There is the government‘s own return, one of their own civil servants admits that the power corporation 

was purchasing diesel fuel and paying a price of 53 percent higher than it could be obtained elsewhere. 

Would you say, Mr. Minister, that I have proved it. There are other illustrations. Come and read your 

own return. Now I say this, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! There is too much cross-fire here. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I say this, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal party believes that tenders should be called for 

this type of business, but I say again that this Return indicates just how much interest this government 

has in private business. They have got about the same interest as a shark would have in a shipwrecked 

sailor who is swimming in the ocean. It‘s got about the same interest in private business as the big bad 

wolf had in little Red Ridinghood. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say this. The business men in Saskatchewan are not so unrealistic that they 

think my hon. friends have suddenly become the friend of the small investor, or the supporter of small 

business, or the comforter of the taxpayer. Business men are not so inexperienced and naïve, as to be 

convinced that the mere passing of legislative enactment is suddenly going to make the socialists their 

friends overnight. Business and industry, investment and productivity are the result not of a mere 

expression of words. Rather they are the result of confidence honestly earned, of experience slowly 

gained, and of decisions soundly made after 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
32 

examination of economic facts. That is why the talk in the throne speech of my socialist friends coming 

to the aid of business is so unrealistic, so meaningless. 

 

I say that the government‘s promise of assistance to private industry is a death-bed repentance, which 

belies a 19 year record of harassment, of attack, and of repeated bad faith. No one who knows the 

socialists in Saskatchewan, no one who has listened to the speeches of cabinet ministers, no one who has 

read reports of NDP conventions, is going to believe them for one single moment. But I will say this, 

Mr. Speaker, the mere fact that at long last they recognize that there is a private enterprise sector in this 

economy, to them is certainly a confession of failure; it is an admission of defeat. The mere presence of 

such a promise shows that even the socialists now realize, as I said a moment ago, that they are living on 

borrowed time, and that the curtain is coming down on the Saskatchewan socialistic experiment. 

 

One other matter I should like to refer briefly to, Mr. Speaker, before I adjourn this debate — this 

afternoon I asked the hon. Minister of Health, a very simple question. I asked him whether or not 

doctors were being recruited by the government or any agency in Great Britain today. Some people 

wonder why the medicare crisis in Saskatchewan has not settled down. Some people continue to wonder 

why so many doctors are leaving. Some people are wondering why all this ill feeling still exists. I think 

many people are beginning to wonder if the word of this government means anything. Many people are 

beginning to wonder if the promises of this government have no value. I cannot help going back to the 

last election. In that election, speaking about medicare, the Premier on behalf of this government made a 

now famous promise — ―no medicare scheme would be introduced without being satisfactory to those 

providing the services, and those receiving the services.‖ The pledge was broken for reasons of political 

expediency, with a brutal disregard of a specific commitment. Of course, as a result medical chaos for a 

month resulted, and of course there was a stoppage of essential health services. 

 

In order to bring to an end that stoppage, the government eventually negotiated. In effect they said we 

want the doctors back at work, we are willing to make some compromise. One of the compromises the 

government offered in order to get those doctors back to work was that there would be no further 

recruiting of doctors from Great Britain, to come over here and try to act as scabs, as my hon. friend the 

Minister of Labour (Hon. Mr. Williams) might say . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — The government did not say that. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Yes, that was one of the commitments made. All right, clause 14 of the Saskatoon 

Agreement stated (among other things) 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
33 

―The role of the citizen group in the provision of insurance services must be limited to that of the 

landlord‖; clause 27 (a) sub-section (8) said this: 

 

It is not the intention or purpose of this act to establish a plan of medical care insurance for the 

residents of Saskatchewan under which the general basis for remunerating physicians for insured 

services provided to beneficiaries would be exclusively or largely a fixed sum of money, calculated on 

a yearly or other periodic basis. 

 

This government has not had the courage, Mr. Speaker, to go out and directly recruit new doctors, so 

they got the community clinics to go out and do it for them, and they set up headquarters for this 

purpose in Saskatchewan House. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, the hon. member has just made a statement 

which is entirely and completely false, and it should be withdrawn. The government did not go out and 

get the community clinics to do anything; the government has had no association with the community 

clinics. They are not responsible to the government and the government is not responsible to them, and 

this statement should be withdrawn. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly will refuse to withdraw that, and if you will permit me, I will 

prove that the Premier is not telling the truth. May I proceed? If in a minute I have made my point I will 

withdraw. He is not telling the truth and I will prove it. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, I say that the government has not had the kind 

of association with the community clinics that the hon. member has inferred; that the government did 

not get the community clinics to do anything. This is my statement and I insist that the reference be 

dropped. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, may I continue to prove what I have said is correct? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think that when a hon. member asks that it be withdrawn unless proved that you must 

immediately furnish the proof or else withdraw it until you have furnished the proof. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I will furnish the proof if you will permit me to. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — But, unless you have . . . 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
34 

Mr. Thatcher: — I will immediately furnish the proof. I will immediately furnish the proof. Now I 

made a statement and I am prepared to prove it. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to a point of order. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You don‘t want it proved? 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . the hon. Leader of the Opposition . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I cannot hear whether an hon. member has a point of order or not unless I 

permit him to speak. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — The hon. Leader of the Opposition was completely out of order when he said that 

a member of this house, on this occasion — the Premier — was not telling the truth. That kind of 

statement must always be withdrawn and withdrawn promptly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps I should put it then that the Premier is certainly misinformed. 

Maybe he didn‘t know what his own ministers were doing. Do you prefer that I put it that way? Now 

may I proceed to give the proof? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You may proceed, Sir. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — A number of advertisements appeared in British Medical Journals for a number of 

months following the time of the medicare crisis. I quote only one. This is from the British Medical 

Journal, September, 1962, London: 

 

A young well-qualified doctor wishing to specialize in internal medicine is recently established in 

Saskatchewan to work under the Medical Care Insurance Plan. The group at present consists of six 

members but it is expected to expand considerably during the next year or so. The commencing salary 

will be between $12,000 and $14,000 per year with increments to a maximum of $20,000. Applicants 

with enthusiasm for devising new techniques for the promotion of good health in conjunction with 

other aspects of medicine are invited to submit details to the Director, 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
35 

The Community Clinic, 19 Chester Mews, London, S.W.1. 

 

Now a lot of people on the opposition side wondered now just where is this 19 Chester Mews, London, 

S.W.1. Just who are the Community Clinic? Fortunately we had a doctor over there who lived within a 

block of that address. And we got a letter from him which has this to say about 19 Chester Mews. 

 

The Saskatchewan Agency (this is Saskatchewan House, Mr. Graham Spry) is 28 Chester Street at a 

point some five houses away from the intersection with Chester Mews. As you can see it has a back 

extension which has an additional side entrance extending from down Chester Mews, therefore 19 

Chester Mews is merely the back extension of 25 Chester Street, or Saskatchewan House. As Sherlock 

Holmes would say ‗Elementary, my dear Watson‘. The advertisement for salaried doctors was 

therefore emanating from the Agent-General‘s establishment despite the express intentions in the act. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I . . . 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! When any member rises to a point of order or privilege I must hear 

them. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — The hon. member has suggested that he is herein giving to the house proof of the 

statement that he made before. This statement does not prove his statement before that the government 

was asking the community clinics to recruit doctors for it. It proves it in no such way at all and, Mr. 

Speaker, I say again that the statement should be withdrawn. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, is it a coincidence that these doctors are being recruited from the back 

door of Saskatchewan House. Are you telling me the taxpayers are paying the rental on this building and 

the government doesn‘t even know who is using it? 

 

Premier Lloyd: — On a point of privilege. I say and when I get into the debate I will prove it too, that 

this statement does not substantiate the statement which the hon. member made previously and I think 

on that basis the hon. member must withdraw it. 



 

February 18, 1963 

 

 
36 

Mr. Speaker: — I do rule that that statement has not yet clarified the statement as made earlier. It does 

not prove the government have directed any clinic for to make application and unless more concrete 

evidence is furnished I would ask for the speaker to withdraw the statement and if he is prepared at a 

later date to submit evidence, that will be time. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, very respectfully, I say that this certainly does substantiate my earlier 

statement but if you order me to withdraw it I see no point in proceeding and I will withdraw, and I will 

wait for the proof which the Premier has offered to give this house when the time comes. But I do want 

to say this. We have today one more evidence that the word of this government means nothing, that they 

treat an agreement as a scrap of paper. This is the reason why medicare in Saskatchewan is still a major 

problem. This is the reason why doctors by the dozen are still leaving the province of Saskatchewan. 

This is the reason why this government will be defeated as soon as there is another election. Mr. 

Speaker, I move to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The assembly adjourned at 4:39 o‘clock p.m. 

 


