



















































Hansard: March 12, 1963


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

FIFTH SESSION — FOURTEENTH LEGISLATURE 

19th Day 

 

Tuesday, March 12th, 1963 

 

The House met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

on the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Erb: (Milestone) — Before the orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I should like to draw the attention of 

the house, to a group of students from Wilcox High School, grade 10 and grade 11 students, 

accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Earl White and Mr. A. Woodside. I‟m sure that hon. members will 

join with me in extending to them a hearty welcome, to express the hope that their stay this afternoon in 

the chambers will be a pleasant and profitable one. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

RADIOLOGISTS & PATHOLOGISTS DISPUTE 
 

Mr. Thatcher: (Morse) — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are called, I should like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Health. Has any progress been made in settling the dispute between the 

government and the radiologists and pathologists? 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: (Minister of Health) — Mr. Speaker, discussions have been held actively over the 

past several weeks. Further discussions were held in Saskatoon on Friday of last week, certainly progress 

in the course of discussions is being made, whether or not these discussions will lead to a resolution of 

the current difficulties, I cannot now say. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: (Morse) — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might ask the Minister a supplementary question? 

If, in the happy event that a settlement is reached, is the government considering a refund for patients 

who have been paying directly for the services of radiologists and pathologists? 

 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

2 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: (Minister of Health) — Mr. Speaker, consideration is being given to the matter 

which the hon. member raises; it is part of the subject of discussion with the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons. I am not now in a position to make any further statements in respect to the matter. 

 

COST OF PUBLICATIONS CENTRE OF COMMUNITY STUDY 
 

Mr. Guy: (Athabaska) — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I would like to direct a question to 

the Minister of Education. Last year in the spring session, I asked for a return for the names and costs of 

publishing publications for the Centre of Community Studies, for the years 1959-60, 1960-61, and I 

think the information was provided. This year I asked for the same information in regard to the year 

1961-62 and 1962-63, and this information was not provided, and it was claimed that it was not 

available to the government. I wonder if you could explain why the difference in policy this year. 

 

Mr. Turnbull: (Minister of Education) — There is really no difference in our policy, Mr. Speaker,— 

our policy is that this agency is not a government agency, it has the right to publish whatever reports it 

wishes to publish. It establishes its own budget in respect to such publications, and if this agency wishes 

the government to table reports in the house, I would be happy to do so. I would suggest that the hon. 

member might write the director of the centre, and make such a request, and the director could either 

give the reports directly to him, or if he wishes, and the director agrees, to allow the tabling of the 

documents, I would see no reasons why it shouldn‟t be done. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 

Hon. Mr. Meakes: (Minister of Co-operation and Co-operative Development) — Mr. Speaker, before I 

adjourned yesterday, I had complimented the Provincial Treasurer on his good budget that he had 

brought down. I had dealt with the budget in relation to my own constituency. I had spent some little 

time on the vision of the Liberal party as expounded by their Liberal organizer, Dean Lang; the policy of 

fresh air friends and quietness. I had dealt at some length with the co-operative movement in 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

3 

Saskatchewan generally, and had spent some time in discussing my department, especially in relation to 

the consumer end of the movement in Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to go on and deal for some few minutes with, first of all the credit union movement in 

Saskatchewan. By the end of December, 1962, there were over 170,000 members of 284 credit unions in 

Saskatchewan. These credit unions had assets of over $142 million representing an increase of 29 

percent over the previous year. The total amount of loans made by credit unions in Saskatchewan since 

1937, when the first one was organized, is now nearing the $400 million mark, and Mr. Speaker, there 

has been no loss in member investment during this period. I would say that this in itself is a remarkable 

record. 

 

One significance of credit unions is that they allow users of credit to control it themselves, and to 

provide credit at reasonable rates. And I would suggest that even with extraordinary growth of the credit 

union movement in Saskatchewan, that there is still room for more growth, especially in urban centres, 

and in some rural areas as well. I think they offer an alternate service to the higher loaning agencies that 

operate in this province. 

 

The establishment of the mutual aid fund and central reserve fund by amendment to The Credit Union 

Act, a few years ago has done much to strengthen the credit union position and guarantees that there 

never will be any loss in member deposits or member equities. 

 

Our Credit Union Branch is required by law to inspect all credit unions at least once a year, and to audit 

all credit unions‟ assets of less than $200,000. Credit unions above these figures are required to employ 

the services of outside auditors. This means that where auditors are employed, that our staff only 

concentrates on the examination of loaning policies. 

 

I fully expect that by the end of next year, that the credit union movement will have assets of over $200 

million and I want to say that all credit unions will again be inspected by our staff in the coming year, 

with no increase in field staff. 

 

The Saskatchewan Credit Society, the central credit union of credit unions in Saskatchewan, continues to 

provide stability to the movement. The society also continues to finance new co-operative projects in the 

north under The Co-operative Guarantee Act. 

 

The Co-operative Trust Company is a relatively new company, and it is providing services for the 

administration of estates at very moderate costs. With the support of 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

4 

credit unions it is now getting into the loaning farm field by mortgages. I might say that this is the 

company that administers The Family Farm Credit Act, and this legislation is performing a useful 

supplement to the services of The Dominion Farm Credit Act. The fact that the legislation permits 

rather more leeway in the percentage of the appraised value that can be loaned for the purchase of farm 

lands has enabled it to be of use where the Dominion program has not been suitable. While the 

Dominion program has far greater resources and larger staff, I would suggest that there is no doubt that 

our program has played a useful role since it was brought in, in 1959, and I am sure that it has 

contributed and hastened the over haul of the federal act a few years ago. 

 

But I want to suggest, Mr. Speaker, there are still some gaps in our credit programs which need study. 

This may involve ways and means of improving credit facilities to encourage livestock expansion, either 

through co-operative or individual action. This also might involve a study of more effective says and 

means of providing starter funds for young farmers who want to get started but haven‟t the necessary 20 

or 25 percent required under the current Dominion and provincial legislation. 

 

This poses a very difficult problem, but I think it is worth looking at, if we hope to maintain the family 

farm. 

 

Our research branch in the department has continued to do this work of investigating new co-operative 

projects, that may be proposed by the co-operatives from time to time. It examines the operating and 

other problems of existing co-operatives, such as the cost of retail credit. It encourages larger co-

operative organizations to establish their own research facilities. Studies which have been undertaken in 

the last year include occupancy costs by credit unions, the place of machine accounting by credit unions, 

the possible expansion of certain services by co-operative fisheries, and a special co-operative credit 

facilities for fishermen. 

 

We hope and expect a number of new studies for this coming year. I might say that statistics complied by 

the research division of the department show that the co-operative share of Saskatchewan‟s retail 

business was 6.7 percent in 1945, and by the end of 1961, it had increased to 9.4 percent. While this 

progress is encouraging, I think it certainly proves Mr. Speaker, the fallacy of the attacks being made 

against the co-operative movement in certain quarters on the grounds that they are taking over large 

sections of our economy. 

 

Statistics also show that our farm co-operatives continue to hold their own in the field of marketing 

products produced by the farmers themselves. For example, in 1961-62, 64 percent of the grain and seed 

produced in Saskatchewan was handled by co-operatives, cattle and calves 53 percent, 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

5 

hogs 28 percent, sheep and lambs 37 percent, eggs 40 percent, poultry 40 percent and dairy products 74 

percent. 

 

The extension services branch of the department undertakes extension and supervisory work involved in 

new types of co-operatives. It gives special attention to co-operatives engaged in agricultural production 

and co-operative developments in northern Saskatchewan. Assistance is also given in holding co-

operative schools for young people and by working with special extension agencies established by the 

co-operatives themselves. 

 

By the end of the year, there was 299 agricultural production co-operatives under the supervision of the 

extension services branch. These included 34 feeder co-operatives, 120 co-operative pastures, 53 co-

operatives for feed and fodder reserves, 21 artificial breeding co-operatives, 19 co-operative farms, 6 

groups for the co-operative use of farm machinery, 11 tree planting co-operatives, 14 watershed co-

operatives and 21 of a miscellaneous type. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I expect to see increased activity in the organization of feeder co-operatives. In this 

our extension staff works with the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and the Department of Agriculture. Our 

men assist with organizations, see to it that proper books and records are kept, that operating methods 

are in accordance with the objects of organization, that there is a proper audit and that adequate reports 

are presented to members. The Pool buys the cattle and assists in selling the cattle after finishing. Local 

agricultural representatives provide advice on feeding methods. I might say that The Co-operative 

Guarantee Act is being amended to facilitate guaranteed loans by the Credit Society to feeder co-

operatives where desired. 

 

I expect to see more community co-operative pasture associations. Here we provide the same services as 

in the case of the feeder co-ops, while the Department of Agriculture furnishes earned assistance and 

outlines the requirements for the most effective use of pasture land. The development of the ARDA 

program may mean more use of co-operative techniques and we shall continue to work with the agencies 

concerned in the development of this program. 

 

I also expect to see more attention given to the development of co-operatives for the establishment of 

feed and fodder reserves, which proved their value so well in 1961. 

 

In connection with these programs, I want to say that excellent co-operation exists between our staff and 

that of the Department of Agriculture, and we appreciate their willingness to work together at all times. 

 

I want to suggest the rising costs of farm machinery makes the purchase and ownership of the larger 

units extremely 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

6 

difficult for the smaller or family farm. We have now had sufficient experience with co-operatives for 

the use of farm machinery to show that there are real possibilities for the joint ownership of the larger 

farm machinery units, combined in some cases with the pooling of grain production operations. It is 

going to be extremely difficult for smaller farmers to maintain their position unless something is done in 

this regard, and we intend to encourage this kind of development wherever possible. 

 

I want to say that The Co-operative Guarantee Act, is being amended to facilitate guaranteed loans to 

co-operatives for the use of farm machinery. 

 

The co-operative development program undertaken by the Extension Services Branch in northern 

Saskatchewan, has now resulted in the establishment of 48 co-operatives. Northern co-operative 

development is a way of improving the welfare of the native people who are in receipt of very low 

incomes and operate on a narrow resource base. It also means encouraging these people to play a 

stronger part in the management of their own affairs. This entails information to them about 

responsibilities of membership as part owners of a business, duties of directors, bookkeeping methods, 

accounting and merchandising and how to assess financial reports. 

 

All of this results in greater interest in community affairs, more belief in their ability to do something 

about helping themselves in other directions, and I believe, Mr. Speaker, in time this will mean less 

social aid. 

 

As of now there are 18 fishermen‟s co-operatives. Co-operative Fisheries Limited was set up to operate 

the 6 filleting plants built by the government on Class B lakes until they could be taken over by the 

fishermen themselves. I might say, to date, $81,000 has been paid by the fishermen using these plants, 

on the purchase price of $225,000. In another year or two, it may be possible to reorganize the 

government-appointed board which administers these plants under The Co-operative Fisheries Act, so 

that they are entirely controlled by fishermen. Co-operative fisheries also acts as sales agents for other 

fishermen‟s co-operatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this time I want to remark on remarks made by the member for Athabaska (Mr. Guy) 

yesterday, and if I understand him right, he said that top management advisors had informed native 

fishermen that if they didn‟t ship their fish with S.G.A. that the co-operative filtering plants would refuse 

to take their fish. This, I say, with all the force that I can regiment, is not true. There is no figment of 

truth in that statement. Actually the fishermen do not fly their fish out, co-op fisheries hires the planes 

and they come in and take the fish out themselves; the fishermen isn‟t the person who pays for the 

freight, initially. 

 

He also complained, Mr. Speaker, that when a vote was 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

7 

taken on certain lakes, that fishermen were allowed to vote who do not normally fish. This is not true 

here either. Any person who has had a fishing licence one year out of the last three is allowed to vote, 

and again I say this proves Mr. Speaker, that what he said, he didn‟t really know what he was talking 

about. 

 

I am pleased to announce to this house that this year one more government appointed director of co-

operative fisheries has resigned. This being Mr. Barney Johnson, of this city, and I wish to take this 

opportunity to thank him sincerely for the interest, and devotion to duty, and sage advice that he gave 

during his stay on the board. I might say, he was replaced by a fisherman from Livelong Lake, Mr. Mike 

Denny. 

 

The operations of Co-operative Fisheries result in the best average price for fishermen that the market 

will bring. Occasionally a fisherman may be able to make a better deal with an individual buyer who 

wants a limited quantity at a good price, but this invariably means a lower price for the rest. Pooling, is, 

therefore, the best marketing method for northern fishermen in the long run, as long as it is not 

undermined by competitors, and other people like the hon. member from Athabaska (Mr. Guy). 

 

Mr. Guy: (Athabaska) — How about the timber board? You mean monopoly, don‟t you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Meakes: — I am convinced that the fishermen are improving their financial position through 

co-operative action, and benefiting socially from helping themselves. The 6 former government trading 

stores are being sold to their customers through local co-operative associations under supervision of 

Northern Co-operative Trading Services. The amount paid on the purchase price, including grants for 

prepayment, is now $108,000 out of the original purchase price of $275,000. 

 

The 8 other co-operative stores in the north were started from the ground up with very limited capital to 

begin with. Much of the financing has been through loans under The Co-operative Guarantee Act and 

the re-payment experience has been good. In view of the extremely limited local resources for financing 

buildings and equipment, provision is being made in our budget for earned assistance to these co-

operative stores based on repayments on loans originally obtained for financing capital assets. This will 

reduce the interest burden and thus make greater savings possible to lower living and production costs. 

Here again, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

8 

Mr. Johnson retired and I am pleased to announce Father Megret of Wollaston replaced him. 

 

I want to say here that all of these stores not only provide savings, and in some instances better services, 

but also force competitors to lower their prices and improve services. Thus the whole community 

benefits and the people gradually learn to do more things for themselves. 

 

I expect we are going to see more local power co-operatives in the north and a survey is being taken in 

this regard. I think one of the great needs of the people of the north is not only to build up savings but to 

learn better money management. We have two credit unions now in northern Saskatchewan, and I 

believe that we are working with the co-operative credit union league and the co-operative credit society 

with the possibility of establishing regional credit unions. 

 

And I want to say here that resource development is important. With the assistance of D.N.R., co-op saw 

milling projects are being developed at Buffalo Narrows, Cumberland House and Canoe Lake. More 

fisheries co-operatives are expected as the people become interested. I am going to say that our staff in 

the north, like others in the region are working under difficulties. The experience with co-operatives to 

date has been good. I want to express our appreciation for the co-operation received from D.N.R. and 

other personnel in the north. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that one of the most urgent needs of the north is better housing, within the means of 

those people who are able to pay. We started an experiment, the home-builders co-operative at 

Pinehouse was organized to ascertain the possibilities of self-liquidating housing, suitable for the people 

of moderate means, considering the income level of the area. 

 

Thirteen houses have been built, ranging from $1,500 to $3,000 in cost, this including donations of 

labour and use of local materials by the members. Financing is through a guaranteed loan from the credit 

society, and we know the people there take pride in their homes, (I was there last fall), which are much 

better than they ever had before, and they are making good progress in meeting their repayments. Plans 

for these houses and specifications were drawn up by the Construction Division of D.N.R. 

 

And here, Mr. Speaker, I want to pay tribute to men like Gus MacDonald and Arnold Feusi of D.N.R. 

and all staff of the north in my own department, for their great interest in northern housing. They are a 

credit to this department and to this government. 

 

I was pleased to hear the Minister of Natural Resources say that he has some money allocated in his 

estimates for 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

9 

housing. I can assure him of the wholehearted support of our staff in the north in this regard. We believe 

that a significant percentage of the people in the north can participate in self-liquidating housing projects 

of this kind, provided the necessary educational work can be done beforehand and the support of the 

people secured. I think that there should be some form of an earned assistance program in this regard, 

investigated, to assist these people who through no fault of their own, whose incomes are too low to 

meet the standards of the Pinehouse project. 

 

It would help immeasurably if C.M.H.C. were to assist with properly supervised housing projects, but 

with standards and specifications related to the income of the people in the area who are paying their 

own way. 

 

I would say, Mr. Speaker, the experience of the department in the north during the past ten years shows 

the immense need for co-operative effort as a means of helping the people. There is the over-growing 

pressure of population on a narrow resource base. But co-operative development amongst our northern 

people requires special staff, a great deal of hard work, time, finances, and the goodwill of all individuals 

and agencies interested in the welfare of the northern people. We, in our department, will do our best to 

play our part. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to say this. The co-operative movement as a whole continues to 

play an important part role in the economy of our province. Almost every farmer in Saskatchewan is a 

member of some co-op or another. The growing number of urban and rural people are also using co-

operative methods through credit unions, retail stores, insurance companies, community service 

organizations, etc., and with the growing urbanization of our population, this trend, I am sure will 

continue. 

 

There is also the increasing role for resources development by co-operatives in the north. Contrary to the 

belief of many, co-operatives are not, except in a few segments like credit unions, growing faster than 

our economy. And I think if the co-operative movement is to continue its historic role in this province of 

providing services at cost to those who need them, I think that a number of fields require further 

development. 

 

For example, there is an important task for co-operatives in the field of housing, low income groups in 

all areas of the province, where people are finding it difficult to build their own housing. 

 

Rising farm machinery costs make an extension of co-operative farm machinery manufacture and 

distribution essential. The special legislation committee on farm machinery and prices in 1939 said that 

the only solution to the problem 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

10 

of high machinery costs was co-operative action. This is as true now as it ever was. The small family 

farm can do a great deal to maintain their position through more cooperative action in the use of farm 

machinery. The necessary expansion of the livestock industry can be helped by more co-operative action 

in production, marketing and credit. 

 

The trend towards the construction of abattoirs closer to sources of supply, tied in with trucks delivering 

fresh meats to consumer markets suggest the need for co-operative abattoirs under producer control in 

order to strengthen producer bargaining power. 

 

Our farmers might well give consideration to the development of fertilizer, the manufacture of fertilizer, 

and there is many more things that I am sure that we can look into. 

 

And I want to say this in closing, Mr. Speaker, that we will do our part in the department, if our people 

show that they want us to do it, in these new and expanded services. This is what we are here for. The 

budget provides for the continuation of co-operative services, Mr. Speaker, I intend to support the 

motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: (Minister of Labour and Telephones) — Mr. Speaker, may I first congratulate the 

Provincial Treasurer on his budget speech, and those who have taken part in this debate, and also 

congratulate the people of this province for having in power a government which has provided a budget 

totalling $187,833,000. This money will all be used for the benefit of the citizens of this province. 

 

The budget for the Department. of Labour, including the various branches, such as electrical and gas 

inspection, boiler, pressure vessels, theatres and public halls, elevator and hoists, fire commissioner and 

apprenticeship, amounts to $1,343,000, a slight increase over last year. 

 

While I do not wish to compete with special neckties worn by Provincial Treasurers, I am today, to 

indicate my appreciation, wearing an unusual stick-pin, a $1 goldpiece minted in 1852. 

 

I had the honor, Mr. Speaker, to represent our province at the commissioning of the destroyer escort 

“H.M.C.S. Saskatchewan” at Esquimalt about three weeks ago. It was a most impressive ceremony, 

witnessed by several hundred people. It is a splendid new ship, modern in every way with a crew of 13 

officers and 226 men, 41 of whom are from the province of Saskatchewan. The ship is due to leave for 

the east coast in May, and later to European waters with visits to many great 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

11 

ports, including some in the Scandinavian countries. Wherever it goes the name of Saskatchewan and its 

location will become better known. It will be an ambassador of goodwill for our province. 

 

I also had the honor to present the captain with a splendid hardwood plaque, made in Regina, of the 

provincial coat of arms. He and all the others were quite pleased and wished me to thank the government 

and the people of Saskatchewan for this remembrance, which will remain in a prominent part of the ship 

indefinitely. The city of Saskatoon presented the ship with a beautiful silver tray, properly inscribed. 

Other cities may do something along similar lines. 

 

I was rather annoyed, however, Mr. Speaker, to see in the Vancouver paper the next morning a 

derogatory article, indicating that the ship was already obsolete. The heading read “The sub-chaser that 

can‟t catch subs”. I was surprised to see the same article in the Leader-Post a few days later. Although it 

may be correct to say that a few modern under-sea boats are faster, Russia has over 400 conventional 

submarines, slower than this new destroyer. The Vancouver paper, I understand, has made something of 

a correction, and I believe the Leader-Post should also do the same. 

 

I hope that the citizens of this province, now that they have the information I have just provided, will 

feel rather proud of “H.M.C.S. Saskatchewan” than otherwise. I am sure that the people of this province 

join with me in wishing the officers and the crew of the navy vessel which bears the name of 

Saskatchewan, “fair weather and good sailing” as it leaves the west coast for different parts of the world. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — At our recent and enthusiastic nomination convention held in the Saskatchewan 

Hotel and attended by over 1,300 people a gentleman handed me this clipping from the Winnipeg Free 

Press dated January 14th, 1963. It is headlined “Manitoba Liberals oppose great jump in minimum 

wage” and I quote: 

 

The Manitoba Liberal Party Saturday took a stand against an increase in Manitoba‟s 66 cent an hour 

minimum wage. Delegates to the party‟s annual meeting rejected the resolution which urged (and I 

quote again) a substantial increase in the minimum wage. 

 

The resolution had claimed there are members of the community suffering conditions of hardship and 

degradation because the present minimum is insufficient. When I was a boy I recall shooting two prairie 

chickens with one shot and I felt quite good about it, but I never thought I would be lucky enough to find 

a Conservative government with a minimum as low as 66 cents per hour on its statutes and, at the same 

time, 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

12 

find the Manitoba Liberal party complaining that 66 cents an hour was too high. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: (Morse) — Careful now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — The Saskatchewan rate is 77 and one-half cents, so there is quite a difference. 

This was an interesting convention, Mr. Speaker, listen to this: 

 

The Liberal meeting produced a labor policy which, first, approved the principal of a secret strike vote, 

but disapproved of a government supervised strike vote. Second, called for consumer representation on 

the Manitoba labor board. Third, opposed any compulsory financial support to any political party. 

(Now, think that one over.) 

 

Eric Litlay, a member of the United Packing House Workers‟ Union, said he objected to the resolution 

because it interfered with the internal affairs of unions, because the union deductions to support the New 

Democratic Party were not compulsory, because members had the right to contract out of the deductions 

if they wished — that is, they had the right to ask that no deductions be made. 

 

After all the caterwauling we have heard in this legislature about members of labor unions contributing 

to political parties through wage deductions, usually three to five cents an hour, now we find a member 

of the Packing House Workers‟ Union, apparently a Liberal or he wouldn‟t be there, upholding this 

principle at a Liberal convention. Now, I have heard everything. 

 

Then further on, other resolutions were passed: first, it called on Canada to join the Organization of 

American States. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Get over to Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — I‟m getting closer all the time. 

 

Second, it urged the establishment of a Manitoba centre for the performing arts. Third, condemned 

government waste and extravagance, opposed any new taxes and called for a return to the old-style 

federal-provincial tax agreement. 

 

Where have we heard those words “waste and extravagance” before? We are right back to 

Saskatchewan, aren‟t we? 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

13 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — People sometimes say to me, why, with the best labor legislation in Canada, do 

you not let the general public know more about it, and that is exactly what I propose to do this afternoon. 

It is such a number of years, Mr. Speaker, since I made a resume of legislation we now have in this 

province for the well-being of men and women who make up our labor force. 

 

Someone might ask, “Just who and what is labor?”. Well, the obvious answer is, those persons who 

work for wages. Teachers, clerks, typists, city and government employees, craftsmen in building trades, 

railway men and many others. Hundreds, even thousands of young men and women have left the farms 

of this province and are now working in towns and cities. We believe that the young people of today 

have little or no idea of what working conditions were 20 or more years ago, and know nothing of what 

wage earners in other provinces receive in comparison to what they are entitled to in Saskatchewan. 

 

First, let us look at our holidays-with-pay legislation. Back in 1944 this government passed legislation 

which provided two weeks holidays with pay per year, or the proportion of payment of four percent of 

total earnings if the employee worked less than a year. No other province had any such measure, 

although over the years British Columbia, Alberta and Manitoba have followed our lead and provide two 

weeks, other province one week. In 1959 we made a further improvement and provided 3 weeks 

holidays for employees with over five years service with the same employer. As yet no other province 

has provided this extra week, which we feel is entirely justified; especially on the prairies where the 

holiday season is so short and the winters so long. This extra week has been well accepted by 

management, and we have had little or no complaint. 

 

It should be stated here that a number of unions have secured three weeks holidays for their employees, 

with certain years of service, and some firms provide it voluntarily. But for employees, especially those 

in the lower income brackets, who are not protected in some way, legislation has been necessary. 

 

Another feature has been the eight statutory holidays, such as Christmas, Good Friday, Thanksgiving, 

July 1, and so forth, for which employees cannot be docked if not required to work on these days. 

Previous to 1945, employers could deduct a day‟s pay for Christmas Day, and some of them did. If 

employees are required to work on any of these days, payment at time and one half extra is required, 

with one or two exceptions. How many young people of today, know of these advantages which I have 

just listed, and know they were brought about by this government. No other province has the third 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

14 

week with five years service, or the benefits of the eight statutory holidays, and as a result many 

thousands of employees in other provinces do not receive these benefits. 

 

From the rather pleasant subject of holidays, Mr. Speaker, let us turn to something entirely different, 

namely the injury or death of employees at their work. 

 

In Saskatchewan approximately 27,000 men are injured each year and about 35 men are killed in 

industry. Widows of these men have received the sum of $300 outright for immediate expenses — in 

other provinces lesser amounts. In this province widows receive $110 per month; other provinces 

provide payment to widows form $60 up to $75, excepting British Columbia where it is $90, the closest 

province to Saskatchewan which I said is $110. In addition the allowance for children in our province, is 

$45 per month, regardless of numbers, as compared to from $20 to $40 in other provinces. The sum of 

$60 per month for the keep of orphans in Saskatchewan, as against $35 to $45 per month elsewhere. 

Previous to 1944 payment of 66 and two-thirds percent of the employees wage while off due to injury, 

was general across Canada. Shortly after assuming office we increased it to 75 percent, which over the 

years has been followed by all provinces in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that every injured workman is Canada should appreciate the actions of the 

Saskatchewan government in pioneering a better deal for him while off work due to injury. 

 

Another improvement, when we assumed office, maximum earnings had a ceiling of $2,000 per year on 

which compensation could be paid. For example, an employee who might have been earning $3,000, 

$4,000 or even $5,000 a year, at that time could only receive payments of 66 and two-thirds percent of 

$2,000 while off work. Now in Saskatchewan he gets 75 percent of earnings up to a ceiling of $6,000 per 

year. This is the highest maximum in any Canadian province. Five other provinces have a $5,000 ceiling 

per year, other provinces less. 

 

Speaking to an official of the Ontario board a few weeks ago, he mentioned that the last time he saw the 

Prime Minister, Mr. Diefenbaker, the latter pointed out to him that while Ontario only had a $5,000 

ceiling, Saskatchewan paid up to a yearly wage of $6,000. John was apparently making a favorable 

comparison. 

 

The board operates an accident prevention department which in 1962 made a total of 3,500 plant 

inspections and in addition gave lectures and demonstrations and showed moving pictures on 417 

occasions to an audience totalling 14,400 people. First aid classes to a total of 1,225 were conducted and 

since this department has been operating, first aid certificates in excess of 5,000 have been issued. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

15 

For some years members of the accident prevention department, have been giving lectures, and 

demonstrations in various technical and academic high schools. 

 

May I now refer to hours-of- work legislation. In Saskatchewan we have a 44-hour week, in ten cities 

and 71 larger towns, and a 48-hour week over the balance of the province. Alberta has somewhat a 

similar arrangement, 44 hours in centres over 5,000 population, 48 hours over the balance of the 

province; B.C. 44-hour week with numerous exemptions. Manitoba has a 48-hour week for men and 44-

hour week for women. Ontario has a 48-hour week for everyone over the entire province. Quebec 40 to 

48 hours per week in the construction and trades, but 50 to 54 and 55 limits are in effect in some areas. 

The Maritime provinces do have some limits in the mining industry. Again, in hours of work we do find 

Saskatchewan in the lead. 

 

Our relationship with the employee and the employers of this province have been very good and we 

found that most of them wished to follow proper procedures and are quite willing to see that their 

employees receive a fair wage. We have the occasional chiseller, of course, who will take advantage of 

his help, and sometimes it is found necessary to take court action where an employer refuses to pay 

proper amounts to his employees, or works them excessive hours without proper remuneration. 

 

Over the years we have collected, mostly through our office, over $1.5 million and paid the money over 

to the employees concerned. It is money they, otherwise, would never have received. 

 

Some might say that this government is doing so much for the wage earner, and less for the farmers. 

This, is, of course, a fallacy, and we know the Minister of Agriculture and his department are doing 

everything they can to help the farmer. Unfortunately the provincial government cannot assist the farmer 

too much where income is concerned; we cannot set prices, whereas we are in a position to do 

considerably more for the wage earner. 

 

Now, to turn to the matter of minimum wage rates, which are an absolute necessity in all parts of 

Canada. No one will ever become wealthy working for income as low as $14.40 per week in certain 

parts of Nova Scotia, or even $34 per week which in Saskatchewan is the highest in Canada. It is, 

however, absolutely necessary to have minimum rates, otherwise a certain type of employer will exploit 

his employees. Like the fellow who used to dock his employees a day‟s pay for Christmas. Also a 

minimum is the amount on which the whole wage scale of a community is based. All Canadian 

provinces have minimum wage laws, Mr. Speaker, Nova Scotia and Ontario for women only, New 

Brunswick, Saskatchewan, British Columbia minimum rates apply through the province. Alberta and 

Manitoba have different rates for urban and rural centres. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

16 

On July 1, 1962, increases were made in our province, namely, $34 in the ten cities and the 10 larger 

towns, $32 per week over the balance of the province, with $2 per week less for employees under 18 

years of age. 

 

It was very good, Mr. Speaker, of the Leader-Post to print an article several months ago, with a headline 

to the effect that Saskatchewan rates were now up to those in Alberta. Actually the $34 per week in that 

province only affects the cities and only covers those over 19 years of age. Employees under 18 receive 

$26 per week and those between 18 and 19 $30 per week. 

 

There are lower rates for female employees, but in Saskatchewan the rate is exactly the same for male 

and female. 

 

Our legislation is much superior. But it was flattering for the Leader-Post to indicate that we had caught 

up to Alberta. 

 

Much more could be said regarding labor legislation, but time does not permit. 

 

I have merely hit the high spots. I will leave this subject now with the suggestion that the wage earners 

of this province become familiar with the benefits we have in Saskatchewan compared to what they 

could expect elsewhere. 

 

Now to turn to the Department of Telephones of which I am pleased to be the minister. Our budget for 

the coming year is $10 million. We have approximately 2,000 employees, and I am glad to say that their 

wages and working conditions are among the highest, if not the highest of any company in Canada. In 

the field of service to broadcasting companies, Saskatchewan Government Telephones has expanded its 

facilities. 

 

In co-operation with the other major telephone companies, a television network was provided for CTV, 

and radio program transmission facilities for the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Both are coast to 

coast networks, bringing radio and television entertainment to the nation. S.G.T. has also provided the 

microwave length from Moose Jaw to Regina, so that CJRE rebroadcasting station here. 

 

In October last year, Saskatchewan Government Telephones passed another milestone, when its 200,000 

telephone was installed. In less than 10 years the number of corporation owned telephones in service was 

doubled. The end of 1962 there were more than 265,000 telephones operating in the province, and we 

expect another 9,000 this year. 

 

Municipalities are benefiting, Mr. Speaker, by receiving a total of $262,000 in grants, which represents 

the taxes on properties owned by the system. 

 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

17 

An 11 storey office complex will be built in Regina, located on the north-west corner of Albert Street 

and College Avenue, facing on Albert Street. When completed it will house the expanding head office 

department of the corporation, which are now located in five rented quarters in various parts of the city. 

The new building will contain a basement, main floor, nine office floors, and one floor devoted to 

mechanical equipment and possible office floor area. 

 

The mechanical equipment floor will eliminate what has sometimes been termed as an unsightly 

penthouse on the roof of a building. It is expected tenders will be called later this month, and that 

construction will start soon afterwards. It will be officially opened in late 1964. 

 

There are 955 rural companies in Saskatchewan, serving over 57,000 subscribers. The department has 

continued paying one-third the cost of poles, and grants amounting to $158,561 were made to 430 

companies. One hundred and seventy companies qualified for maintenance grants, totalling $43,000. It 

should be understood that in order to qualify for the maintenance grant, the rural line should be in 

reasonably good condition. This is necessary if the subscribers are to have good service. 

 

I urge all rural companies to keep their lines and equipment in good working order. Rural representatives 

made many visits to rural telephone companies, for the purpose of advising and helping rural telephone 

companies, for the purpose of advising and helping linemen to clear trouble beyond their ability, and to 

locate and advise on matters of construction and reconstruction. The usual elementary training classes 

for rural maintenance men were operated with 33 men receiving training. 

 

Somewhere over the years, Mr. Speaker, I have seen a sign in a restaurant which read like this “We have 

an agreement with the banks, that they will not serve any meals, and we will not cash any cheques”. 

Perhaps in a similar vein the government might indicate that they, the government, would not undertake 

to remove an appendix providing that the medical profession would not undertake to tell the Department 

of Health how to obtain the money to pay their accounts. After all, it should not concern the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons how these collections are made, and their place in society should be to provide 

their patients with the best service possible, for which this government will undertake to see they are 

provided with all of their proper remuneration. It is as simple as that. 

 

With no offence meant, it has been established over the years that, generally speaking, doctors are not 

noted for being good businessmen. Perhaps there is a good reason for this. I do not know. 

 

It has been brought to my attention that some medical men are still whispering to their patients about the 

terrible way in which this government is treating them. Most people 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

18 

think a great deal of their individual doctors, and are easily influenced by statements made during office 

visits. It is more than likely they have misunderstood the Saskatoon agreement, signed in that city last 

July by representatives of both the government and the College of Physicians and Surgeons. Certainly 

Dr. Dalgleish has misunderstood the agreement, according to what he is reported to have said in 

Montreal last week. 

 

However, in all fairness, I must say that in my opinion the average individual doctor is a fine type of 

person. He is well-educated, kindly, considerate and does the best he can for his patients. It is most 

unfortunate that the profession appears at times to be under complete control of their executive, the 

College of Physicians and Surgeons, which in turn is controlled by the Canadian Medical Association, 

which then is greatly influenced by the American Medical Association. 

 

Mr. Steuart: (Prince Albert) — Sounds like the N.D.P. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — It has become almost a phobia with the latter to fight tooth and nail any 

suggestion of legislation to assist needy persons in payment of their medical bills. 

 

This association has one of the largest lobbies in Washington, and has spent millions of dollars to defeat 

President Eisenhower‟s bill to assist just the older citizens, and most recently spent millions to defeat 

President Kennedy‟s plan to assist the older people for only a 90-day period. Perhaps some of the 

members of this legislature saw on television last July, an officer of the American Medical Association, 

speaking in Los Angeles, and heard his statement to the effect that they would pour thousands of dollars 

into Saskatchewan to defeat our medical care plan. I thought he had a lot of gall. In the United States 

they call it state medicine or creeping socialism and seem to work themselves into a state of hysteria just 

thinking about it. It any case, in spite of continued harassment by groups opposed to the plan, the plan is 

underway and our citizens will no more receive staggering medical bills, often too large to pay, and on 

the other side of the coin, the doctor‟s income will be greatly enhanced because they will have no more 

bad debts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — The patients are better off and no more need to suffer because they could not 

afford medical attention and did not want to appear to be accepting charity. All members of government 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

19 

are better off because they know that they have taken a step forward in the interests of humanity. All 

other governments in Canada are indicating interest and progress in medicare plans. The actions of 

opponents of the plan remind one of King Knute trying to sweep back the tide with a broom. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, my time is up and I don‟t think I need to say anything to the effect that I will do 

otherwise than support the budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: (Attorney General) — Mr. Speaker, I rise in this debate to support the budget which 

was brought in by my very good friend, the hon. Provincial Treasurer. 

 

Before proceeding, however, I would like to compliment radio station CJME, on the excellent reports 

that I have received about the quality of the broadcasting this year from this assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, hon. members will recall that before this session commenced, the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition was beating his breast, and making great promises and threats, as to what he would do and 

what he would say when the session commenced. 

 

Hon. members will recall that among the things that he was going to demand was a legislative inquiry, 

into the operations of the medical care plan, particularly in reference to the complaints of some doctors 

about delays which they alleged to have suffered in receiving payment of their fees from the private 

carriers. As it turned out, Mr. Speaker, when the doctors started inquiring a little more closely into this 

situation, they discovered that if anybody was to blame for any delays in receiving payment of their fees, 

it was the private carriers, whom they, themselves, had chosen to represent them in their dealings with 

the Medical Care Commission. Indeed, enough people now know, Mr. Speaker, and are in possession of 

facts which have permeated into the offices of newspapers and into the office of the Leader of the 

Opposition, on this subject, that the Leader of the Opposition has shamefacedly dropped this aspect of 

his complaint prior to this legislative session. 

 

Most people, now recognize that this tempest on his part was just another smearing campaign against the 

Medical Care Insurance Commission. This trick had the advantage, Mr. Speaker, that if the attack was 

made and not answered, then, some of the mud would stick to the government and the Medical Care 

Commission. On the other hand, if the Medical Care Commission answered the attack by disclosing the 

true figures, and the true state of affairs, then the Medical Care Commission would be in violation of 

The Medical Care Insurance Act, and would be liable to be prosecuted. So, 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

20 

that either way, this was the kind of attack that could be made with complete impunity by an 

unscrupulous politician, because he was safe from having it adequately replied to because of the 

safeguards that are built into the Act itself. 

 

There never was a more beautiful opportunity for the kind of politicians we have sitting opposite us, to 

exploit a situation. However, the facts have now persuaded the Leader of the Opposition to subside on 

this score. 

 

The session was commenced with the promise by the Leader of the Opposition that he was going to 

attack the government on every front. He was going to attack in the field of social welfare, as well as 

medical care, but members of the opposition have now come to realize that they find themselves on the 

wrong side of the medical care issue. The growing popularity of this medical care plan, makes it prudent 

for Liberal politicians and for the Liberal party to now all run for cover, or to refurbish the other horse 

that they have been riding in this regard. 

 

Any time now we can expect to hear members of the opposition trumpeting their claim that they have 

supported medical care in Saskatchewan and indeed they will be producing what they say is concrete 

evidence of their support, by reminding that they did in fact vote for the original Medical Care Act put 

on the statute books of this province. 

 

I suggest now, Mr. Speaker, that they find themselves in the eye of the hurricane, just before the wind 

starts blowing the other day, and that accounts for their quietness in respect of this issue. 

 

Mr. Erb: (Milestone) — Nonsense. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — With regard to the question of social welfare, Mr. Speaker, you will recall that 

they lost out in a bitter harangue against the government, and harassment against the government, and 

finally there again, the bare facts overwhelmed them. Even now they have come to realize belatedly that 

the administration of social welfare is a matter for which the municipal authorities are responsible, and 

we couldn‟t help observing two or three days ago that, when this fact eventually sunk in, they were 

unable to provide a speaker to continue the debate on this motion. For all any of them were able to do 

about it, the question would have been voted on last week. They were unable to produce a speaker. 

 

Just about this point, they realized that they were on the wrong side of the medicare issue, they were on 

the wrong side of the social welfare issue, and as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, it has become 

increasingly apparent from this side of the house, that hon. members opposite are in a 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

21 

fit of depression. No wonder they are in a fit of depression, because they realize that their political 

strategy has not paid off. 

 

We saw evidence of it only yesterday, when the opposition spokesman used up the time of the legislature 

and imposed upon the people of Saskatchewan with a silly diatribe, garbage picking, nit picking, a 

display which I suggest is a disgrace to any legislative body in the British commonwealth. 

 

Having been caught off base on these issues, the financial critic opening the . . . 

 

Mr. Erb: — You are doing alright yourself, Bob. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — . . . debate on this budget made a plaintive appeal for some help from boards and 

commissions in the preparation of the opposition analysis of government programs. He pointed out that 

such help was available to the Provincial Treasurer, and he said, and I quote: 

 

I‟m sure that my colleagues on the other side of the house, will agree with this statement, so that if we 

are going to provide all of these services the minister has outlined this afternoon, surely to goodness 

we have another million dollars someplace that could be made available to the official opposition in 

this house. 

 

And then he goes on to say: 

 

The business of government is growing every year and the facilities that are made available to the 

opposition, ought to grow with it, and I make that appeal to this house, at this time.” 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I support the proposition that more expert help should be made available 

to members of the opposition, I have a high regard for the role which the opposition should play in our 

parliamentary system, and a strengthened opposition can do nothing but strengthen the institutions of 

parliamentary government. In my view, every hon. member on the other side, who took part in this 

debate, rendered mute, but eloquent testimony to the soundness of the proposition advanced by the 

financial critic. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

22 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — There have been complaints in this house, by opposition spokesmen, that the 

addition to the sales tax, that the addition to the income tax, makes Saskatchewan one of the highest 

taxed provinces in Canada. They say that it would be wrong for us to take any part of the one and one-

half percent added to the sales tax for medicare last year, or to take any part of the one percent tax on 

personal income and corporation income, into general revenues. They say that these taxes are in the 

nature of a premium for medical care. Indeed, one of his friends even went so far last summer to suggest 

suing the government for selling medical care benefits, which the government was unable to deliver for a 

short time. 

 

In one breath they say that these payments are merely the purchase price for a new service, and should be 

kept in a separate fund for that purpose; in the next breath they argued that these payments are really 

taxes after all, and that these taxes make Saskatchewan one of the highest taxed provinces in Canada. 

Mr. Speaker, my hon. friends don‟t need a million dollar worth of assistance to advise them that they 

ought to at least speak out of the same side of their mouth all the time. Either these are taxes or these are 

payments for a new service. They can‟t be both at the same time, unless my hon. friends are willing to 

recognize on the other hand, that Saskatchewan is enjoying the highest standard of services of any 

province in Canada out of the taxes they pay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — If these are taxes or if they are payments for services, the people of Saskatchewan 

know that they are getting full value for them, and that is what counts . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: (Prince Albert) — Wait until the people find out . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, more than half the people of Saskatchewan pay no income tax, and 

they will not find this a burden on their income. The right to enjoy prepaid medical care, in return for a 

premium of $12 a year for a single person, and $24 a year for a family, plus whatever small amounts 

people will pay in addition on their purchases under the sales tax, will confer upon them a tremendous 

benefit, that they could not have otherwise gotten for themselves any other way. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

23 

Those with larger incomes will find that in the combined taxes they are probably paying more than they 

would have paid for private coverage, but they will not be subject to the exclusions, the waiting periods, 

the limited benefits which applied to the private plans. Even those who pay more under this plan than 

they would have paid under private plans, have the assurance that they will not be driven into financial 

disaster because of medical expenses, that exceed the coverage provided in the private plans, or that 

comes within the exclusions or within the waiting periods provided in the private plans. So that even 

those who pay more are enjoying the benefits, a substantial benefit financially from the operation of this 

plan. 

 

I recall, Mr. Speaker, a constituent of mine, when I was canvassing in his neighborhood last September, 

who had been persuaded by the Leader of the Opposition and the financial critic, that he should march 

down to Regina last July to try to persuade the government to postpone the implementation of the 

medical care plan. I will never forget how chagrined he was when two months after the implementation 

of the plan he incurred a doctor bill and hospital bills of nearly $500, paid, of course, by the 

Saskatchewan Medical and Hospitalization Plan. 

 

Today, in this province, now, every person can enjoy almost complete medical and hospital care, without 

a financial deterrent of any kind. No matter how high the cost of that care, or how little his means. We 

now also enjoy the benefit of being able to pay for our medical care at a time when we are well — a time 

when we are not sick or convalescing from sickness. We also have the advantage of being able to pay for 

our medical care in accordance with our means. Those with small means pay very little, those who can 

afford to pay more, pay much more. This is an advantage from every point of view, and this came to pass 

in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because the CCF laid this plan before the people of Saskatchewan in 

1960, and pledged itself to introduce such a plan after the election of 1960. This came to pass because 

this government remained loyal to that pledge, and because a sufficient number of people in 

Saskatchewan remained loyal to this democratic decision in the face of a heavily financed and highly 

organized campaign of civil disobedience and hysteria, organized and promoted by the Liberal party and 

the other dark horses of reaction. 

 

I cannot help feeling a little saddened by the exploitation that went on during that campaign. I think of a 

young married woman, with young children, who was part of a delegation who came to meet the 

government. They asked the government to back away from this plan. A married woman with small 

children whose family income was so low that she and her family were entitled to live in subsidized 

“socialized” community rental housing project. If she did not enjoy the benefits of a free publicly 

supported educational system, she would be unable to educate her children. She had to depend on the 

limited and restricted benefits of a 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

24 

so-called “private plan” for the medical needs of her family. She was a person who will contribute much 

less under this plan of medical coverage without limitation, without waiting periods, without 

exemptions. It shakes one‟s faith in the future of democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when one sees helpless people, such as her, and others like her, used as pawns in a blatant 

political power play by the opponents of this government. 

 

What has been the role of the Liberal party in this, Mr. Speaker. The Liberal leader taunted to 

government almost every day of the 1962 session that we would be unable to implement a medical care 

plan. His party spokesmen operated at K.O.D. rallies, the organization was heavily financed by the 

backers of the Liberal party; and they are known, they are known. Such Liberals contributed generously 

of their time and their money to support that campaign. 

 

Liberal leaders took every opportunity to try to embarrass the administration on this question, but the 

opposition did not have the courage to come out, “flat footed”, in its own name and oppose the medical 

care plan, they took care . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — . . . they took care, and as I have already said, to vote for it on second reading. 

At the same time they took every means possible to prevent it succeeding. 

 

Hon. members in this house will not have forgotten how they fought it in this house, day by day for five 

weeks to prevent it from passing. How they used every possible stratagem to prevent it from going into 

effect. 

 

This role of studied hypocrisy is very clearly illustrated by a series of three newspaper stories, appearing 

in the Leader-Post in the middle of October, last year. 

 

First, I refer to page 32, of the October 15, Leader-Post, headline — “Liberals in Ontario back Medicare” 

and I quote: 

 

The Ontario Liberal association, Saturday, approved incorporation, of a prepaid medical care insurance 

plan into the provincial party‟s political platform. 

 

It must be administered by a medical care insurance commission, (like in Saskatchewan) it must 

include representatives of government, and the medical profession (as in Saskatchewan) must be 

financed by a combination of personal premiums and taxation (such as in Saskatchewan) coverage 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

25 

 would include the services of general practioners and specialists on home calls, in the doctor‟s office 

or hospital, (again, just as in Saskatchewan) doctors will be free to practice, inside or outside the plan, 

(just as in Saskatchewan). 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Inside the act, though. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Oh no, my hon. friend knows perfectly well that the opportunity to practice 

“inside the act” or “outside the act” was available to the doctors before the strike July 1st. My hon. 

friend knows that and all the publicity and organs that his friends control can never mislead the people 

on that fact, and so, Mr. Speaker, there was the plan adopted by the Liberal party of Ontario, similar in 

all important aspects to that of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — This was going to be worked out prior . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — And in the same newspaper a day later, the Leader of the Opposition referring to 

the action taken in Ontario, and obviously embarrassed about it, tried to find some distinction between 

what was proposed in Ontario, and what was already in existence in Saskatchewan and so he is quoted as 

saying: “Medicare without mess. — Thatcher”, and the Leader of the Opposition tried to pretend that the 

scheme offered by the Liberal party in Ontario was different (hoping that people would assume that it 

was different) than it was in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — It was. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — He says “it was”. Well, I will say it was similar in this respect, Mr. Speaker, 

because in the very same issue of the paper, the headline: 

 

O.M.A. to oppose Liberal plan. 

 

The Liberal party in Ontario have the assurance of the College of Physicians and Surgeons, in that 

province, that they would go on strike against that plan — 

 

just as they did in Saskatchewan. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

26 

The president of the Ontario Medical Association has warned that the doctors would oppose the Ontario 

Liberal party‟s proposed medical care plan. 

 

I cite these facts, Mr. Speaker, to make it perfectly clear that the Leader of the Opposition did not have 

any secret formula, by which he could have brought in a medical care plan in Saskatchewan, without the 

difficulties attendant upon it last July. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — He has given no indication, or evidence, that he had any method of doing that, 

indeed, the evidence is the opposite. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, they only way in which the opposition would have differed from this government 

in handling the problem is that the opposition would not have had the “guts” to see the thing through and 

implement it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — That is the difference, Mr. Speaker. That is the difference. 

 

Mr. Danielson: (Arm River) — Brave today! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has had some other things to say 

since the last session of the legislature. He citied a return, which he said was tabled in this house in 

1961, to support his claim that there were over 600 new, or greatly increased taxes, since 1944. 

 

He leaves this impression that this represents a vast increase in the tax burden of Saskatchewan. Well, 

technically speaking, Mr. Speaker, he is correct that there have been 600 or more fees for services 

rendered by the government that have been adjusted in the last 18 years. 

 

And I congratulate him for being technically right on this matter. In view of his record, however, Mr. 

Speaker, I took the trouble to look into the returns to see just how right he was. in fact. Looking at the 

answers it is perfectly clear that most of these fee revisions were in need of adjustment for 25, and in 

some cases, as much as 50 years. Of that number of increases, what is the situation? 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

27 

Well, there were dozens of upward revisions, in connection with the fees charged to joint stock 

companies. The fees for security salesmen were upped. Firms issuing investment contracts had 5 items 

in their tariff fees increased. When we passed new legislation, as we did some years ago, setting up 

licensed cocktail bars, and beverage rooms, well, there were 40 items of fees charged to the proprietors 

of these rooms — thus 40 new taxes! Revisions in the fee schedule charged to electrical contractors 

accounts for 112 of these revisions, out of the 600 that my hon. friend refers to. 

 

Theatres pay certain fees in connection with the examining of films for public showing. There are 42 

items in their fee schedule, and the theatre owners are paying slight increases in connection with these 42 

items. 

 

The maximum weight limits of trucks in this province, in 1944, was 30,000 lbs., presently it is 74 or 

76,000 lbs., but at the time that the return was given it was 72,000 lbs. Now, Mr. Speaker, this meant 

that additional classifications of fees had to be set up for these extra weight categories, and it is true that 

for each class of licence there were 17 new weight categories set up, which accounts for another 100 

fees. But, if you ask the truckers of Saskatchewan, whether they would rather go back to a 30,000 pound 

weight limit, and the fee which corresponds with a 30,000 pound weight limit, or maintain the present 

72,000 pound weight limit, with the corresponding fees. I am sure they would unanimously agree that 

they would rather carry the higher loads and pay the higher fees. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — . . . my hon. friend is caught out again in his old tricks and habits of deception. 

The hon. member should find out that he may escape the consequences of these little evil tricks at a rural 

political meeting where the documents aren‟t readily available, but sooner or later, they will be recorded 

in a newspaper account, and somebody will check the facts, and then, of course, his story collapses. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that when the people of Saskatchewan, come to choose a premier in 1964, or „65, 

or „63, they will seek to choose somebody whose integrity and honesty is apparent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

28 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, hon. members opposite have referred back to 1944, they have said 

that this government is imposing a budget, or maintaining a budget of $188 million, compared with only 

$31 million in the last year of Liberal government, and they have left the insinuation that this money is 

not being adequately accounted for. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it is not a very pleasant memory to go back to 1944, and I can understand how it 

would be even more unpleasant for members of the opposition, to have to cast their minds back to that 

date. 

 

But I would like to answer this criticism by referring to the public accounts of the province, for that year, 

and comparing some expenditures for that year with the expenditures for this year. Not because I have 

any desire to drag up ancient history, Mr. Speaker, but I suggest that if my hon. friends are going to make 

this criticism they have to be prepared to face the answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — In 1944, the budget of this province was $31 million, $188 million today. So 

there is an increase of $157 million, which I suppose, has to be accounted for by this government. 

 

First of all it should be remembered that if this government had inaugurated no new programs, if it has 

expanded no worthwhile new projects, if it had been a “do nothing” government like its predecessor, the 

mere process of inflation and the higher costs of goods and services would have driven that $31 million 

budget up to $85 or $90 million in the last eighteen years. 

 

The higher cost of carrying on the existing programs would have resulted in a two and a half or three-

fold increase in the budget. 

 

All you have to do is look at stenographers and clerks salaries; all you have to do is look at legal fees; all 

you have to do is look at the cost of automobiles; all you have to do is look at the things that 

governments spend their money on, and that $31 million today would be $85 or $90 million. 

 

Hon. Members: — Don‟t forget the telephone calls. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Now, our present budget is exactly a $100 million more than that. If you increase 

that $31 million by a three-fold factor, 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

29 

brought it up to $88 million, you could have no new services, or no improvements in services. Our 

budget is $100 million, so presumably I should have to account for an extra $100 million. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I am going to review items of expenditures in this budget, which will add up to not a $100 

million but to $146 million, expenditures that are new since this government was elected, and Mr. 

Speaker, I suggest that that shows that we have run the existing services of this province on less than the 

normal increase in costs, which would have accrued as a result of inflation and higher cost. 

 

Our present budget is exactly, as I say, a $100 million more than the figure which one would expect it to 

be if there had been no change in levels of service. 

 

First let us look at the municipal road programs, instead of the picayune little grants that used to be 

distributed to municipalities, with a good voting record, now we have a massive program of assistance to 

municipalities to build their local roads. More than 1,000 miles of all weather municipal roads are built 

each year, and will be built again next year, with the province‟s contribution of $6,843,000. 

 

Does anyone in the opposition say that that is an unjustified expenditure? 

 

This government launched a program of assisting rural telephone companies in building and extending 

rural telephone lines. No such program was ever thought of by the Liberal party. Our assistance to rural 

telephone companies will cost the province $511,000 next year. 

 

This government, aided by Ottawa, supports the efforts of the municipalities to provide work and wages 

programs. For those who are unemployed or for those who otherwise would be in need of assistance to 

the extent that this program succeeds, it is an alternative to the good old Liberal “relief days”. The 

province‟s share of the cost of this program are expected to be $133,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have been told in this debate how prosperous the province was in the days of Liberal 

government. Well, it was never prosperous enough to help the municipalities install sewer and water 

systems. Indeed our small urban municipalities had a very low percentage of modern homes because of 

this lack. next year Saskatchewan will contribute $450,000 to assist municipalities to solve this problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, much has been said about support for our local schools. In 1944, Saskatchewan contributed 

$2.75 million to school grants. Next year the total will be $36.5 million, or 15 times as much. In addition 

the province will contribute to technical training and vocational training a further $1,078,000. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

30 

While we are looking at the programs which directly assist local governments in meeting their financial 

burdens, I note grants to hospitals and health regions. This is largely to assist in the capital construction 

costs of new hospitals. There was nothing provided for this purpose in 1944. Next year there will be 

$3,011,000. 

 

These increases in expenditure which I have already noted amounting to $46,664,000 represent direct 

assistance to local government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Many of the items which I will now refer to are of very substantial help to local 

government but are specifically aimed at other programs. 

 

Much has been said about social aid. Well, Mr. Speaker, the public accounts of 1943-44 show the total 

of $280,000 contributed by the province for this purpose. I realize there may have been some federal 

money spent in addition, but we are talking about the budgets of Saskatchewan in 1944 and in 1964. The 

province‟s share of social aid in the new budget will be $7,537,000. 

 

One shouldn‟t overlook the small sub-vote of $4,500 for legal services to assist beneficiaries under the 

child welfare programs, under various other social welfare programs to assist in the maintenance of the 

integrity and security of the families in need. 

 

Then there is the blind persons allowance which will cost $84,000 next year. The disabled persons 

allowance, $686,000. The program of old age assistance which will cost the province $2,241,000 next 

year. Neither of these programs were available in 1944. In 1944 the total sum voted for aid to dependent 

families and child welfare amounted to $540,000. This year the province will contribute $1,635,000 in 

direct aid to these people. 

 

19 years ago, Mr. Speaker, the province managed to scrape up $43,000 to provide supplementary 

allowances for old age pensioners. We hear weeping and wailing across the other side about the 

treatment these people now receive at the hands of the present government, yet the sum voted next year 

will be $537,000 — 12 times the amount spent for this purpose in the last days of Liberal government. 

 

What are we doing for elderly people? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Very little. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

31 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — This government inaugurated a program, — well, if my hon. friend will listen his 

head won‟t rattle so emptily. This government inaugurated a program of grants in aid for the 

construction of housing for aged people. Today more than 5,000 aged people are living in dwellings built 

largely through grants from this government. It is true they get a larger sum in total from the federal 

authorities but that money is borrowed, and repayable with interest. Ours is an a outright grant. Next year 

the province will be contributing $189,000 in grants to assist in the operating costs of these homes. In 

addition the province will contribute $500,000 for the cost of constructing five more senior citizens‟ 

homes. Neither of these programs existed until they were inaugurated by the CCF government. 

 

Saskatchewan is famous, Mr. Speaker, for the progress it has made in the establishment of provincial 

geriatric centres. The institutions at Regina, Saskatoon, Melfort, Swift Current, are conspicuous 

illustrations of the humane purposes of this government. These, together with the centre at Wolseley, 

will cost the province $927,000 to operate next year. That‟s not at the province‟s share. When one 

remembers, Mr. Speaker, the ill-concealed hostility of the Leader of the Opposition when he learned that 

the government had asked the employees of the various departments and crown corporations to be 

certain to give to the co-operative association of the province an even break when it came to purchasing 

fuel and oil for their automobiles . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I never objected to an even break . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I never objected to an even break, I said don‟t favor them over everyone else. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well, the hon. member is putting words in my mouth. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, my hon. friend referred to a memorandum which he had in his hand, 

but he didn‟t quote from it. If he had quoted from it the fact was that my friend picked . . . 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

32 

Mr. Thatcher: — I quoted that you were paying about 50 percent too much . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, my hon. friend picked a sentence out of context, but if he had read 

the whole statement, it was perfectly clear . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I read it all and so did you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — . . . it was perfectly clear that the instructions of the government were that the co-

operatives were to receive an even break. My hon. friend may think that he can deceive us but I know he 

wasn‟t deceived himself on this point. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well, you‟re not deceiving the people of Saskatchewan much longer. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — And he flew into this tantrum of rage, Mr. Speaker, because the government had 

asked or reminded its servants to give these folks an even break. 

 

Opposition spokesmen have also attacked the government because it made it possible for the co-

operative movement to have a tiny share in the oil resources of the province. Well, Mr. Speaker, these 

ill-concealed, thinly-veiled evidences of hostility to the co-op movement in our province will not be lost 

on the minds of the thousands of co-operatively minded people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . lost in Prince Albert anyway. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

33 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, my hon. friend and others like him have made this remark over and 

over again, apparently presuming that this constitutes an answer for any kind of logical argument that is 

presented in this house. And, Mr. Speaker, if my hon. friend really has that philosophy, if he really 

believes that the end justifies the means, that the only important thing is the result, then of course this 

explains why my hon. friend is so unscrupulous in the use of misleading innuendoes, insinuations and 

slurs that he casts on the government of this province from time to time. My hon. friend‟s character 

shows clearly enough without him standing up at every opportunity and saying, Ah, but we won in 

Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Yours is the same way. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, if my hon. friend really wants to answer arguments in this house he 

had better not think he is doing it by pointing to election results. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Four in a row. People are the final court . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Let him deal with arguments on their merits. My hon. friend thinks the end 

justifies the means. And so, Mr. Speaker, the people in Saskatchewan will not lose sight of this evidence 

on the part of my hon. friend. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — They didn‟t in four by-elections . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Well, Mr. Speaker, though he may not be able to discern the relevance of what I 

am saying, I am sure that the majority of the voters in Saskatchewan will be able to discern it. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

34 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the assistance which this government has given to the development of co-

operatives is not lost sight of by the co-operative minded people of Saskatchewan. Prior to 1944 all our 

co-operative movement had from this government was the assistance of a small branch of the 

Department of Agriculture, costing that year some $23,500. . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . the wheat pool. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — . . . and, Mr. Speaker, my hon. friend‟s party gets these co-operatives into this 

kind of financial jam through their failure to control or influence economic conditions . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Pretty weak, pretty weak. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — . . . and then because they come along and lend at 6 percent the money to bail 

them out, . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — It saved the wheat pool, it saved the wheat pool. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — This exposes his true understanding of social and political conditions that brought 

about that situation, Mr. Speaker. Everyone knows the evidence that this government is interested in 

supporting the co-operative is to be found in the fact that we established the first Department of Co-

operatives and Co-operative Development in Canada. I am sure that the $510,000,000 which will be 

voted this year will merit the support of every member of this house. No citizen of Saskatchewan would 

tolerate a member who was so short-sighted as to oppose the work of this department. 

 

Then we have the law-enforcement agency, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. In 1943-44, it cost 

Saskatchewan $270,000. This year the force will cost $1,336,000. Surely I don‟t need to justify the 

increase of $1,100,000 any more than to just lay it before the house. I think it is justified on its face, Mr. 

Speaker. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

35 

Everyone in Saskatchewan knows how vastly we have improved the provincial highway system of 

Saskatchewan under a CCF. government. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — What government hasn‟t? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — The last year before . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, my hon. friend says, what 

government hasn‟t . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Since 1944. 

 

Hon. R.A. Walker: — It is true that all provincial governments now build better highways than they did 

in 1944. But that is only half the story . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Better than you‟re doing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — . . . and his old half truths and half story just won‟t wash. The fact is, Mr. 

Speaker, that when his party was in power in this province we had the most disgraceful highways in 

Canada, today our highways are among the best to be found in this country. 

 

Mr. Steuart: (Prince Albert)— Have you been to Alberta and Manitoba? Have you been out of the 

province lately? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, anybody who visits this province after an absence of 10 or 20 years 

can hardly believe the transformation that has occurred in our highways since this government was 

elected. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

36 

An Hon. Member:— . . . this province isn‟t a . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — But he‟s talking such nonsense. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! If the hon. Leader of the Opposition wishes to take part in this debate he will 

have an opportunity but he must remain quiet at this time. . . And at the same time I must remind people 

in the gallery that they must control their outbursts or leave the gallery. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Even they are embarrassed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate your drawing attention to the fact that I am getting some 

support from the galleries if I am not getting it from across the way. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, anyone who travels in other provinces knows that Saskatchewan has nothing to be 

ashamed of with respect to their highways. Indeed, Saskatchewan is very proud of the improvement in 

our highways, and I am quite confident that if we had had a continuation of the government that we had 

in the first 39 years of this province‟s history, we would still be embarrassed, be ashamed of our 

highways as we had been prior to 1944. 

 

That is not all, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the irrelevancy of some of the interjections and I 

really didn‟t expect to earn the compliment that any of my hon. friends opposite would understand what 

I was saying but I do appreciate the fact that they are at least willing to recognize the fact that I am 

saying something. I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that sometime I will ask my 7 year old son to prepare a 

speech which will be equal to the intellectual level of the interjections I am getting from the other side. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, previous governments spent nothing on the design or on planning or on materials 

research for highways. Highways were built in those days by having a foreman walk 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

37 

in front of a caterpillar along the ditch to show the operator where to make the ditch, and everyone 

knows, and all you have to do is look in the public accounts to see that there were no staff capable of 

doing engineering or designing on the highway system of this province prior to 1944. Unlike other 

provinces the Liberal government in this province didn‟t believe in engineering or planning. Next year 

we will spend $609,000 on these important functions. And anyone who drives in Saskatchewan today 

appreciates the engineering and the economic efficiency that goes into the highways presently being built 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I think that not only this legislature but the people of Saskatchewan owe a debt of appreciation to the 

Hon. J.T. Douglas and the present Minister of Highways for the interest and the inspiration which they 

bring to highway construction in Saskatchewan. My friends who visit from other provinces of Canada 

are always, well, almost always breathless in rhapsodic praise of the highway they see now, especially, 

Mr. Speaker, those who were familiar with Saskatchewan prior to 1944. I am not referring only to CCFs. 

I have some Liberal friends who visit me from other provinces and they comment upon this. 

 

Mr. McCarthy: (Cannington) — Name them . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Well, if my hon. friends‟ friends aren‟t my friends I shan‟t shed any tears. In the 

last year, Mr. Speaker, before CCF government was elected we were only able to spend $871,000 for the 

maintenance of our provincial highway system . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — There was a war on then. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems that under the Liberal government there was always 

either wars or depressions, pestilences and disasters. 

 

An Hon. Members — Worse pestilences since the socialists took over. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — The Liberals seemed to have an affinity for this sort of situation. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

38 

Mr. Thatcher: — We‟ve had a pestilence since 1944. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — This year, Mr. Speaker, we will be spending $6,642,000, or eight times as much 

to maintain approximately the same number of miles of provincial highways. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — How is that with Alberta this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Alberta spends vastly more on maintenance of mileage that is less than half the 

mileage in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think right here, Mr. Speaker, is another area on which the Department of Highways should be 

complimented. This province, with a total highways budget of about $25 million, less than half the 

budget of either of the province adjoining us in the past five years — this province is able to maintain 

highways of a standard that is equal to or better than the standards you find in the other provinces. 

 

An Hon. Member — And more miles of road. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: —Even a Liberal or a Conservative or a Social Credit government can spend vast 

gobs of money but to get their maximum in results I suggest it requires efficient and effective 

administration and planning — something that you would expect to find, and the proof of the pudding is 

in the eating. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, hon. members, Liberal members are sensitive about hearing of the old roads, and I 

am not going to say any more about them because I see it offends their sensibilities a bit, I will leave this 

matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, next year the government will spend $1,287 million operating the mineral audit branch, the 

mineral records branch, the mines branch, the petroleum lands branch, the petroleum and natural gas 

branch. This 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

39 

expenditure represents an outlay of less than seven percent of the income which the province receives 

from that industry. In a manner of speaking, Mr. Speaker, you could say that this represents the expense 

of collecting the rent on the peoples‟ mineral lands. Even more significant I believe that it represents an 

investment in future development which will pay off in still larger crown revenues from oil production. 

If we had had a Liberal government in this province, these last 20 years, it would not have been 

necessary to spend this $1,287 million because under a Liberal government we never succeeded in 

having any oil development and probably never would. 

 

We take pride, Mr. Speaker, in our health programs; the cancer commission cost $85,000 in the last year 

before we came into office. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — The Liberals brought that in. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Or was it the Conservatives who brought it in? You had better read your history, 

Mr. Speaker, the hon. member had better read his history. He was saying something about the wheat 

board the other day. He had better read his history and see who brought in some of these things. It wasn‟t 

the Liberal party. The Liberal party fought tooth and nail against the wheat board and I remember, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Hon. J.L. Ralston, Liberal member, critic of the Department of Trade and Commerce, 

fought and delayed the passage of the wheat board legislation in the House of Commons for weeks or 

months — the same kind of tactics as my hon. friend used here in connection with medical care were 

used by J.L. Ralston in connection with the passage of The Wheat Board Act of 1935. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What‟s that got to do with . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Same old Liberals. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — I‟m sorry I didn‟t hear that. My hon. friend may be able to fool himself but he 

isn‟t able to fool very many other people with his new twist on history that we hear from time to time 

when he makes his speeches. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

40 

I hope I will be forgiven, Mr. Speaker, for not trying to correct all the evidences of misconceptions and 

misunderstandings by my hon. friends, but the ones that are most obvious I am afraid I will have to take 

time to deal with. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this cancer commission, in 1943 $85,000. This year $1,140 million. Oh, a gross 

extravagance, waste, I am sure. Well, Mr. Speaker, in 1944, when we were first elected the percentage of 

survival for a five year period was 43 percent, that is the average for 1932 to 1944. In the following five 

years it had gone up to 53 percent — 10 percent of all those seeking treatment and getting treatment 

from cancer commission, 10 percent improvement in the five-year survival rate. 

 

This is the kind of thing that this government takes pride in spending money on, Mr. Speaker; improving 

the health and happiness and well-being of the people of Saskatchewan. The government has sincerely 

attempted to bring about the highest quality of medical care and health services for the people of 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Look through the public accounts of 1943-44, look through the public accounts of that year and you will 

find no expenditure that can be directly attributed to special or ordinary medical or health care services 

for the people of northern Saskatchewan. Today we will spend $187,000 on this service. 

 

As hon. members know this government has placed a great deal of importance, attached a great deal of 

importance to the regional and local health services, the preventive services in all areas of the province. 

The total expenditure for this purpose in 1944 was $130,000; this year $1,560 million — 12 times as 

much. This is in addition to the figure which I have already mentioned for northern Saskatchewan health 

services. 

 

Saskatchewan is leading every province in Canada, indeed every jurisdiction of the North American 

continent in the quality of psychiatric services available to our people. When this government was first 

elected the only facilities available were the mental hospitals at North Battleford and at Weyburn. The 

government of that day spent, through their Public Health Department and their Public Works 

Department, $1,579 million for the maintenance and running of these two institutions. Today, in addition 

to those institutions, we have the psychiatric services branch operating full time mental health clinics at 

Saskatoon, Regina, Moose Jaw, Swift Current, Prince Albert, Yorkton. In addition to our new regional 

mental hospital at Yorkton, the Moose Jaw training school for mental defectives and the new institution 

for similar purpose at Prince Albert. All of which today require a budgetary appropriation of $11,813 

million — more than a eightfold increase, in the last 19 years. It is because of 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

41 

this expenditure, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan is able to maintain a smaller population of 

institutionalized patients when the numbers are increasing in every other jurisdiction in North America. 

 

Out of ordinary provincial revenue we will pay $12,338 million over to the Saskatchewan Hospital 

Services Plan which, together with federal reimbursements and the direct hospital tax, will provide a 

fund of more than $36 million to pay the hospital bills on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. There 

was of course no such provision in 1944 when this government was elected. 

 

Everyone is familiar with the blue card service, a plan which provides free medical services to certain 

classes of social aid recipients. This year $2,225 million will go into that fund. This is another program 

which was initiated by this government. 

 

Then, of course, there is the Saskatchewan medicare plan, and I see that out of ordinary revenue there 

will be $13,804 million will go into the medicare fund for the payment of medical care accounts. 

 

I see $126,000 for the operation of the South Saskatchewan River Development Commission. Mr. 

Speaker, we had to get rid of a Liberal government in Saskatchewan as well as in Ottawa before it 

became possible for us to set up a Saskatchewan River Development Commission and administer a dam 

on the South Saskatchewan River. 

 

Although this next item could be properly referred to and included in the estimates of the Department of 

Agriculture, I am referring to it separately. It is the crop insurance plan which next year will cost the 

treasury $306,000. Here likewise it was necessary to throw out the Liberals in Saskatchewan as well as 

in Ottawa before this program could be undertaken. 

 

Hon. members will recall the appearance in public accounts committee of Dr. Baker of the 

Saskatchewan Research Council, and the interesting account he gave of the work done by that group. 

Previous to the election of the CCF, nothing was spent by the government on scientific research. Besides 

research conducted in specialized fields and other areas, the Saskatchewan Research Council will cost 

the Saskatchewan taxpayers $580,000. I am sure no-one will quarrel with that expenditure. 

 

When I look at the last year of the Liberal government, I find that less than half a million dollars was 

spent in the entire agricultural department vote. Out of an expenditure of something over $30 million 

that sum represented approximately 1.5 percent of the provincial budget. The opposition has wept 

copious, though crocodile tears because the 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

42 

government has not, in their opinion, done enough for the agricultural industry. I have already referred to 

the vast increases in assistance available to local governments, most of which are in rural areas, the grid 

road program, the South Saskatchewan River dam, specifically ear-marked for the department of 

agriculture this year is $8,522 million net, and in addition of course there are substantial reimbursements 

which bring the total expenditure up to over $11 million, or 22 times as much as the Liberals were able 

to find for that purpose. 

 

The increase in our appropriation to the university from $550,000 to $6,694 million will not be lost sight 

of by the people in the Regina area and all through the southern part of the province. Young people in 

this area will not be penalized by being required to go away from home in order to get the advantages of 

university facilities. We therefore expect to bring the advantages of a nearby university into the lives of 

the greater proportion of Saskatchewan young people by locating an additional university in the city of 

Regina. The growth in enrolment in our university already gives testimony to the improvements there, 

improvement in facilities there, but also testimony to the improvement in the quality and the character of 

our elementary and high school educational program, both of these came about as a result of the policies 

of this government. 

 

There are three important programs of the Department of Education, which were initiated by the CCF 

and which has brought further benefits to young people in virtually every community in Saskatchewan. 

 

I refer to the scholarship program, the adult education program, the fitness and recreation program. 

These three programs are estimated to cost $541,000 next year. 

 

Conscious government planning to encourage industrial development, was unknown in Saskatchewan, 

prior to 1944. Nothing was spent on that kind of thing, and the results showed it. Next year we will 

continue to expand our efforts in that direction. The economic research branch and the industrial 

development office of the Department of Industry and Information, will receive an appropriation of 

$207,000. Since we have now industrialized our province, or have our province well on the way to 

industrialization; since considerably more than half of our working force are now wage and salary 

earners in industry and commerce; we require a separate Department of Labour in Saskatchewan. 

 

The vote for the Department of Labour next year will be $1,343 million. No one, Mr. Speaker, who 

realizes that Saskatchewan has entered the twentieth century will quibble about that, I hope. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in our modern and prosperous province, 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

43 

more and more people can afford the time and expense for recreation, out of doors, or travel, and 

vacation enjoyment. Furthermore, we are anxious to develop our growing tourist industry, which we 

heard the other day amounted to something like $25 million a year. Next year we will vote $1,163 

million for tourist recreational facilities and parks. 

 

A conspicuous new policy introduced by this government in 1944, was a pay-as-you-go policy on public 

buildings. Previous governments invariably followed the policy of borrowing for public buildings, 

indeed, even for roads. Some of those debentures are still outstanding. The CCF have always met these 

costs out of current revenue. 

 

Next year, we will spend $1,600 million of provincial funds on new technical institute facilities, a 

further $100,000 will go for a core lab in La Ronge. $1,170 million will go to complete the regional 

mental hospital at Weyburn; $100,000 will be voted for a psychiatric research building at Saskatoon; 

$535,000 will go to complete the geriatric centre at Swift Current and $500,000 to extend and improve 

the provincial jail at Regina. 

 

This is a $4.25 million, Mr. Speaker, being paid out of current revenue, which in other provinces is 

traditionally financed out of borrowings, and always was financed out of borrowing prior to 1944. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could refer to scores of additional programs that are highly valued by the people of 

Saskatchewan. I could point to millions of dollars of other expenditures, that were vastly expanded by 

the CCF government. But I have already referred to expenditures which account for an increase of $146 

million in our 1963-64 budget, as compared to 1944. 

 

You will recall, Mr. Speaker, that we agreed earlier that the level of 1944 services at present prices, 

ought to cost about $88 million, that should have left $100 million of our present budget to account for 

— an increase of about $100 million to explain away. Where do we get more than $146 million from 

these increased programs? 

 

Well, the answer is, Mr. Speaker, that we have trimmed and cut the cost of the 1964 programs. Instead 

of rising to three times their 1944 level, we have kept these costs down. All those programs which I have 

not itemized, the ones I have not referred to today, will cost only $43 million in 1964, as compared with 

$31 million, a much smaller increase than one could reasonably expect. 

 

This was achieved in several ways; the purchasing agency, revolutionized procurement procedures. We 

don‟t pay $5.46 anymore for purple dye. Purchases are placed on a competitive basis. We buy cars, and 

some hon. members opposite, complain that we buy cars as cheap as we can. But this revolution in the 

method of procurement in government supplies 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

44 

has undoubtedly saved the people of Saskatchewan, untold millions of dollars in the last twenty years. 

 

Another saving was on interest. In 1943-44 estimates it showed estimated expenditures for interest of 

$7,422 million on the public debt. Now there were some offsets against that, it amounted to $2,208 

million interest which the government took in. In those days, too, the government charged interest to the 

government telephones, $600,000, the government charged interest to the wheat pool, (my hon. friend 

from Arm River (Mr. Danielson), makes savage attacks on this government because it collected some 

money from the wheat pool to pay off, the wheat pool indebtedness). Well, the government collected in 

interest from the wheat pool $687,000. 

 

There is interest from the Saskatchewan Power Corporation $369,000; interest from the farm loan board 

$350,000, adding up altogether to over $2,000 million. But by getting rid of the dead weight debt, Mr. 

Speaker, we were able to eliminate this drain on our treasury for the benefit of our taxpayers. As the 

Provincial Treasurer pointed out, the interest which we will pay on the public debt will be more than 

offset by the interest which the government earned this year on various government funds, with the result 

that will actually take in more in interest than we will pay out next year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there have been other administrative and fiscal improvements brought in by the CCF 

government. I will not worry the house now by taking the time to recite them and refer to them. One can 

verify the fact that this government is giving good value for the monies that it receives from the people 

of Saskatchewan in the form of taxes, fees, and levies of various kinds, by taking a glance at the fiscal 

record of our neighboring provinces. We manage in Saskatchewan to keep our budget in line with other 

provinces, on a per capita basis. Yet it always seems to be the fact that our province initiates the new and 

desirable social programs. 

 

I am sure, Mr. Speaker, due to these facts, the people I represent would expect me to vote for this 

budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: (Prince Albert) — In rising to speak in this debate, Mr. Speaker, there are one or two 

matters I would like to deal with before I get into the main topic of my speech, and I think that the 

display that we just witnessed, by the attorney-general brings this home more than ever. 

 

In the more than three weeks that we have sat in this session, we have witnessed persistent attempts by 

the N.D.P., CCF, Socialists, or whatever they call themselves, to do two 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

45 

things. First, to attempt to change the name of the Liberal party, and second, to smear our leader. 

 

Now the hon. Attorney-General who has just been speaking, has given us a display today of the smear 

and half-truths about our leader, that has been typical of the actions of those opposite for the last three 

weeks. 

 

And I would like to remind the Speaker, this is the same man that went across this province attempting 

to smear the doctors; who will smear and blacken anyone who stands in his way in this province. They 

like to call us Thatcherites. Well, for their benefit I can tell them, that means good sound government, 

and we don‟t mind being called that at all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — It also means this is the man who has built up the Liberal party, so now we are in a 

position to put an end to socialism in the next election, and this they don‟t like. 

 

Now this business of changing names, some of them call us Thatcherites, comes very strange from a 

party that changed their name, it is now so obviously ashamed of being called N.D.P., that is must be 

embarrassing to them, to their supporters and to those labor leaders down East, who are putting up the 

money to back them in office, and the Hon. T.C. Douglas in his campaign across the country. 

 

I would like to remind them, I know what they are trying to do, they are attempting to spread disunity. I 

would like to remind them that theirs is the party of disunity; theirs is the party that is breaking up and 

falling apart. It was their party that lost their member down in Ottawa, Hazen Argue. It was their party, 

who had a cabinet minister walk across the floor and is now a very welcome member of the Liberal 

party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh, I could tell them another one too. They had an organizer up in the Prince Albert by-

election; they had this one out in the open, Mr. Speaker, they had several hidden in the civil service, and 

down under the counter; they had this one right out in the open. But you know a week or two ago he quit 

the N.D.P. I don‟t think the N.D.P. could stand him any longer. He quit the N.D.P. This is the party that 

is falling apart, and, of course, they are yelling and hollering in an attempt to attach these labels to us, to 

hide the mess 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

46 

they are in themselves. 

 

Why are they doing this? This is the oldest practice in the world. It is typical communist tactics, and they 

have engaged in it for years. If you can smear, and kill the leader, then you kill the party. 

 

Well, I say this, Mr. Speaker, to them and to the public. That we are united behind Ross Thatcher, united 

behind him, and together we are going to run these people out of office as soon as they have the courage 

to go to the people in a general election. 

 

I suggest they look to their own party, and their own leadership. They say Thatcherism. What about 

Lloydism? It was mentioned here the other day. What does it stand for? It is becoming infamous, Mr. 

Speaker. Five percent tax. Upping the car rates and the insurance rates. Over-taxation. And it especially 

will go down in the history of this province as bringing on the terrible medical care crisis which was so 

unnecessary, and that we as in this province last July. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, it was said years ago that people “who live in glass houses, shouldn‟t throw 

rocks”. Well, these people live in the biggest glass house in Canada, and they won‟t survive when it 

crashes down around their ears as soon as they have enough nerve to go to the people in a general 

election. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to something the Hon. Minister of Co-operatives said when he spoke 

this afternoon. He made reference to certain fishing co-ops in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Wake him up so he will hear. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — They‟ve been asleep for years, I don‟t think even I could wake them up. He tried to 

leave the impression that all these fishing co-ops in the north were strictly voluntary, and that there was 

no government compulsion and no government interference. And he denied the fact that was stated by 

the hon. member from Athabasca, when he said that this type of interference did exist. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to tell you about 10 or 11 Métis and native fishermen, who were hauled before a J.P., I 

think it was in May of 1962, and charged with selling their catch, their fish, illegally to a co-operative. 

Now these fishermen were found guilty by the J.P. They didn‟t‟ know what they were guilty of. They 

were found guilty, they were charged $10 or $12 and cost, or 15 days in jail. Finally one or two of them 

realized this was wrong, so they appealed it, they appealed it before 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

47 

Justice W. Nelson, in Prince Albert in February, 1963. And I want to read the judgement he found in this 

case, the appeal by these native and Métis fishermen. 

 

Now just one of them appealed; it was agreed that if his appeal won, all the other appeals would go the 

same way. When I read these parts of this, it will prove to you and to this house, just what is going on in 

parts of northern Saskatchewan. Coercion, force, and the compulsion these people are using with these 

fishermen and with others in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Now, I have here, Mr. Speaker, the judgement signed by Walter H. Nelson, Judge of the 

District Court, Judicial Centre of Prince Albert. 

 

Now he states in here: 

 

That at the outset of these proceedings I allow the accused to change his plea to one of “Guilty”. I, 

thereupon proceed with his appeal by way of trial. And it was agreed between counsel on the day set 

forth in the charge, the persons accused did market their fish to Waite Fisheries Limited, and at the 

time of the marketing the fish to Waite Fisheries Limited the accused was possessed of a licence upon 

which appeared the following in print: 

 

All fish taken, marketed, and disposed of under authority of this licence shall be in accordance with 

directions given from time to time by the Minister of Natural Resources. 

 

And it was further agreed by counsel that the printed portion of the licence was followed by a rubber 

stamp imprint, which read as follows: 

 

All fish taken under authority of this licence shall be delivered to the Co-operative Fisheries Limited. 

 

It was further admitted by counsel that at the time of the alleged offence, and at the time of the issuance 

of the licence the accused was not a member of Co-operative Fisheries Limited, nor was he a member of 

the petitioning group and did not sign the petition. 

 

“By Order in Council, no. 2128 of 1961, dated at Regina, December 8, 1961, the regulations under 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

48 

The Fisheries Act of the province of Saskatchewan were amended by deleting sections 25 and 26 of the 

regulations and substituting the following and the regulations are laid out: 

 

What they say in brief is that: 

 

Where a group of fishermen, may have, in the minister‟s opinion, a common interest in commercial 

fishing in any water or parts thereof, the minister may 

 

A.  Permit the group to catch all or a specified amount or proportion of the total limit prescribed for 

commercial fishing in any water. 

 

and 

 

B . Upon a request of the majority of the group cause every commercial fisherman‟s licence, issued to 

a member of such group, to contain a provision requiring that all fish caught under authority of the 

licence shall be marketed through a specified dealer, agency or co-operative association. 

 

Now section 26 statutes that: 

 

(1) No person who holds a commercial fisherman‟s licence, which contains a provision inserted 

therein, pursuant to Section 25, shall sell, barter or otherwise market any fish taken under the 

authority of such licence otherwise than to or through the dealer, agency or co-operative 

association named in the licence. 

 

And it was under that sub-section of section 26 that the accused was charged. 

 

The statement of W. H. Nelson goes on, 

 

On the 13th of April, 1962, a communication somewhat in the form of a petition, addressed to the 

Honourable A.G. Kuziak, the former Minister of Natural Resources for the province of Saskatchewan, 

was received in the office of George Elwood Couldwell, Director of Fisheries, Department of Natural 

Resources, Prince Albert, which communication is marked as exhibit “P” and so on. 

 

And this petitioner letter states this: 

 

To the Hon. A.G. Kuziak. 

 

We, the undersigned fishermen, being the majority of the total of fishermen having a common interest 

in and holding commercial licences on DORE LAKE 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

49 

AND LAC LA RONGE LAKE AND BEAVER RIVER in the Province of Saskatchewan, do hereby 

request the Honorable Minister of Natural Resources to cause all commercial fishing licences issued 

for the above mentioned lakes to contain a provision requiring that all fish caught under the authority 

of such licence shall be marketed through the Co-operative Fisheries Limited, in accordance with 

sections 25 and 26 of the schedule of regulations under The Fisheries Act. 

 

We request this provision to remain in effect until the majority of the total fishermen on the above 

mentioned lakes shall request otherwise, or at such time as the honorable minister may wish to 

withdraw such provisions at his discretion. 

 

This document was signed by forty eight (48) names, and on April 23rd, 1962, a further communication 

was received at the office of George Elwood Couldwell, the Director of Fisheries, in Prince Albert, 

which is the second page of Exhibit P. in those proceedings, and which reads as follows: 

 

The Hon. A.G. Kuziak 

Minister of Natural Resources, 

 

And this states that: 

 

Further to the signatures affixed on page one of this letter, the following named persons who 

previously held commercial fishing licences at Beauval are not presently residing permanently at 

Beauval and will not be holding commercial fishing licences at Beauval this year, as most of these 

people are engaged in commercial fishing elsewhere than in the Beauval area, and therefore will not 

be fishing at Beauval and for this reason have not been present to sign this letter. 

 

And their names are listed and states: 

 

Therefore for the forty-eight signatures affixed to page one of this letter constitute eighty-four percent 

of the potential resident commercial fishermen of Beauval, Saskatchewan. 

 

And they have signed it and witnessed it, members of the Beauval Fishermen‟s Co-operative, and they 

signed their names to it. 

 

Now the judgement goes on to say that: 

 

The only witness called in these proceedings was George Elwood Couldwell, the Director of Fisheries, 

of the Department of Natural Resources, Prince Albert, and his evidence discloses that at the time 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

50 

the petition, was received by him there was no open fishing season either at Dore Lake, Lac La Ronge 

or Beaver River, and that no licences were in fact issued until the 15th and 16th of May, so that from 

the date of the petition, and until the licences to fish the three bodies of water mentioned were issued 

no one could legally fish on any of the waters, and no one did in effect hold a subsisting and valid 

commercial licence to so fish. 

 

It was also disclosed by the evidence of Mr. Couldwell that an investigation of sorts was conducted for 

the purpose of ascertaining if the signatures to Exhibit P.1. were in fact a majority of the fishermen 

residing in the Beauval area. This investigation was conducted by referring back to licences covering 

1959, 1960, and 1961. 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

That the time the petition was received by the director of fisheries, Mr. Couldwell, there was no one 

holding a valid subsisting commercial licence to fish any of the three waters referred to in the petition, 

so that they cannot be said to be fishermen by reason of the fact that they held licences allowing them 

to fish, but for the purpose of this case I am going to assume that the signatories to the petition were by 

occupation fishermen in previous years, and presumably intend to continue to be fishermen, although I 

can find no actual evidence to that effect. 

 

Having received a request such as contained in the petition, Exhibit P.1. the minister was permitted 

under sub-section (a) of Section 25 to permit the group to catch all or a specified amount or proportion 

of the total limit prescribed for commercial fishing in any water, or part thereof. 

 

On May 9th, 1962, the Honourable A.G. Kuziak sent a memorandum to Mr. G.E. Couldwell, which was 

referred to in the heading as an “Endorsement of Licences — Section 25 and 26, Saskatchewan Fisheries 

Regulations,” and this document is in evidence. The relevant part thereof reads as follows: 

 

Approval is hereby granted to endorse marketing provisions on all commercial fishing licences issued 

in the following areas: 

 

And they list 25 lakes, there were only 3 to begin with, besides the 3 concerned with in this case, there is 

25 lakes, and then there is The Beauval Fishermen‟s Co-op. Pine house Fishermen‟s Co-op. Pelican 

Narrows Fishermen‟s Co-op. 

 

And this document is signed by the Honourable A.G. Kuziak. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

51 

“The witness Couldwell stated that he also received some verbal instructions from the Honourable A.G. 

Kuziak to endorse, or to have endorsed, all commercial licences issued to persons wanting to fish in 

Dore, Lac La Ronge, or Beaver River, with the following: 

 

All the fish taken under authority of this licence shall be delivered to Co-operative Fisheries Limited. 

 

and all licences issued on the 15th and 16th days of May, 1962, for those waters were so endorsed. 

 

It was argued by counsel for the respondent that the word “group” referred to in the relevant sections and 

sub-sections of the regulations previously referred to, mean all the fishermen of the area, including even 

those who reside in the area and who do not sign the petition, and he argued further that the minister also 

had the power under section 25 to come to the conclusion or form the opinion that the petitioning group 

was in fact a majority of all fishermen residing in the area, but with this argument I do not agree. 

 

It is my view that the only point on which the minister can form an opinion is whether or not a group of 

fishermen have a common interest in commercial fishing in any water or part thereof — 

 

And he quotes section 25, and he goes on to say: 

 

The minister cannot say that a certain number is in his opinion a majority. The number must, in fact, be 

a majority, and his opinion in that regard is of no consequence. If the request is in fact from a majority 

then he may place certain restrictions on the licence. However, it must first be proven that the request 

is from a majority of the “group” and if “group” means all the fisherman and potential fishermen of the 

area how can it be proven? Going back three years and checking the applications for licences does not 

prove to me that the petitioning groups is a majority — 

 

It goes on to state that: 

 

The witness Couldwell stated that he had no idea as to how many people lived within the area in 

question, and as all residents are potential fisherman how can it be shown that the petitioning group 

represents the majority of all fishermen in the area? The evidence disclosed that only twenty-six (26) 

persons applied to fish on Beaver River and some of those were not signatories to the petition. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

52 

Let us suppose that forty-nine (49) applied and were granted licences to fish on Beaver River, and 

not one of them signed the petition. Then, suppose all signatories to the petition applied and obtained 

a licence to fish only on Dore Lake. Then a minority who had no interest whatever in fishing on 

Beaver River would in effect control the marketing agency for all those fishing on Beaver River, and 

this could, in my opinion, not have been the intention of the legislature. 

 

There is no evidence before me to show that the petitioning group is a majority of all fishermen in 

the area and I so hold. 

 

The judgement goes on to state: 

 

I also feel that the Minister could not form the opinion that a group had a common interest without 

some basis, such as shown by the signatories of Exhibit P.1. and what basis would he have for saying 

that in his opinion all residents of the area have a common interest and therefore form a “group”. 

 

It goes on, and he finishes the judgement: 

 

I therefore find the accused not guilty and allow the appeal. I order that the fine and costs be refunded 

to the accused, and award taxable costs to the Appellant. 

 

And he signs it W.H. Nelson, Judge of the District Court of the Judicial Centre of Prince Albert. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have stated before, and I think this proves it beyond any doubt, that there has 

been coercion, there has been compulsion, in the co-operative movement in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

We, in the Liberal party, are not opposed to co-ops, on the contrary, not only are we not opposed to the 

co-op movement, we have supported it over the years and we will continue to support it, but we say this, 

the acts of those people, and the people employed by them, in attempting to insert and worm their way 

into the co-op movement, they are proving and we will prove, the are the greatest enemies that the co-op 

movement has or ever has had in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the most serious problems facing the people of the province 

today, concerns local government, both urban and real municipalities have many grave and growing 

problems. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

53 

The need and the cost of expanding most present services and adding new ones, such as more schools, 

and larger hospital facilities, better roads, homes for senior citizens, slum clearances, and urban renewal, 

are but a few. Some of these problems are peculiar to rural and some to urban municipalities, but they all 

have one problem in common. High land or property taxes, and the lack of other adequate sources of 

revenue. Now this is not a new situation, but it has grown more acute with each passing year. 

Municipalities have been faced with a growing range of demands. Demands that weren‟t dreamed of 

when our municipal system was set up over 50 years ago. Local government is the creation of the 

provincial government. When the system was instituted, property, land taxes, were given to municipal 

governments as their principal source of revenue. 

 

Thank God for that. this province would never have been anything if we‟d had them. They needed the 

pioneers with an instinct which these people never had or never will have. 

 

These sources of revenue on land tax and property tax were probably quite adequate at the time, 

considering the relatively few services that municipalities were expected to provide in those early days. 

 

Now, in 1944, Mr. Speaker, the CCF party promised the people of Saskatchewan that they would ease 

the burden of municipal taxes by paying the total cost of education. Well, Mr. Speaker, the socialists 

broke that promise in 1944 after they were elected and they have left it unhonored for the last 19 years. 

During those 19 years this government has introduced hundreds of new taxes and charges, they have 

increased hundreds of existing taxes and levies, they have increased our provincial taxes to the point 

where even they have to juggle the figures to try to prove that maybe we are not first, maybe we are only 

second or third highest taxed people in this nation. 

 

But this is only part of the story. While provincial taxes were increasing sevenfold, municipal taxes 

doubled and then they tripled, and now they are four times higher than they were in 1944. At the same 

time many municipal services have not kept pace with demands. Far too many Saskatchewan rural 

municipalities, cities, towns, villages, school units are in a very precarious financial position. In 1944, 

Mr. Speaker, the socialists promised to solve the municipal problem; they failed us then. 

 

Then in 1956 they made the same promise and again they broke faith with the people of Saskatchewan. 

That year, 1956, the government called in representatives of local government and they said we will sit 

down together and we will work out our mutual problems. Well, I was at that conference, Mr. Speaker, 

and I saw my first example of socialist togetherness. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

54 

Now just let me explain for a moment how the socialists go about working out a mutual problem 

through togetherness. The first thing, they called in the people concerned, it could be local government, 

it could be doctors, it could be businessmen, it could be farmers. The group doesn‟t matter. These 

socialists will master plan for all of us. Well, then they sit them down in comfortable chairs and they 

proceed to brainwash them, with long speeches delivered by cabinet ministers but I am afraid written by 

imported planners. The idea is that eventually you become numb from your seat and this numbness 

spreads up to your brain. When this happens they hope then that they can convince you that black is 

white and that up is down and even that socialists plans to take away a little more of your freedom and 

independence is really in your best interests. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — The numbness started at the top. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I can‟t hear what you are mumbling. If you put your teeth back in I am sure we would 

all get along better. 

 

The trouble is that Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, are a hardy lot and they‟ve seen through this and 

they are now resisting even these great master plans. Well now, this is exactly what happened at the local 

government conference in 1956. Local government authorities came into this chamber with high hopes. 

They thought at long last a start would be made towards solving their problems. They received instead 

long lectures from cabinet ministers on their own inefficiency, the weakness of the present rural 

municipalities. There was no mutual discussion of plans or problems, there was only a preconceived plan 

prepared long before the conference began. The delegates sat for about three days and listened to one 

cabinet minister after another lecture the rural delegates especially on the joys of the county system. 

 

Now after about two days of this some of the urban delegates cornered Clarence Fines and we asked him 

when our problems, when the urban problems would be discussed. And I think at that time, I think he 

was speaking out in that corridor, he summed up the government‟s feeling then and I am convinced it 

has been their feeling ever since. He said, we won‟t talk to you until we‟ve straightened out these rural 

boys. His exact words, and I remember them well, “We won‟t keep pouring money down a rat hole”, 

referring to the rural municipalities. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Shame on him. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

55 

Mr. Steuart: — Well, almost seven years have passed, Mr. Speaker, and we all know what has 

happened. First we have had the continuing committee; well, they continued so long I think some of us 

thought they had gone into orbit. They hold dozens of meetings all over this province. They spent about 

$300,000, and I understand they are asking for more for the same purpose — to sell rural people on this 

preconceived plan and to give the socialists more control over local government. 

 

First there was to be no vote; the plan like so many others would be forced on the rural people whether 

they liked it or not. Another typical socialist freedom. Freedom from the responsibility of running your 

own affairs. But something went wrong. The rural people held many votes and this opposition backed by 

public opinion forced the government to change their plans. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I said that the socialists changed their plans, but they didn‟t change their minds, just their 

plans. They promised a vote to people concerned before any change would be made in municipal 

boundaries or in the system. Now then I see by the Leader-Post that the Hon. Minister of Municipal 

Affairs has promised that no change will take place unless the S.A.R.M. agrees, and I sincerely hope that 

this promise is kept better than most of their other promises. 

 

But just let‟s for a minute take a look at how they propose to carry out that promise to give the people 

concerned the vote. 

 

Well, I have here a map of what I am sure, I presume will be county No. 16, if the county system ever 

comes into being. This proposed county takes in seven, parts of seven rural municipalities, 92, 93, 94, 

95, 123, 124 and 125. Now parts of every one of these municipalities are contained — I say parts — are 

contained in this proposed county. Now, under the government‟s plan, those people living within this 

proposed county will have a vote on this particular county, Those left out will have no say. whether the 

municipality goes in or stays out of this proposed county no. 16. They will automatically be in the 

adjoining county. But what if there is no adjoining county? There can be a dozen or more townships, in 

this particular case, cut off from their former municipality and without any form of local government. 

We all know what will happen. They will eventually be forced to agree to go into the next county. 

 

Now this is their idea. It will spread. If they could get one or two or a few municipalities, groups of 

municipalities across this province to agree, then the rest of the municipalities would fall in line or fall 

over like tenpins. Now, Mr. Speaker, the fair and proper way to take such a vote is to let everyone in 

each municipality affected 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

56 

vote at the same time and on the same question. Let them all decide if all or part of their municipality 

should go into any larger unit. This would be real democracy, not socialists political tricks designed to 

feel and confuse our rural people. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the real tragedy of this situation is that most people realize that there is need for 

reform in our municipal system. Municipalities, both rural and urban, have far too many demands made 

on them and too narrow a tax basis. Farmers, home owners, cannot continue to pay the ever-mounting 

local taxes. Local taxpayers are suffering real hardships because of mounting municipal taxes. And in far 

too many cases municipal services are falling behind demand. Falling behind necessities. What can be 

done to solve this very really and very complex problem? 

 

We all know, for example, that we must have improved local roads, we must build better schools, add to 

our hospitals, build low cost housing, make it available, must clear our slums; in other words we must 

improve living conditions as fast as we can afford to. But at the same time we cannot continue to load 

these terrific costs on the farm lands and the urban property holders. 

 

To do these things, Mr. Speaker, and still leave local government in the hands of local people, without 

breaking them financially should be our goal. But how do we do this? Well, certainly the government‟s 

way has been a failure. The actions they have taken I say have set back municipal reform at least 25 

years. Why has this happened? This whole municipal mess has been a typical socialist operating in 

fuzzy-minded planning. It has been imposed from the top down. You know when most reasonable 

people have a problem they get together and they agree on a goal, they exchange ideas, and then they 

reach a compromise solution. It may take time, it may not be perfect but it is democracy. When the 

socialists see a problem, Mr. Speaker, whether it be with doctors or businessmen or farmers or working 

people or rural people, what do they do? First they turn their planners loose. Then they call on the people 

concerned and attempt to dictate what must be done. If these people don‟t fall in line, they turn on their 

propaganda, they smear them, they blacken their name and they accuse them of wrecking the democratic 

process. 

 

Well, you know, Mr. Speaker, as long as they did this to small helpless minorities, and we have talked 

about one here and I brought it that the poor, little fishermen, the native fishermen of northern 

Saskatchewan — as long as they did this to small, helpless minorities they got away with it, it worked. 

But now they tackled the rural municipal organization which is neither small nor helpless, and their little 

plans hit on the rocks. I hope our rural people continue to resist this bare-faced grab at their basic 

freedom and independence. And I tell you that they can be assured of 100 percent support in their fight 

from the Liberal party. 

 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

57 

Mr. Speaker, let the government go back and sit down with the reeves and the mayors and the 

councillors and begin again. These people are experts in local government. They have the confidence of 

local people. Let them decide mutually what services belong to the province and what services can be 

best rendered on a local level by local people. Then let the government give them adequate financial 

resources to meet their obligations without breaking our farmers, small businessmen and our working 

people. 

 

If the governments, I am convinced, did this in an honest and sincere manner, they would dispel the fear 

and suspicion that now prevails throughout Saskatchewan. But I am afraid this isn‟t the socialist way. I 

can assure you, Mr. Speaker, members opposite, that it is the Liberal way. 

 

We are convinced that this is the only way to keep our free way of life and to bring real progress to 

Saskatchewan. This year, with millions of dollars of surplus money, wouldn‟t this have been an ideal 

time to make such a start, a start on such a program. Sound, long-term municipal help by our provincial 

government. But again they failed the people of Saskatchewan just as they have failed them since 1944. 

It has been truly said that local government, being closest to the people, is the backbone of democracy. If 

this government through its ill-planned action or its inactions refuses them the proper tools to do the job, 

they will have done a real disservice to the whole structure of our free democratic way of life. 

 

If this government, through its evident determination to centralize all authority in their own hands, if by 

this manner the socialists cripple local government, they will have taken a major step towards 

dictatorship. Mr. Speaker, their actions in the past few years have led many people to believe that this is 

their ultimate goal. Let them disprove by a change of attitude towards our doctors our business people, 

our co-ops, and by all means, at this time, towards our municipal people. Their budget, I am afraid, 

shows no indication of such a change of attitude and I cannot support it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: (Ministry of Industry and Information) — Mr. Speaker, I am happy to have an 

opportunity to say a few words in this debate. I want to assure you right at the start that I have no 

intention of wasting my time trying to answer all the ridiculous statements that I have heard emanating 

from across the floor during the last few days. The time left to this debate is, both today and tomorrow, 

rather limited and I am afraid if I used it all I wouldn‟t have time to deal with everything that has been 

said. And 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

58 

it seems to me quite obvious that it doesn‟t matter how hard you try you very seldom have any success in 

convincing our friends opposite. I am almost inclined to my current life work in trying to educate them 

or do something about their way of thinking. 

 

I want to start now, Mr. Speaker, by congratulating the hon. Provincial Treasurer on the budget which he 

brought down a few days ago and particularly on the very fine speech that he delivered at the time that 

he presented the budget to this house. I have had the privilege of sitting in this legislature for quite a few 

years now and have listened to a number of budget speeches and have perused the budgets which were 

brought down from time to time and in spite of the fact that we have had a lot of good budgets and good 

speeches over the years, I do want to congratulate the present Provincial Treasurer on the very fine effort 

which he made and on the very fine budget which he brought down. 

 

Now, there are many things which I would discuss during this debate. There are matters pertaining to my 

own Department of Industry and Information which I might want to touch on; there are things that I 

might want to say with respect to the new proposals with regard to industry development incentives and 

this sort of thing. I would also be interested in saying something about the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation for which I have some responsibility, and I think it is only right that, in view of the fact that 

large sums of money are provided annually for the use of the corporation, the house be given some idea 

of the developments which are taking place, the ways in which this money is being spent and where we 

stand from time to time with regard to the ultimate objective of the corporation. 

 

I would like then to spend a little time today, Mr. Speaker, dealing with a few matters which concern the 

corporation. I would like too to refer very briefly at this time to some remarks made by the hon. member 

for Souris-Estevan (Mr. MacDougall) when he spoke a few days ago, and the hon. member was dealing 

with problems of the petroleum industry and read at fairly good length from the brief which was 

presented a short time ago to the government by the petroleum association. The hon. member if my 

memory serves me correctly, after reading off all of the recommendations of the petroleum association, 

suggested that the government should be prepared to adopt the recommendations without question 

because the petroleum association said that in their view they were in the best interests of all concerned. 

 

Now, I am not going to quarrel at any length with the recommendations of the petroleum association. I 

had the privilege of sitting in on the meeting at which the documents was presented and, quite frankly, 

some of their recommendations I can certainly agree with. And I certainly agree with what they said in 

their brief when they pointed out that the geological prospects in Saskatchewan are not as 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

59 

favorable as they are in some other areas, and I can certainly agree with the statement which followed 

that to the effect that on the whole, generally speaking, the regulations which apply to the petroleum 

industry in Saskatchewan are considered favorable by the industry. Now what they were suggesting to 

the government, Mr. Speaker, was not that the regulations are particularly onerous as far as the industry 

is concerned but they were pointing out that because of the geological factor that if Saskatchewan wishes 

to continue to enjoy a reasonable level of exploration in the province, then it would be well if we could 

look to see if we could provide some further incentives to the industry. 

 

And, as has been pointed out by a number of speakers including the Provincial Treasurer, this matter 

certainly is being given very serious consideration and I have no doubt but what some changes will be 

effected in the not too distant future, and I am sure that this will again interest the industry and we can 

expect some further step-up in exploration work. 

 

One of the other matters, though, that the hon. member referred to was something else that was raised by 

the petroleum industry in their brief with respect to the natural gas purchase policy of the government or 

the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. And I do want to say a word or two about this, Mr. Speaker, 

because I want to put on the record exactly what our policy has been and I particularly want to put on the 

record the policy which we proposed to the delegation when we met them, that we were prepared to 

adopt, and I want to say right here that the reason we said that we were prepared to provide or propose 

this purchase policy was simply because in fact it is very little different, if any, than the policy which we 

have followed in the past. I want to suggest, Mr. Speaker, and this has been confirmed to me by 

representatives of the petroleum industry, that the complaint with respect to the fact that the corporation 

has a monopoly insofar as gas purchase in the province is concerned is mainly a question of principle 

rather than because of any actual hardship that has been worked on the industry by virtue of the 

purchasing policy which we have followed in the past. 

 

There is plenty of reasons for this and I think my hon. friend should know it. 

 

Mr. MacDougall: (Biggar) — One is the government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — But I want to say this. That we have done little different here in Saskatchewan 

than has been done in other jurisdictions. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

60 

I want to remind the hon. members that the province of Alberta, during the early years of the petroleum 

and natural gas industry in Alberta, saw fit to provide that export of natural gas from that province would 

not be permitted until such time as sufficient quantities of natural gas had been proved up to take care of 

the needs of the Alberta citizens in the years ahead. 

 

I want to point out too, that in Alberta there has always been some authority which could establish he 

price which was paid for natural gas, both at the level of the producer and of the consumer. 

 

Now, when we first went into the natural gas business here in Saskatchewan, most certainly we 

examined the prices which were being paid for natural gas elsewhere. And when we originally 

established our price schedule which generally called for 10 cents per thousand feet, at the well head, 

there was little if any complaint from the producers because, Mr. Speaker, there was no question of the 

price itself and besides that of course there was no alternative market available at that time. 

 

The one factor we must keep in mind is this. That when someone suggests that the price we paid in the 

past was not equal to what they refer to as the price which could be obtained from Trans-Canada 

Pipeline which is quoted at the figure of 13 and one-half cents or so. They compare this to the 10 cent 

price which we pay, but they forget to point out that our price of 10 cents has been paid to the producer 

at the well head while the Trans-Canada price has been paid at the pipeline. In other words, the producer 

has had to produce and gather, dehydrate and deliver that gas to the pipeline in order to receive the 13 or 

13 and one-half cents. And when you examine the costs of gathering and preparing that gas and 

delivering it to the pipeline, then you will find that on the whole our price over the years has been 

somewhat better than the price which has been paid by Trans-Canada Pipeline. 

 

Now, a few years ago we found it necessary to re-negotiate some contracts with some producers in the 

western part of the province. They were not satisfied with the price which we were offering them. We 

were satisfied that the price which we were offering was in fact at the well head, equivalent to the price 

which they could have obtained from Trans-Canada Pipeline at Trans-Canada Pipelines. However, 

because we couldn‟t resolve the difficulty, the two parties agreed on arbitration and we submitted the 

question of price to an arbitration board. It was interesting to me, Mr. Speaker, to read the report of the 

arbitration board which examined the costs and the prices and concluded that there didn‟t seem to be any 

real reason why a price increase could be justified because in fact the price we were offering was 

equivalent to the Trans-Canada price. But, nevertheless, like a lot of other arbitration boards they said, 

well, notwithstanding that, we are going to grant a slight increase anyway. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

61 

Because we wanted to make it abundantly clear to the industry that we have in fact no desire to ask them 

to receive a price for the natural gas which they produce less than they can receive from other sources, 

we saw fit when we met them last to place before them a purchase policy which we felt they could have 

little, if any, quarrel. And let me repeat that the policy which we proposed did not cause us any concern 

at that time and does not cause us any concern at this particular time either, simply because it is in fact 

practically identical to the price structure and price schedule which we have worked under the past 

number of years. I think all hon. members know that during the last 10 years or so, the corporation has 

purchased essentially all of the available gas which has been produced here in Saskatchewan, and we 

have constructed gathering systems in the various fields, we‟ve built compressor stations, and pipelines 

linking all of the known gas fields of economical size to our market areas which we have developed 

during the past 10 years. 

 

The market which the corporation has developed over the past decade is for some 50 billion cubic feet of 

gas per year. I want to remind the hon. members, Mr. Speaker, that only about two-thirds of this quantity 

has been and can be met from Saskatchewan sources. The gas which we require to continue at this rate 

of consumption for the next 30 years, and this is without allowing for any further growth, in our natural 

gas system, is considerably more than the proven reserves of natural gas in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would not have time to refer to the purchase policy in total in the two or three 

minutes remaining before 5:30 so I would beg leave of the house to call it 5:30 at this time. 

 

The sitting was recessed at 5:30 p.m. 

 

The sitting was resumed at 7:30 p.m. 

 

Hon. R. Brown: — Mr. Speaker, when I called it 5:30 I was dealing with the natural gas purchase policy 

which we spelled out to the delegation from the Canadian Petroleum Association. I had made reference 

to the fact that during the last decade the power corporation had developed a market for some 50 billion 

cubic feet of gas per year and we had built lines into the areas to pick the gas up to take it to the market 

and I pointed out that the amount of gas in Saskatchewan was not anywhere near the requirements of the 

corporation‟s system in the years ahead. 

 

I do want to just review the purchase policy which we laid before the delegation from the Canadian 

Petroleum Association. First we said that the corporation would 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

62 

continue to buy natural gas wherever it is proved up in the province in sufficient quantities to make it 

economical to take it into the system or to transport it to market. We pointed out some idea of the 

volumes of gas which would be required to be proved up in order to make such reserves economically 

feasible for recovery and gave an illustration of the formula which we suggested might apply. We 

suggested that the corporation could invest about a million dollars for each 100 billion cubic feet of 

reserves which were proved up. This would mean that the corporation might reasonably build 40 or 50 

miles of pipeline which would handle some 10 million cubic feet per day. Understandably, smaller 

reserves would have to be closer to available pipelines in order for that formula to apply. 

 

We agreed, too, that while pipeline companies usually purchased the gas gathered and delivered at the 

pipeline, and this is the case with Trans-Canada Pipeline, the corporation has generally taken delivery of 

the gas at the wellhead, and I want to remind the hon. members again, Mr. Speaker, that this has 

involved a much bigger investment on the part of the corporation than would otherwise have been the 

case. We suggested to the association that the corporation will give preference to the purchase of gas 

gathered and compressed to pipeline pressure at a central location in the field. In certain cases, the 

corporation will be willing to construct the gathering system and compressor station and to buy the gas at 

the wellhead with the price adjustment on a cost of service basis. This is the formula under which we 

have been purchasing gas in the main, from our suppliers during the last decade. 

 

We also proposed that after the initial build-up period, we would be prepared to accept the generally 

accepted average rate of delivery of one cubic foot per day for each 10,000 cubic feet of the reserve. This 

rate would be applied to new fields after an initial build-up period of some five years. 

 

We also proposed, Mr. Speaker, that if the corporation‟s system cannot absorb the available gas within a 

reasonable time, the corporation will offer to purchase the recoverable reserves in place on the basis of 

payments over a 10 year period. This is the kind of an arrangement which we worked out with respect to 

the purchase of the Hatton-Many Islands field. This quite often is of great interest to the producers if 

there is no other ready market available for the gas which they are able to produce, and we favor this sort 

of an arrangement because it does provide an opportunity for the corporation to buy up reserves which 

they can produce when required in the years ahead. And it safeguards us to some extent at least from 

rapidly rising prices for natural gas. 

 

The pricing policy, as I mentioned earlier, originally established by negotiation with the producers, were 

as I said generally considered to be somewhat more favorable than the 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

63 

prevailing prices in Alberta. Over the last three years the wellhead contract price in Saskatchewan has 

been some 10 and three-quarter cents per thousand cubic feet, and as I mentioned, the producers have 

chimed that other markets exist for the gas and that Saskatchewan prices should take them into account. 

As I said before, we are satisfied that we have in fact been meeting competition insofar as gas prices are 

concerned but in order to make it abundantly clear to the producers that we seriously mean to pay 

competitive prices, this is a proposal which we laid before the Canadian Petroleum Association. 

 

We said that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation will meet or exceed Trans-Canada Pipeline‟s average 

purchase prices. For new discoveries of natural gas meeting Trans-Canada Pipeline specifications, 

gathered and compressed to pipeline pressure, the corporation will pay a price schedule as follows: the 

base price will be the weighted average price for 1,000 B.T.U.s. of gas, paid by Trans-Canada Pipelines 

for field gathered and compressed gas in Alberta or Saskatchewan over the previous three years, plus 

one-half cent per thousand cubic feet for an annual load factor over 75 percent, plus three-quarters of one 

cent per thousand cubic feet for an annual load factor of 62.5 to 75 percent, one cent for an annual lead 

factor of 50 to 62.6 percent, and for annual load factor below 50 percent we are prepared to pay the 

weighted average Trans-Canada price plus one and one-quarter cents per M.C.F. 

 

I think this should indicate quite clearly, Mr. Speaker, that we have no intention of forcing the producers 

to sell their gas at an uneconomical price or a price much below that which they might be able to obtain 

elsewhere. 

 

We further suggested that for sweet gas purchased at the wellhead, and this again would be for new 

discoveries of gas, the corporation is prepared to pay the schedule I just outlined a moment ago, less a 

fixed gathering charge of some 3 cents per thousand cubic feet and a compression charge of one-third 

cent per 100 pounds of compression. This is in line with the procedure which has been established over 

the past ten years or so. 

 

Now, having spelled out a schedule of prices which we feel is abundantly clear and should not be open 

to too much question, we have gone further and suggested that while we firmly believe that every effort 

should be made to retain in Saskatchewan natural gas which may be proved up, in order to meet the 

requirements of Saskatchewan citizens in the years ahead, and this again is in line with the practice 

which was followed in the province of Alberta, we are prepared if it can be adequately proven that a 

price is available higher than we are prepared to go, or if the gas which is proved up is in such a location 

that it is not economically feasible to take it into our own system, we are prepared to waive our rights for 

sole purchase and in fact permit the export of that gas from the province. Our own view is that with the 

price 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

64 

schedule which has been proposed, plus the fact that the corporation is prepared to purchase gas in place 

which it cannot immediately use in the system, there is very little likelihood that export will be 

demanded or in fact required. 

 

It has been proposed by the association that there should be some means for arbitrating the prices that are 

paid by the corporation for gas obtained from the producers. Again, let me say I would suggest that there 

is not too much likelihood that the situation will arise where arbitration will be required, but again our 

view is that we don‟t quarrel with this sort of a proposal. It has been used in the past in order to establish 

prices which the corporation has had to pay but we are somewhat at a loss as to how you could establish 

an arbitration board which would be completely independent and which could be considered as being 

fair to both parties concerned. And I suggested this in my discussion with the petroleum industry. I am 

sure that there would be some squawks from the producers if we suggested to them for example that 

some government agency such as the local government board was empowered to arbitrate gas prices. 

And rightly so. By the same token we wouldn‟t feel that the corporation was being given a completely 

square deal if we had a board which was made up of individuals whose leanings might be towards the 

petroleum industry. I think that the association as well as ourselves recognize that the problem of finding 

a body or a group of individuals which might be considered completely unbiased and fair in a matter of 

this kind. However, as I said, we certainly suggested to them that we didn‟t quarrel with this sort of a 

proposal and that we could work out some arrangement to our mutual satisfaction for an arbitration 

proceeding then certainly we would be prepared to go along with that sort of an arrangement. 

 

I want to take just a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, to review a few of the highlights of the operation of the 

corporation during 1962 and I hope that time will permit me to refer to the extension of the natural gas 

system which the corporation will be undertaking during 1963. There are a lot of other matters that I 

would like to touch upon but I don‟t want to encroach on the time of the other members on both sides of 

the house who are looking for an opportunity to speak this evening, so I will make this as short as I 

possibly can. 

 

I would like to suggest to you that in 1963, the present year, is likely to be a year of objectives or 

achievements realized as far as the power corporation is concerned. Squaw Rapids, our first hydro-

electric system, will begin delivering power to the provincial system within the next few weeks. Also, 

early this summer the corporation head office staff will move to their new building at the corner of 

Scarth Street and Victoria Avenue. Now I know there has been a lot of caustic comment made about the 

new head office building and I am not going to try to answer all of the rather ridiculous criticisms which 

have been levelled at the 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

65 

building. I only hope that all members on both sides of the house will take an opportunity this summer 

when the building is completed to visit it and to see just exactly what we have provided as a 

headquarters for this great utility that belongs to the people of Saskatchewan. As far as I am concerned, 

Mr. Speaker, it will be a matter of satisfaction when we can move our staff into that building. This will 

be the first time since about 1950 that we have been able to have all of the head office staff of the 

corporation under one roof. At the present time we are operating from some 24 floors of 10 different 

buildings located throughout the city of Regina. I suggest to you that there are not many utilities 

operating in the dominion of Canada that would attempt to operate under those conditions for too long. 

The head office building is badly needed, it is long overdue, and as I say it will be a matter of 

satisfaction to me have the corporation under one roof for a change. 

 

I want to refer too to one of the major developments in the natural gas picture and that is the 

development of underground gas storage located at a couple of points on our system. We started this 

year by constructing a storage cavern up around Melville, we are presently building just out of Regina 

here in order to provide a storage cavern in this area. The purpose of this of course is to assist us in 

taking care of peak requirements during the winter season and it is a means of postponing development 

of looping of our major transmission lines from our source of supply. 

 

It is interesting too this year, and I believe this was mentioned in the speech from the throne, that this 

year the corporation expects to add its 200,000th customer to the electrical system and it is also expected 

that the 100,000th customer will be added to the natural gas system. 

 

I would like to just mention briefly some of the benefits to the people of Saskatchewan which will accrue 

as a result of the completion of the Squaw Rapids project. I think all hon. members know and realize that 

hydro-electric stations are more expensive to construct than either steam or internal combustion operated 

stations. However, this initially higher cost is more than offset by lower costs of operation and 

maintenance. The lower cost of operation of course reduces the cost of the production of power, and I 

want to say, Mr. Speaker, that it is the intention of the corporation to pass these savings on to the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The government is hopeful that the corporation will be able to develop rate reductions in some areas 

which will facilitate greater use of electrical energy by our people. We are hopeful that a lower run-off 

rate for farmers will be established. This proposed rate reduction is designed to facilitate economic water 

heating for domestic use. I suggest that this will apply to a large cross-section of our rural population in 

conjunction with the family farm improvement 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

66 

branch program of providing water and sewage facilities for our Saskatchewan farmer. 

 

Residential customers may expect reductions where higher consumptions are concerned. Our basic 

electrical needs are still being met by our steam plants and unfortunately reduction in the basic rates 

cannot be made at the present time. Hydro power will initially be used to augment steam production and 

will play that similar kind of a role on your electrical power bill. As the consumption increases the 

average cost per kilowatt hour will decrease. 

 

We are hopeful too that with industrial rates it will be possible to reduce rates for industries which use 

electricity in their operations on a high load factor basis. The cost of providing power for a sustained 

electrical load is considerably lower than cost of production for high demands over relatively short 

periods. We are hopeful that it will be possible with bringing in the first hydro-energy to the system that 

we will be able to provide a reduced rate for our industries operating on a high load factor basis. And 

this, Mr. Speaker, can apply to a fairly substantial number of our larger industries in the province. 

 

I would like to remind you, Mr. Speaker, that our utility at the end of 1944 showed only some 13,000 

customers, including rural customers throughout the province. Today, with the number of electrical 

customers approaching 200,000, there are more than 60,000 farms connected to this system. 

 

While the farm program was officially completed in 1961, an additional 1,700 farms were added to the 

system in 1962. I think it is interesting at this time to note that one indication of the benefits of electricity 

and the greater use which is being made of electricity by our farms is the fact that some 2,400 farms 

found that their electrical needs had grown during 1962 to a point where it became necessary to convert 

their 5 horsepower services to 10 horsepower services. As a matter of fact, because of the conversion to 

the higher horsepower services the corporation ceased buying the 5 horsepower transformers a couple of 

years ago. 

 

Power generated by the corporation has increased more than seven times during the last 14 years and in 

the last 10 years average residential consumption of electricity has risen from some 900 kilowatt hours 

annually to an average of some 2,900 kilowatt hours in 1962. The average farm in Saskatchewan used 

2,700 kilowatt hours of energy in 1957 and 4,300 kilowatt hours in 1962. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

67 

Power consumption in the province has risen to compare very favorably with the national average in 

Canada, and this is a matter of great satisfaction as far as I am concerned because not too many years ago 

our average consumption was considerably below the national average and it is indicative of the greater 

use that the people of the province are making of electricity in their daily lives. 

 

It is interesting to note too, Mr. Speaker, that while power consumption across Canada increased by 

some 4.3 percent in 1962, consumption in Saskatchewan increased by some 11 percent. I think it is even 

more significant, Mr. Speaker, to note that the seasonal peak demand in Saskatchewan was up by some 

15 percent. During 1962 Indian reservations in the province were served for the first time in the history 

of the corporation. A total of 4 reservations were served in time for the Christmas season. With 

electricity now available to every settled area of the province our Indian reservations represented the last 

frontier to be crossed with modern electrical power. The program of electrification of Indian reservations 

will continue until power is available to every family in the settled areas of the province. 

 

One of the interesting developments in 1962, Mr. Speaker, was the establishment of the first 

underground distribution system on our provincial power grid. This was completed in a new residential 

section of the city of Yorkton. This distribution system energized at some 25,000 volts will provide 

some of the highest underground voltages on the continent, providing adequate power for future 

requirements and eliminating one step in transformation from the corporations 25,000 volt system. 

 

We propose in meeting the requirements of planners and architects to install underground electrical 

systems in all new subdivisions of larger urban centres in the future. 

 

During the year 1962 the corporation constructed a number of high voltage transmission lines designed 

to provide alternate service to some areas, to improve existing services and to prepare for the transfer of 

energy from the new hydro station at Squaw Rapids into the settled areas of the province. 

 

In natural gas operations, the corporation added a record number of communities to its natural gas 

system, some 28 as a matter of fact. Members will recall that we originally mentioned the program of 

some 16 during the session last year but because treasury was able to provide us with some additional 

funds we were able to add a further 12 communities to the system during the year; 20 new gas wells 

were brought into production in the Hatton-Many Islands area and we built a new compressor station at 

Hatton in order to boost the compression in our system. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

68 

I mentioned earlier the construction of the gas storage cavern at Melville and this I might mention was 

quite successful and when it is finally completed, it is not quite done, it is interesting to note that we will 

be able to store sufficient gas in that cavern to take care of the needs of the Melville-Yorkton area; our 

gas customers in that area, for quite a number of days in the event that we should run into any problems 

in any other part of the system, and find it impossible to put gas from other parts of the system into that 

area. 

 

As I mentioned a moment ago too, it is our intention to continue to buy these storage caverns as the need 

arises in various parts of the province in order to take care of the peak needs of the citizens. 

 

By the end of 1962, the corporation was operating some 10,500 miles of electrical transmission lines, 

and some 58,000 miles of electrical distribution lines, serving some 198,000 customers. 

 

At the same time, the corporation operated some 2,100 miles of natural gas transmission line, and 1,400 

miles of distribution mains serving some 89,000 customers. Power consumption in the province for 

1962, was, 1,394,000,000 kilowatt hours, and some 44,800,000,000 cubic feet of natural gas was 

supplied to customers. 

 

It is interesting to note here, when we speak of the consumption of natural gas in the system, that the 

consumption of natural gas by customers of the system, during the month of January this year, was 

greater than the consumption of the entire system in the year 1956. I mentioned a moment ago that we 

expect to commence operations at the Squaw Rapids Project in the very near future. We are hopeful that 

by the end of this month we will have the first of the 33.5 kilowatt generators at the project in operation, 

and we will be continuing to add units as we go along during the year, and as we add these units and 

bring them into production it is the intention then to gradually close out the Moose Jaw and Prince 

Albert generating stations. 

 

At the present time as far as Squaw Rapids is concerned, all of the work on the dam, and the spillway in 

the power canal, and the generating station intake structures, is complete. Work on the high voltage 

transmission line is continuing and the work on the plant itself is well under way. 

 

The corporation was involved in the construction of the South Saskatchewan River Dam project during 

1962, only to the extent of supplying steel liners for the three diversion tunnels, which will act as power 

pen stocks when the project is completed. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

69 

Investigation and design work for the Coteau Creek hydro-electric power station was well under way, 

and we expect this station will be brought into operation, in time for the winter season of 1967. 

 

Our expenditures on the South Saskatchewan project to the end of 1962, amounted to $6,6 million and 

nearly $4 million was the corporation‟s share of the cost of the reservoir. 

 

Studies of the Saskatchewan river system are continuing, to determine the river‟s most economic 

development. These studies include preliminary investigation into the feasibility of increasing 

Saskatchewan river flow, by diversion from the Athabasca, the Peace and the Columbia river systems. 

The government of western Canada, the provincial governments appear to take a rather favorable 

attitude toward eventual augmentation of prairie water supplies through co-operative action of some 

kind. 

 

There is much more could be said, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the operation of the corporation during 

1962. I mentioned earlier there are a number of objectives will have been achieved; 200,000 customers 

of the electrical system, 100,000 customers of the gas system, completion of the first hydro station at 

Squaw Rapids, and completion of the head office building in the city of Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — However, this is not the end of the story, as far as the corporation is concerned. It 

is indicated that in the years ahead if we are to continue to meet the demands of our people for electrical 

energy and natural gas, that expansion of the corporation must continue in both fields, with very little 

abatement. 

 

Anyone who may think that it will be possible to drastically reduce the amount of money invested in the 

corporation annually, in the immediate future, is simply whistling in the dark. We will no sooner 

complete the Coteau Creek station, than we will be well underway with the construction of possibly 

another hydro station somewhere on the Saskatchewan River, and this again will not be the end of the 

demands for electrical energy by the people of this province. 

 

Our forecast of consumption demands an increase in load growth over the years ahead, indicate that it 

will be quite some time in the future, before we will be able to sit back and say that we have sufficient 

capacity in our system to take care of the growing demands for electrical energy by the people of this 

province. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

70 

By the same token our consumption of natural gas will continue to rise over the years ahead, we will 

undoubtedly be adding more customers to the system, as the years go by, and it is obvious from past 

experience, that the consumption of natural gas by established customers will continue to go up, with 

greater use being made by commerce and industry of the natural gas, it is quite apparent that one of the 

major phases which we will have to face up to, in the not too distant future, will be the need for looping 

many of our major transmission lines, presently in existence. 

 

I think this is obvious, when you note in the speech and the budget brought down by the Provincial 

Treasurer, the fact that the corporation will be provided again this year with a rather substantial amount 

of money, some $46 million. This money will be spent as it has been in the past, on the various activities 

and I don‟t intend to take the time to try and break it down to you in detail, but I will be glad to discuss it 

in detail with any member of the house, who wishes to have more information on the matter, but it 

would take a great deal of time to tell you about all the places we are going to build a little bit of 

transmission line and this sort of thing. 

 

I think I can sum it up, or break it down, in this way, that something over $11 million will be spent again 

on generation and a good portion of this will go towards the completion of the Squaw Rapids project. 

 

About $7.5 million will be again invested in transmission lines, a good portion of this in high voltage 

lines in order to be able to take the power from the Squaw Rapids station down to the settled areas. 

 

Almost $8 million will be spent on distribution systems and about $13 million will be spent on the 

natural gas system and some $6.5 million on administration. 

 

Now, I think the main interest of the members on both sides of the house, because this affects their 

constituencies, is the extent of the natural gas program for this year, and the communities to which we 

have decided to extend service during 1963. 

 

So, I think I will conclude my remarks simply by putting on the records of the house, and for the 

information of the members, the natural gas program which we intend to undertake in 1963, and may I 

suggest to members on both sides of the house, that while there may be some disappointments, I hope 

you will have regard to the fact that we have only so much money that we can spend, and we are trying 

to do our 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

71 

best to provide service where it is economically feasible to do so, and where we feel that we can pick up 

the greatest concentration of customers in the light of the investment which we will have to make. 

 

Now, I think I have said before that sometimes when I get up and announce this program, I almost feel I 

should walk across the floor of the house and make it from over there, because I might be safer from my 

colleagues on this side of the house, so I am going to ask them to be a little tolerant this evening, and 

keep in mind that I always try to be fair to everyone, and I think that this will be abundantly proven when 

I tell you the places to which we intend to take gas this year. 

 

We are going to add 15 new communities this year, and I‟ll just run down them — the town of Alsask, 

will be added, the town of Marengo, or is it a village in the southeast part of the province. 

 

We feel that we have sufficiently overcome some of the gas quality problems and other problems which 

we were encountering down there, with respect to the flare gas which we buy from the plant and we are 

going to make a start in providing service to that area this year. 

 

We will be adding Carnduff, Carievale, Gainsborough, Alameda and Oxbow to the system. And moving 

from that part of the province up into the central part of the province, we will be building a lone to serve 

the communities of Muenster, Englefeld, St. Gregor, Watson, Quill Lake, Wynyard and Wadena, and 

one lonely little point out west, the town of Piapot will also be added to the system in 1963. 

 

The only closing comment, I wish to make, Mr. Speaker, is this that I seem to recall the hon. member 

from Melville, making some comment some time ago, when he spoke in the house, that the things that 

people were entitled to and they should have them, and by golly, they should have more, particularly the 

people of Melville constituency should have more. I just want to put on the record once again, and to 

point out, that once again the constituency of Last Mountain, still doesn‟t have one community added to 

the gas system, and nevertheless I will support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Erb: (Milestone) — Mr. Speaker, since the Provincial Treasurer brought down the budget on 

Friday, March 1, 1963, the people of this province have become painfully aware of the fact that they are 

now, indeed, among the highest, if not the highest taxed citizens in the nations. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

72 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Erb: — They don‟t like it. Well, in the face of the forecast of the former Provincial Treasurer of a 

deficit for 1962-63, it is relatively simply to understand the embarrassment of the present Provincial 

Treasurer, and the government over the surplus of some $20 million. Both the financial critic of the 

opposition, the hon. member for Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) and the hon. member from Maple Creek, 

(Mr. Cameron) as well as others on this side of the house have made some very lucid analysis of the 

situation in which the Provincial Treasurer and the government find themselves, and at the same time, 

Mr. Speaker, they exposed the manner in which the government endeavored to hide its embarrassment 

by way of supplementary estimates. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, no one ever need feel sensitive about having a great amount of monetary wealth, 

providing that at all times one can look one‟s fellow man in the eye, and of course, good business ethics 

would dictate that one be able to do so at all times. 

 

Well, the position of the Provincial Treasurer and the government, therefore, I submit, Mr. Speaker, is 

one that finds them looking down at their boots, as a result of the glaring revelation of the extent of 

which they have extracted millions of dollars out of the taxpayers pockets. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: (Provincial Treasurer) — I can see my boots anyway. 

 

Mr. Erb: — You must wear an awfully big size. During the federal election campaign of June, 1962, 

that is during the federal election of June, 1962, the Minister of Industry and Information, speaking at 

Elrose, said, “Now, if the government bowed to the doctors, it would have meant accepting dictatorship 

under white-garbed gangsters with scalpels at our throats” and he compared them to gangsters with guns 

at our heads. Well, presumably my hon. friend, Mr. Speaker, was speaking for the government. Well, 

one can only conclude from the remarks made by the hon. member that somehow, unless restrained, 

these white-garbed gangsters would extract too much money out of the pockets of their patients for 

medical services. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there are several members of 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

73 

Her Majesty‟s advisors, to your right, Mr. Speaker, were forced by reasons of emergency, or otherwise, 

to submit themselves to the scalpels of these white-garbed gangsters; and they are alive because of their 

knowledge and skill. Now, I ask, was their price too high? Was this an unwarranted extraction? Well, 

events certainly have proved the analogy the hon. minister attempted to apply to the medical profession, 

in reality is infinitely more appropriate in its application to those on the treasury benches to your right, 

Sir. For if ever people anywhere have had to submit to an unwarranted extraction of money by a 

government, it is the people of Saskatchewan, and as it were, with guns to their heads. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Erb: — Well, for some time now, the Premier of this province has belabored the people over radio 

and T.V. about the value of paying taxes, and that through programs provided by them, there derives a 

strange “togetherness” that makes for greater freedom. The Provincial Treasurer now takes up this theme 

in his budget address. That more government intervention, more taxes, in short more statism “will enable 

men to stand up as individuals, and to be free in the fullest sense of the word”. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, people everywhere are becoming wary of the suggestion, or the propositions that 

freedom is equated to the extent that government becomes involved in, with, and directs the actions of 

people in their province. 

 

Freedom, like democracy, is open to many interpretations. The claim of Mr. Khrushchev is that the 

Soviet Union has the only real democracy, a people‟s democracy, and, therefore, its citizens presumably 

enjoy the greatest amount of freedom, because the state has relieved them of their problems. By his 

interpretation of freedom and democracy, Mr. Khrushchev can also say that this “enables men to stand 

up as individuals and be free in the fullest sense of the word”, and, perhaps, the majority of Russians 

agree with him. 

 

The fact, however, is that we in the western world do not accept Mr. Khrushchev‟s interpretation, neither 

of democracy nor of freedom. Neither do we believe that the people of Saskatchewan will accept what in 

effect, is an attempt to legislate them into a gregarious state of existence, beyond their natural inclination 

to associate. 

 

Well, this doctrine of “togetherness” espoused by the Premier and embraced by the Lloydites, the 

fulfilment of which is to be attained by government intruding more and more into the lives of people, 

and going deeper and deeper into their pockets, is indeed a strange and alien concept of freedom, Mr. 

Speaker. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

74 

Just how the doctrine of “Lloydism” makes for more freedom is something obviously that only the 

“Lloydites” can comprehend. 

 

An Hon. Members: — Termites. 

 

Mr. Erb: — Because to the average normal Saskatchewan citizen, more and higher taxes constitute a 

threat to his freedom, and make no mistake about it, more and more intrusion by the government into his 

affairs, under the guise of helping him with his problems, eventually becomes an infringement upon his 

liberty. One hundred and fifty years ago, a great English statesman and Prime Minister William Pitt, said 

this: 

 

necessity is the plea of every infringement of human freedoms. It is the argument of tyrants; and it is 

creed of slaves. 

 

I think we would do well to ponder these words of wisdom spoken in the 19th century and to observe 

their accuracy in the light of events of the 20th century. And it is also well, I suggest, for the people of 

Saskatchewan, to ponder this positive role for government that is advocated by the Provincial Treasurer 

and his N.D.P. cohorts. 

 

Well, indeed, governments should exercise a positive role, but not in a manner that can be interpreted, 

Mr. Speaker, as paternalism. It is only a truly positive role when government provides the kind of 

leadership for people to meet their social and economic problems, in such a way that they become 

increasingly less and less dependent upon the state. But from the pronouncements of the N.D.P. and its 

hierarchy, it is evident that the N.D.P. government is not capable of this kind of leadership. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Erb: — For the warp and woof of its philosophy is promised on stateism, and its interpretation of 

freedom and democracy, therefore, is not in consort with the establishment of accepted traditions. 

 

Well, as I noted at the beginning of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have become 

painfully aware that they are indeed among the highest, if not the highest, taxed citizens of the nation. 

And what creates even a more gloomy picture, is the fact that their per capita income is among the 

lowest in Canada. In the face of such unencouraging statistics, and the $20 million surplus, 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

75 

derived in the most part by direct taxation, is it any wonder then that the gentlemen to your right 

occupying the treasury benches are looking down at their boots. 

 

I submit that much of the embarrassment of the government over its $20 million surplus, derives from 

the inordinate haste to plan, legislate, and implement the medical care plan. Because as everyone knows 

the original date of the commencement was to be January 1, 1962, hence the reason for the special 

session in October, 1961. But as the old adage has it, Mr. Speaker, “that the best laid plans of mice and 

men gang aft a glae”. And so as a result of this, the next starting date was to have been April 1, 1962, but 

again the realism of the officials of the Department of Public Health prevailed and July 1, 1962, became 

the target date. However, this time with a vengeance, “That it will come in with or without the co-

operation of the doctors”. 

 

Well, now the legislation that was passed at this special session in October, 1961, provided for three new 

taxes to support the medical care plan, as everyone knows. Beginning January 1, 1962, the new tax 

revenues began rolling into the treasury. But it was only after the signing of the Saskatoon agreement, 

July 23rd, that the medical care commission commenced to pay bills for medical care services rendered 

to beneficiaries under the plan. Incidentally, Mr. Speaker, as a palliative to the unsavoury manner of 

extracting money from the people for a service that they were not receiving for a period of approximately 

seven months, the people were given a bonus, as it were, by the government, by waiving the per capita 

tax for the remainder of 1962. 

 

Well, in short what does all this manipulation add up to? From January 1, 1962, to December 31, 1962, 

revenues from the three new taxes amounted to in excess of $15 million. Whether or not they all have 

been collected or not is beside the point, but the amount paid by the medical care commission for 

medical services rendered to beneficiaries, after July 23, amounted to some $5 million, or less. In other 

words, this government extracted out of the pockets of the people over $10 million, over and above what 

was necessary to finance the medical care plan form July 23, 1962, to December 31, 1962. 

 

Well, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the people would have had better luck had they been able to take this 

$10 million to Las Vegas. The odds that they would have come back with some of it would have been 

infinitely better than the stacked deck from which their hand was dealt by this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Erb: — Well, we are now witnessing the spectacle of a remorseful and embarrassed administration, 

attempting to administer 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

76 

to an irritated people, a variety of palliatives by way of supplementary estimates. We are all agreed, Mr. 

Speaker, that the three kinds of aids to new industries, outlined in the budget is a forward step in creating 

incentives for their establishment. It is something, of course, that has been long overdue. 

 

Of course, no one will quarrel with the increase of the $3.8 million in gross expenditures for farm 

programs, and the $3.8 million for community pasture development and so forth, but I submit, Mr. 

Speaker, that it would have been infinitely more palatable to the taxpayers in this province had the 

government budgeted for what now appears in the supplementary estimates in an orthodox and 

conventional manner. 

 

Well, in any case it is hoped that out of this potpourri the most significant thing that will materialize is 

increased resource development and economic growth. Because unless this occurs our house of essential 

services is built on shifting sands. Direct taxation on the people for essential services have now reached 

the point beyond the saturation point. 

 

Unless an expanding economic basis is forthcoming soon to meet the inevitable increments in costs of 

services, the prospects for our province are not too bright, and are unpredictable. While it is hoped that 

this look the government has taken on in respect of their attitude towards private enterprise, 

Saskatchewan will move forward in economic expansion, recent statements by the national leader of the 

N.D.P, Mr. T.C. Douglas, indicate that the attitude of the N.D.P. towards the United States has not 

changed. The anti-American campaign carried on by the rank and file of the N.D.P. is in no manner 

conducive to inspiring confidence and goodwill that is required attract investors to our province and for 

the most part, American investors. 

 

The rank and file of the N.D.P. are unable to comprehend that were it not for American initiative, 

enterprise and investment capital Canada would not be enjoying one of the highest standards of living in 

the world. Indeed, were it not for American risk capital, there would be no oil or gas development in this 

province, and no potash industry such as our friends across the way boast about, about which we are 

glad. 

 

Well, charges made by the national leader, T.C. Douglas, such as he made in an address last weekend to 

an N.D.P. meeting at Saskatoon are enough to get the jaundiced eye of the United States. In his attack on 

Lester B. Pearson, T.C. Douglas in effect accuses this great Canadian of entering into a dark and sinister 

and monstrous conspiracy with American interests for the sell-out of Canada. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

77 

I don‟t know how many members have had the opportunity to read what he said but this is what he said 

in part. Mr. Douglas said: 

 

In the future Mr. Pearson would be remembered for two things. First, he brought honor to Canada by 

winning the Nobel Prize for peace, second, he brought dishonor to his party by failing to stop its 

conversion into a satellite party for the United States interests. 

 

He said: 

 

If Mr. Pearson wished to challenge this proposition he would show his good faith by disclosing 

contributions to the Liberal campaign chest by United States owned industry in Canada. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I‟d sure like to see it. 

 

Mr. Erb: — The N.D.P. leader attacked the defence policy of the Liberal party concerning Canadian 

acquisition of nuclear arms, charged that the Liberal stand was determined by one man in the dark on the 

basis of Pentagon rumors. 

 

Mr. Douglas said: 

 

During its years in office, the Liberal party allowed decision-making with respect to Canadian 

economy to be taken out of Canada. We are now witnessing the completion of the process; an 

economic satellite becomes a political satellite as surely as night follows day. 

 

Well, certainly, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Lester B. Pearson has done infinitely more than our Canadian in 

cultivating the goodwill and understanding of our good neighbor to the south and of the nations of the 

free world generally. 

 

Now I say, contrast Mr. Pearson‟s performance to the pro-Castro sentiments of the N.D.P. leader and his 

disciples . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — They hide their heads . . . 

 

Mr. Erb: — And having done so we find that the Hon. Lester B. Pearson is 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

78 

bringing honor still to his country, which he has served so many years and will continue to serve with 

great distinction, Mr. Speaker, will continue to serve with great distinction. 

 

Tonight‟s editorial has a very fine comment, I think, on what Mr. Douglas has been saying, and I think it 

should be put on the record of the house, and I quote from the editorial of March 12, 1963, 

 

Mr. Douglas and his N.D.P. party are not only opposed to nuclear arms but they would have us 

withdraw into isolation both from NORAD and NATO. Now is the time for nations of the free world 

to stand up and be counted. If this was not realized before, surely it must be brought home forcibly on 

those who saw the CBC documentary film on Cuba over the national network Sunday night. With 

Russian‟s help the communist bridgehead to the North and South America continents now is more 

heavily armed than Canada, according to the commentators on this film. The film showed some of 

these armaments. 

 

Well, it goes on to say why was the CBC permitted to take the film, obviously the communist desire to 

impress the people of the Americas with tiny Cuba‟s armed strength. But it must have had other effects 

on many Canadian viewers. It must have shocked them — it must have made them ashamed that an issue 

in the election campaign is whether or not we hold up our end in the collective security arrangement for 

the defence of the free world, and for the defence of our own country. 

 

How could any true Canadian, after viewing this show of Cuba‟s might, support the N.D.P. part and its 

policy for Canada‟s withdrawal from NATO and NORAD? 

 

Mr. Pearson and the Liberal party alone in unambiguous terms are calling upon the Canadian people to 

stand up and be counted as full partners with other free nations in their defence and our defence of 

freedom. The election of Mr. Pearson, the man of peace, who at the same time is a firm believer in the 

efficacy of collective security, will tell the world “that we stand firmly behind our allies at this critical 

time when the communists are knocking at our front door”. 

 

Well, I said, Mr. Speaker, contrast the pronouncements of the N.D.P.‟s leader and his followers, to that 

stand of Mr. Pearson, and I think out of all this, we shall see the red slip of the N.D.P. and its leader 

showing consciously or subconsciously. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

79 

Mr. Erb: — Well, the wailing of the N.D.P. and its leader, about the domination of the Canadian 

economy by Americans was exposed for what it really is by Professor Harry Johnson of the Department 

of Economics of the University of Chicago. An editorial of March 13th . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — We would like to see it . . . 

 

Mr. Erb: — . . . said this: 

 

The contention of the N.D.P., that there is an increasing problem of American domination of the 

Canadian economy, has been shot down in an address to the Canadian Club of Toronto, by Professor 

Harry Johnson of the Department of Economics, University of Chicago. 

 

Professor Johnson did not mince words, he said: 

 

American domination of the Canadian economy I regard as a spurious problem. Insistence that it is a 

real problem, seems to me to be a piece of hypocrisy, perpetuated by greed aiming to exploit the 

Canadian inferiority complex, under the guise of patriotism. Its main significance in keeping with the 

irrationality from which it starts is that it consistently supports policies which will probably bring 

about the very things it claims to dislike, American ownership of Canadian industry and a second-rate 

economy for Canada. 

 

Well, in the editorial of March 12, 1963, I should also like to read a comment made by this editorial 

upon Mr. Douglas‟ charge that we have now become an economic satellite of the United States. 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

When Mr. Douglas was the head of Saskatchewan‟s government, this province borrowed heavily in the 

United States. At one time approximately 50 percent of the province‟s outstanding bonded debt 

represented money borrowed across the border. 

 

If what Mr. Douglas said with respect to Canada becoming a satellite economically under the Liberals, 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

80 

it must be true that under Mr. Douglas‟ premiership, he permitted Saskatchewan to become 

economically subservient to the United States. 

 

After his near defeat in 1948, Mr. Douglas pleaded with the petroleum industry, then and now dominated 

by U.S. capital, to come to Saskatchewan. When it did so, Mr. Douglas boasted of his achievement, the 

$14 million potash mine and the refinery near Esterhazy represents the investment of U.S. capital in 

Saskatchewan. The government which Mr. Douglas formerly headed singled out this development for 

laudatory references in both the speech from the throne and budget, and hope is being expressed that 

even more foreign capital, including U.S. money, will come into the province to finance other potash 

potentialities. 

 

Is Saskatchewan becoming a U.S. satellite through the investment of capital from that country in our 

province 

 

it asks. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if it is a question of bringing honor, stability and prosperity to Canada, the Canadian 

people will look to Lester B. Pearson and the Liberal party to do just that. Because from the 

pronouncements of the N.D.P. and its leader it is obvious that they are incapable of bringing honor to our 

nation, and insofar as Saskatchewan is concerned, incapable of generating the kind of atmosphere that 

will make it possible for Saskatchewan to move ahead with other provinces in economic development 

and growth of our population. 

 

And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the real solution to Saskatchewan‟s problem is a provincial election, 

without delay, so that the decks may be cleared for a new administration — a Liberal administration — 

yes, a Liberal administration which will create the kind of atmosphere which will bring about renewed 

confidence in our province and its leaders, and enable Saskatchewan to prosper socially and 

economically in a manner that is hoped for by all its citizens. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, from what I have said and what others on this side have said, I am sure that it will be 

gathered that I cannot support the budget. 

 

Therefore I shall move an amendment, seconded by Mrs. Batten: 

 

that all the words after the word „that‟ be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 

 

this Assembly regrets that the proposals of the Provincial Treasurer as contained in the budget 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

81 

do not meet the needs of the people of Saskatchewan since they would continue to levy excessive and 

unwarranted and unnecessary taxes of the present time rather than providing for substantial tax 

reductions which could be instituted with no adverse effect to the responsible commitments of the 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — In looking over this amendment I believe from my reading of the rules and so on that 

the wording is in order so, therefore, I will rule this amendment to be in order. 

 

Is the house ready for question on the amendment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: (Minister of Agriculture) — Mr. Speaker, I wish first of all to congratulate the 

Provincial Treasurer on the budget he brought down in this house. And I very much appreciated his 

address in connection with the budget. It was down-to-earth, common sense and I particularly 

appreciated the allocation which has been made to the Department of Agriculture in the estimates for 

this year. 

 

I wish also to pay my respects to the hon. Provincial Treasurer that he has assumed this responsibility to 

probably climax now 25 years of public service. I can remember a good many years ago, 1943 to be 

exact, when Mr. Brockelbank came to my own constituency to speak. I never realized at that time, when 

we were travelling over muddy roads, as he said was the case in his own constituency, during that period 

and earlier than that, I never realized that we would ever have the improvements that we have in that 

area at the present time. I never realized at that time. We were a bit depressed, Mr. Speaker, we had a 

Liberal government in power at that time and it was very difficult to see anything optimistic on the 

horizon — I never anticipated that we would have all of the modern conveniences that result from the 

public utilities that the hon. minister spoke of a while ago. 

 

I am very proud of this budget, Mr. Speaker. Unlike the hon. member that just took his seat. I believe the 

hon. member mentioned that if he were associated with this kind of budget with the heavy burden of 

taxes that it placed on the people of this province, he wouldn‟t be able to look his fellow-men in the eye. 

Well, I can assure him, Mr. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

82 

Speaker, that for a lot less money in the budget and aside from any budget, if I did what he did, I 

wouldn‟t be able to look my fellow-man in the eye. Mr. Speaker, there is no one that has ever been more 

intimately associated with another member of this legislature as I have with the hon. member that has 

just taken his seat and I know his philosophy, and know it well. Either he had no conviction then, he was 

either dishonest in his conviction then or he is dishonest now, in light of the kind of statements he made 

in this house. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: (Morse) — The hon. member has accused one of the members. He must withdraw. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Premier Lloyd: — The Leader of the Opposition knows enough not to be talking from back there. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, will the hon. member withdraw what he just said. He accused the hon. 

member from Milestone (Mr. Erb) of . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

If the hon. member is in the house he can speak for himself. If the hon. member is not in the house it 

would be for one of his colleagues to raise the point. 

 

Mr. Erb: — He made the charge that I was dishonest — I think that is unqualified and I ask that it be 

withdrawn. . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Coming from him of all parties . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, I think I know what I said. I didn‟t accuse anyone of being dishonest, 

I said to the hon. member that 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

83 

he was either dishonest then when he held those convictions and by his completely changed attitude I 

can only come to the conclusion that he is dishonest now in his opinions, in his philosophy. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Withdraw your statement. Withdraw. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I will ask for the withdrawal of that statement. I think the minister is aware that 

imputation must be withdrawn. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Very well, Mr. Speaker, I will be very glad to withdraw the imputation, Mr. 

Speaker, and I can say this, Mr. Speaker, that it is only by the grace of God and your ruling that the hon. 

member has escaped. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like first of all to proceed with matters relating to agriculture. I noticed when the 

hon. member for Moosomin, (Mr. McDonald) who spoke sometime ago, mentioned that the price of 

livestock had fallen, that the price of cattle had fallen by 9 cents a pound. This again was an exaggerated 

statement but the thing that I was interested in was — he says the Minister of Agriculture sits there and 

doesn‟t realize that cattle have fallen 9 cents a pound. I thought I would find out just what the facts were, 

Mr. Speaker. And I did. I find that the price of cattle — I‟m talking about good choice steers now — the 

price in November 1962 was $28.59 a hundred weight, and February 16 was $23.05. Well I took the best 

figure, that‟s about a drop of $5.54 a hundred cwt. Feeder cattle good steers, November 1962 — I am 

talking about Winnipeg. 

 

The price of feeder steers, November 1962, was $25.39; February $21.40. This is a drop of $3.99. It is a 

drop and I am aware that cattle went down, but the point I was interested in, Mr. Speaker, was that the 

hon. member for Moosomin then proceeded to say that we should howl to Ottawa about this. This isn‟t 

the way they used to talk on the opposite side of the house when there was a Liberal government in 

Ottawa. They used to say to us, you solve these problems. What are you always running to Ottawa for. 

So I was interested in making a few comparisons to see what actually did happen in Ottawa in respect to 

price fluctuations, particularly for cattle. I find this, Mr. Speaker. That when the Liberals were in power 

in Ottawa in 1951 the average 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

84 

price for all classes of livestock on the Winnipeg market was $27.40, in 1952 it fell to $18.85 a hundred 

weight — a drop of about 8 and one-third cents a pound. And by the next year it had dropped $13.63 a 

hundred weight. In two short years, Mr. Speaker, a terrific drop. A far different situation than the drop in 

price that he referred to recently. I know the hon. member is conscious of the drop in cattle prices, so am 

I, but the predictions are that they will likely go down a bit more so I would advise caution in the feeder 

business for the next little while. 

 

When you look over the records of prices you find these extreme fluctuations have been characteristic 

throughout a long period of years in Ottawa when Liberal regimes were in power during all this period. 

 

I intend to refer a bit more to general agricultural economic problems farther on in my address, Mr. 

Speaker, but I choose now to deal specifically with my department. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, I would like to review a bit the development of conservation programs in our 

province. 

 

When the first steps were initially taken to correct some of the effects of the natural hazards and 

handicaps under which the agriculture economy of this province has labored over the years. Way back in 

1922 there was organized what is called a „Good Farm Conference‟ and a survey was made of the 

agriculture situation at that time and certain recommendations came out of it, and as a result of those 

recommendations the soil survey services at the university were instituted. Saskatchewan pretty well led 

other provinces in soil survey research work and soil survey work generally. 

 

The first pasture was established in 1922, and this was a provincial pasture known as the Matador 

pasture. This was the first pasture established in the province of Saskatchewan. Then came the bitter 

experience of the dry thirties and out of that P.F.R.A., another agency set up to correct, as well as 

possible, the ravages of drought in this province and the harmful consequences on the farm people in this 

area. P.F.R.A. came into existence in 1935, and in the period 1935 to 1948, this 13 year period, there 

were 1.25 million acres of land placed in P.F.R.A. pastures. In 1948 we reorganized the direction of 

policies within the lands branch and in that same year we established a new branch called the 

conservation and development branch. Between 1948 and 1961, a 13 year period, an additional 1.2 

million acres of land were added to the pastures in this province, including P.F.R.A. pastures, provincial 

pastures and co-operative and municipal pastures. The total acreage in pastures at the present time, either 

established in operation of under development, is 2.6 million acres. This has meant a tremendous 

increase in this particular activity. I believe I mentioned in the course 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

85 

of my throne speech debate that as a result of policies pursued in the lands branch alone and in 

conjunction with pasture and fodder development and administration of lands, some 26,000 

Saskatchewan farmers are receiving the benefit of crown land in one form or another. This, I think, Mr. 

Speaker, a most significant contribution towards stabilizing the pattern of agricultural settlement in this 

province. 

 

We have consistently as provincial ministers made representation to the government at Ottawa, 

particularly the ministers from provinces who did not have the benefit of P.F.R.A., requesting that 

additional policies be inaugurated by the federal government under which provinces could share 

developments of various kinds associated with soil and water and general resource development. As a 

result of this ARDA came into existence and I would like to speak a bit on the ARDA program and to 

point out immediately that the policies and programs that we have had in effect over the years can now 

be greatly expanded, and you have noted in the estimates of the department a sum of $1,224 million for 

expansion of our pasture program, and some $2.6 million for land acquisition. This means that the 

acreage in community pastures and fodder projects in the next two years will increase tremendously. I 

should say too that it is a challenge to the Department of Agriculture, particularly the lands branch who, 

without any substantial in increase in staff, will be carrying out and discharging this program in the 

coming year. 

 

We are going to have a very busy year, and I can assure you the Provincial Treasurer that we are going to 

do our very best to spend the money that he has allocated to us, for what we believe to be a very worthy 

purpose, and if there is one of those expenditures that will strengthen the economic base of this province, 

that the hon. member who just took his seat, states should be done. 

 

I should mention first of all, that we haven‟t been standing still on the ARDA program, despite the fact 

that the federal government‟s estimates have not as yet been approved. Last year within our usual 

programs we will share some benefits under ARDA. We have included under the ARDA agreement, any 

projects that we undertook, as from June 1 on, will be shareable under ARDA, and we expect that we 

should, therefore, obtain something in the order of $400,000 to $500,000 for program work that we 

undertook in the fiscal year, 1962-63. 

 

Hon. members will also note that in the supplementary estimates, additional allocations have been made 

to the lands branch for land acquisition in the amount of $100,000. Additional money has been allocated 

to the conservation and development branch, also to expand their branch‟s pasture 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

86 

development activities of this winter. We have had a good winter, we have been working pretty well 

around the clock to get the full benefit of the programs that have been now made available to us. 

 

I should mention that to date about a million and a half dollars worth of projects have been submitted to 

Ottawa under the ARDA programs, and we will be adding to them very substantially in the next few 

months. 

 

In explanation of the ARDA program, I should say that the master agreement, that is the over-all 

agreement, was signed in October last year. The water and soil and research agreements have all been 

signed, and as I have said, we have submitted to Ottawa, some twenty projects for approval, involving 

about a million and a half dollars. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn for a minute to the conservation and development branch. It too, 

will have an active year. Since this branch was formed in 1948, it has spent something in the order of 

$19 million for pasture development; for flood control; for reclamation of land under irrigation; for 

reclamation of land by drainage; and dry land reclamation projects as well. Time will not permit any 

details. Information in regard to the various activities and the accomplishment to date. I think I spoke of 

this during the Throne speech debate. 

 

I should mention one item, and the hon. members will note in our supplementary estimates, there is an 

item of $180,000 to the conservation and development branch, for well water development. 

 

This program has gone very well, as you know, it is a shared program with the federal government, 

inaugurated in the drought year of 1961, under which program the federal and provincial government 

paid between them, 70 percent of the cost for ground water development on a community basis, with the 

rural municipalities putting up the other 30 percent. 

 

This was a good program and I want to say this, Mr. Speaker — all the while that the Liberals were in 

power in Ottawa, I could never convince them that it was to their own interests, that they ought to 

contribute something to emergency relief programs in this province. But we were able to get some help 

in transportation assistance, from the federal government, and particularly in this program of ground 

water development. To date, the total value of well completions is $242,000. The department has paid 

$170,000 to date, to this program to develop, 127 wells that are completed and applications are 

authorized for 206. It has been an excellent program, and if the drought continues, its full value will be 

appreciated. As all hon. members know throughout this summer we were very fortunate in that we did 

have showers over quite a large area of this province, that gave us a good crop. We were very fortunate. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

87 

The general moisture situation this spring doesn‟t look any better, and unless we get a great deal of 

snow, we will have a very serious water problem. I just want to draw to the attention of the hon. 

members, again, we have taken timely action in anticipation of the occurrence of these situations when 

we inaugurated these programs. There is a possibility we may be able to continue this emergency well 

development program into 1963. 

 

I turn now to the plant industry branch, this is the branch that had the responsibility for administering 

emergency assistance. In 1961-62 fiscal year there were some $3,360 million paid out for transportation 

assistance on top of that the assistance for well development that I just mentioned, and on top of that 

again, subsidization of grasshopper chemicals. The hon. member for Yorkton (Mr. Gallagher) is not in 

his seat, and I don‟t think he was aware of the fact that the Department of Agriculture has been 

subsidizing grasshopper chemicals. In 1961-62 the subsidization amounted to $125,000, in 1962-63, 

$185,000, and it is predicted for the coming year, we will likely have a minimum subsidization of 

grasshopper chemicals in the amount of $240,000. If the outbreak is serious, if we don‟t get a period of 

wet weather this spring, this figure could go up to a half million dollars. So we are subsidizing 

grasshopper chemicals, and the increase can be attributed in the coming year largely due to the fact that 

we feel that it is advisable to discontinue the use of Dieldrin in any form. Therefore, for the coming year 

we intend to use the existing supplies for cut-worm control and for grasshopper control during the early 

states of growth, beyond that we would strongly recommend that the chemical be not used. In fact we 

will not make it available to farmers after a certain date of growth has taken place. This will be done in 

order to minimize and reduce completely the possibility that the chemical may show up in cereal grains. 

We are not aware as to whether or not it is in fact injurious to human life, but the food and drug people 

advise that the tolerance, insofar as residue is concerned is nil, and we must govern ourselves 

accordingly. 

 

We will be using several other chemicals; we will be using seven, and there is a new chemical on the 

market called sygon, which I think farmers will be able to put through their sprayers a little more easily 

— it is more costly and the subsidization will, therefore, be greater. 

 

I would like to at this time, Mr. Speaker, extend my sincere appreciation to the radio people and 

particularly to the T.V. people, both stations, CKCK in Regina, and CFQC in Saskatoon, for their very 

helpful co-operation in providing technical assistance and the facilities at their studios, to carry on our 

agricultural extension program. This program has become very well accepted by the farmers of the 

province, 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

88 

and I want to particularly extend my appreciation to the radio, T.V. stations and to the press, for the 

public service they have rendered in providing the general farming public with up-to-date information on 

farm practices but more particularly during emergency situations. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I wish to turn to the animal industry branch, and one of the high-lights in the budget, 

insofar as agriculture is concerned, will be the dedication of $1 million towards the establishment of a 

veterinary college on the University campus in Saskatoon, if and when a decision is arrived at, that the 

veterinary college will be located on that site. It has been suggested in this house, that perhaps our 

interest hasn‟t been too keen in furthering the interest of veterinary medicine and giving the farmers of 

this province adequate protection from diseases occurring in livestock. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, I mention a new program, and I‟ll only mention a few. Sometime, Mr. Speaker, I 

hope perhaps next year, I will very carefully review the innumerable new programs, new legislations, 

new services, that have been introduced in the Department of Agriculture, since I became minister in 

1946. When one looks back it makes very interesting reading, and certainly the field of animal disease 

control is no exception. 

 

One of the new pieces of legislation that was placed on the statute book, was The Veterinary Service 

District Act. This was enacted, I believe in (if I remember correctly) in 1946. Since then 47 veterinary 

service districts have been established. In fact in the past seven years they have increased in number 

from 20 in 1955 to 47, with a practising veterinarian in 1962. This is a very good record, Mr. Speaker, 

and the other new policy introduced was the bursary plans provided to Saskatchewan students, who 

wished to take veterinary medicine at the veterinary college in Guelph, Ontario, or the veterinary college 

at St. Hyancithe in Quebec. 

 

As a result, and we led the way again, in providing these bursaries or scholarships, so that in 1963, we 

had 49 veterinary students, 48 attending the veterinary college at Guelph, and one at the college at St. 

Hyancithe in Quebec. 

 

We had more students in the veterinary college at Guelph than any other province in Canada, with the 

exception of Ontario itself. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — None of them came back. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Will the Leader of the Opposition refrain from interrupting, especially when he 

is not in his own seat. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

89 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I overlook it, he can‟t restrain himself. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I will not overlook it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — The hon. member says “Well they didn‟t come back to Saskatchewan”. Quite a 

number of students came back and they will be coming back. We didn‟t put any firm strings on them, 

initially we did, they were required to come back and practice in Saskatchewan for three years, we 

reduced it to one year, and it is still one year, we have obtained veterinarians and they will be coming 

forth in increasing numbers. The hon. member is good at knocking, I don‟t suppose he accepts that the 

programs I just mentioned have proved beneficial. I notice, Mr. Speaker, that in his new platform he says 

that they are going to do everything they can to establish a veterinary college, and I want to say at this 

juncture, too, that the new champion of the veterinary college, the hon. member for Saltcoats, the new 

champion, that would move heaven and earth, to get a veterinary college in Saskatchewan, I invite both 

of them to put their vote where their mouth is, when the time comes to vote on this budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — This is particularly true of the hon. member for Saltcoats, after having said what he 

said in this house. If the hon. member for Saltcoats doesn‟t vote for the budget with a million dollars 

dedicated to the veterinary college he is going to have to talk a lot faster than he is accustomed to 

talking, Mr. Speaker, to talk his way out of that. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: (Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley) — You voted against family allowance . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — The hon. members says I voted against family allowance. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

90 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — This is typical of the hon. member . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Tell the truth . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I‟m sorry. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition keeps interjecting and saying “tell the truth”, and he 

knows that is very unparliamentary to sit in your seat and keep talking, and to make comments like that. 

I cannot permit it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, he seemed to speak very quickly when he accused me of suggesting 

that someone was dishonest in principle and thinking. And if, Mr. Speaker, we haven‟t been unmindful 

of animal disease control — again I say that we led all of the provinces of Canada in originating a 

comprehensive program of Bang‟s disease control. In the early days when we began testing — before the 

federal government came into the picture and our vaccination program — while the federal government 

came into the picture and undertook Bang‟s testing, we continued the vaccination program at an 

increased tempo. And I want to say here, at the moment, that I very greatly appreciate the supreme effort 

made by the federal health of animals branch in being able to cover ground so quickly in Bang‟s testing 

throughout the province, to the point where we practically have the whole province tested. Next year the 

program will be completed, it is so well advanced that we feel that we can discontinue the calfhood 

vaccination program, and this may be done. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — A mistake . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — The hon. member said it is a mistake, well I am advised too by veterinarians, who 

provide plenty of advice, and at the present time we are told by the federal health of 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

91 

animals people that the incidence of Bang‟s found in testing is about 0.8 percent. It is down very 

considerably, and when the municipalities have all their tests completed, I think there is a general feeling 

that it isn‟t necessary to continue the calfhood vaccination program. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn to another item, another new service, provided by the provincial 

Department of Agriculture, and that is the agriculture machinery testing organization. This is one service 

that the hon. Leader of the Opposition is not going to have in his program, it is going to be earmarked for 

abandonment. So he said, “I don‟t think the hon. member is aware of the demand for this kind of service, 

by the farmers in this province, when some 20 percent of the farmer‟s dollar goes to the purchase of 

machinery, considering the high prices being paid for farm machinery at the present time, it certainly is 

advisable, extremely advisable, that some effort be made to improve the workability of farm machines, 

and also a machine‟s capacity to work under various soil conditions, and various conditions through the 

province. The farm machinery testing organization will be testing 13 machines in the coming year for 

various companies. Included are three combines, and it takes a very considerable time to properly test 

combines, two windrowers, rakes, balers, sprayers, one-way discs, heavy duty cultivators, swathers, and 

this type of machinery. 

 

Moving from that, Mr. Speaker, I wish to refer now to the family farm improvement branch, and make 

some reference to the activities we can expect from this branch in the coming year, and the progress that 

they have made to date. In 1963, some 4,000 farmers are expected to order water and sewage materials 

through this branch, and it is expected that some 3,000 farmers will require construction services and 

technical advice through the branch. 

 

The number of farmers contacted in the field will in all likelihood reach 4,000 in the coming year. Some 

of the figures to date are quite interesting. To date over 11,000 applications have been processed by the 

family farm improvement branch, and many of whom, of course, will be contacted during the balance of 

this winter, and in the coming year. Over 7,000 orders for materials have been placed, and as I 

mentioned during the throne speech debate, 6,000 water and sewage systems will be installed by the end 

of 1962, or were installed by the end of 1962. 

 

This is an interesting figure, because this is as many water and sewage installations made in three years, 

as have been made in 75 previous years, so from this figure one can readily see the great need and 

necessity for having provided this kind of service to our farm people. I should mention that it 

complements pretty well the water and sewage program that is provided through towns and villages. 

Certainly, it would have been most unfair to have provided 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

92 

this service to residents of towns and villages and have neglected our farmsteads. 

 

To date, some $340,000 in grants have been paid to farmers, who utilized this service and took 

advantage of it in all its aspects to bring this modern convenience, not only to the farm homes, but to the 

farmstead generally. 

 

I should mention that under the legislation in connection with this program, there is provisions 

ultimately for farm planning and farm beautification as well. It has complemented handsomely the rural 

electrification program. I hope that the hon. member for Humboldt has finally been converted to the 

merits of the family farm program, since I heard her say in this house, and have been informed that she 

said the same thing in the country, that all this was, was another piece of socialist regimentation, that we 

would now be sending people to farms. 

 

Mrs. Batten: (Humboldt) — Oh! Oh! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — She says oh! oh! I can get the evidence if she wants it, and she said we were going 

to tell the farm housewife where she could have the bathtub, where she could have her sink, where they 

could have the washbowls and this sort of thing. In fact, Mr. Speaker, she made such a speech in a town 

at a time when a meeting was held to organize that particular municipality, to enable the farmers to come 

in this program on a group basis. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Will hon. member, Mr. Speaker, tell us what he is talking about? What speech is he 

talking about and what town, and where? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — The hon. member says “what speech”, she should know, I wouldn‟t be able to keep 

track of her. 

 

Mrs. Batten: — I can assure the hon. member I would know if I had made this speech, but since you 

dreamt it up, when did you dream it up? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

93 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, I didn‟t dream it up at all. If she will just keep her patience, I can give 

her the place and time and so on, if she wishes to have it . . . 

 

Mrs. Batten: — Let‟s hear the rest of your story. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Yes, she‟ll hear some more about this too. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Now, Mr. Speaker, all I want to say in regard to these kind of remarks — is it 

shows that the hon. member‟s minds travel at the lowest possible level. They would like nothing better 

than to get mixed up and no doubt they probably are too when doing this sort of thing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I wish to turn again to the economic aspects of agriculture. We have heard a good 

deal over the years about agricultural policy; we have heard promises made over the years that the 

farmers ought to have parity prices; we have heard from both Liberals and Conservatives, promises that 

if they were elected to power, farmers would be provided with better prices. None of this has 

materialized. Everyone knows, as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, it may come as a surprise for the house 

to know that one can go back 44 years ago and find wheat prices higher than at present. We find that 

wheat now is still lower than it was 44 years ago. And I go back to the year 1917, when the price of 

wheat was $1.95 a bushel, now the average price to farmers is $1.28 per bushel. 

 

The hon. member for Humboldt (Mrs. Batten) shakes her head, these are facts, and one can go over the 

years, one after another, and note the fluctuations in the price of grains over the years . . . 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Mr. Speaker, was the . . . 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

94 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — In 1925 . . . 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — When you quoted the price of wheat at $1.28, is . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! If the minister wished to permit a question he would take his seat while 

you asked it. The fact that he didn‟t signifies that he doesn‟t wish to answer a question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I am quoting the price of wheat to the farmer, including all of these payments. Now 

we have the example again of the Liberal party offering $2 wheat. Mr. Argue used to talk about parity 

prices a great deal, now he is talking about $2 wheat, and Mr. Hamilton . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Are you against it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I‟ll come to you, and Mr. Hamilton is telling him that $2 wheat would make it 

tough for the eastern cattle raisers. Now, I can say this, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberals promised $1 

wheat. I can remember during the thirties, this was an election pledge, and it took a huge delegation of 

western farmers to go down to Ottawa, after they were elected . . . 

 

Hon. Walker: — Ten years . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Yes, ten years after they were elected to make them fulfil that promise. 

 

The same thing has happened in the switch of government recently. For the benefit of hon. members I 

have got a message for you. The hon. member said, I might have guessed it. Certainly not, but here‟s 

what I‟m for, here‟s what I say. That the farmer does not live by wheat alone. The Liberals don‟t say 

what they are going to do about other farm prices. They say that they are going 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

95 

lay the emphasis — yes, I‟ll come to it in a minute — but here we have the figures. Everyone recalls that 

a huge delegation of farmers, businessmen and some clergymen, went to Ottawa after the election of the 

Conservative government, they didn‟t go there because of the consequences of Conservative government 

rule, they went there at that time because of the consequences of Liberal government rule. 

 

And I might say things haven‟t improved, Mr. Speaker, since. Here is what they said. Farm costs have 

been going up, farm prices have been going down. The same as ever. And this delegation submitted a 

brief in which they said that the plight of the wheat producer is even worse while farm prices generally 

have declined about 12 percent since 1947, the price of wheat at the farm is down 21 percent, and I am 

saying that the spread in price and cost has widened since that time. And they took two comparative 

years, they took the comparative periods 1954 to 1956 inclusive compared to the years 1951 to 1953 

inclusive, and the delegation said that the farmers of Saskatchewan in those comparative periods of time 

had lost $500 million on account of wheat alone, in disparity of price relationship. That is what they 

said. 

 

And it is this thing that is bothering and worrying the people of this province. It is not the taxes that the 

hon. member says worry people; because want better services but above all else they want the money to 

pay for these services; people want them. And I am saying, Mr. Speaker, that both of the old parties have 

failed completely in meeting the farm situation. They have been fooling the people ever since they have 

ruled the roost at Ottawa. That rule is coming to an end; if it doesn‟t come to an end in this election it‟s 

going to come to an end in the next election, certainly in the following federal election — you can be 

certain of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to say something about farm policies, and it is this. When I get through I hope 

the hon. members applaud when I get finished because I am going to say something to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have been attempting to deal with the agricultural problem on a piecemeal basis. First, 

it‟s the price of hogs that is worrying people; then it‟s the price of butter; then it‟s the price of milk; then 

it‟s the price of grain and we have been endeavoring to deal with this problem in a piecemeal fashion, 

unrelated to the whole. We have never yet seen a policy introduced that would deal with the total 

agricultural problem, and I am suggesting this — this is not fish or timber — or anything else that you 

have up in your country, — the time has come, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the tremendous changes that 

have taken place in the agricultural economy that the agriculture industry as a whole be assured of an 

income sufficient to meet its total costs; and I have some interesting figures gathered in this 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

96 

connection. Any less than that will not be enough. And I am saying, Mr. Speaker, that this income to the 

industry must be guaranteed, year in and year out, and one can‟t supply this need for stabilized income to 

the industry in relationship to its total cost by fixing prices alone. This is not enough. Any 

comprehensive marketing and farm income policy, to be effective, must provide sufficient income 

pricewise to enable substantial deductions to build up an income stabilization fund to take care of crop 

failure years, to make a redistribution of income within the industry, to guarantee that all farmers in 

Canada will be given a guarantee of minimum income based on family farm needs. This is essential. 

 

I am convinced that this can be done. This can be done without disturbing whatever the pattern of 

existing settlement. And if it isn‟t done we will continue to fail the agricultural industry. This industry 

and the people employed, self-employed within it are entitled to the same income security as the people 

are who are employed in other segments of the economy. And I am saying that this can be done. And this 

happens to be the N.D.P. federal farm program. It is up-to-date and it is a program that faces realistically 

the situation that is facing the agricultural industry. It intends to deal with the total agricultural problem 

and to also associate the solution to the farm problem in conjunction with finding a solution to the 

growing problem of unemployment. 

 

Prosperity for the nation starts at the lower levels. If we can‟t stimulate business by improving income at 

the lower levels, we cannot do it any other way. The hon. Leader of the Opposition feels under his 

private enterprise philosophy all that you need is a few more millionaires, a few more million dollars to 

invest in business enterprises to make profits and somehow some of this prosperity will rub off onto 

others and that we will have general prosperity will rub off onto others and that we will have general 

prosperity. He is starting at the wrong end. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We wouldn‟t tax the daylights out of the farmer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — We‟ve got to improve the income position of the little people before we can expect 

the general economy to become stable, and to move progressively forward. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — That is a very rocky platform. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

97 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member says this is a pretty risky platform, whatever his 

words were — a pretty rocky platform. Let me point this out. People . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Five percent sales tax and 22 percent income tax . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — People don‟t mind a five percent sales tax, they don‟t mind paying taxes if they 

have the money to pay for these services. I am saying to the hon. member, his private enterprise sector of 

the economy is taking a lot more out of people‟s pockets and giving them less in value. There is no 

money, Mr. Speaker, for which people get more value than they do for their tax dollar and get better 

services and the kind of services they demand. Sure, it‟s the hue and cry of the hon. members opposite 

and the hon. member for Milestone, their latest addition, is echoing the cry of taxes. What is this for, Mr. 

Speaker? High taxes. This is pure political propaganda and eyewash, and they know it. They talk about 

glaring promises being made. Anyone that goes out and promises the people of this province, or any 

other province, that they are going to reduce taxes is misleading the people. This has never been done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — We are. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I do know, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Premier Lloyd: — All afternoon, and all evening, this gentleman who comes from the constituency of 

Morse (Mr. Thatcher), has been sitting here interjecting about every five or six minutes. I think it is time 

that he observes some of the common courtesies of the house and kept quiet for a period. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. Since when has a bit of heckling or interjection been 

contrary to the rules of the house. It is done in Ottawa, it is done in every legislature that I know of. Now 

what are these gentlemen so sensitive 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

98 

about. I am not . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! It is contrary to the rules of the house. The rules of the house make it 

quite clear that people are not supposed to speak from their seats and interject that way. The rules of the 

house are quite specific. Members may say “hear, hear”, or “divide”, but both can be construed as a 

breach of privilege against the legislature, and that is against the rules of the house. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — It is a custom, Mr. Speaker, I know that is done in England or any other British 

parliamentary system. I don‟t know why my hon. friends and particularly the Premier are so sensitive. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — On the point of order, Mr. Speaker. I don‟t think anybody objects to a little bit but 

certainly the extent to which it has been carried on this afternoon and this evening, and I have risen only 

once, the only time I have had anything to say whatsoever. It is time that we had a halt to it. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — I suggest, Mr. Speaker, the Premier may be leader of the group to your right but he 

has no more privilege in this house than any other member. He is only the member for Biggar, and he 

won‟t be the member next time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, may I proceed? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I would ask the members to turn to page 114 of Beauchesne and read what he says 

there. It is pointed out plainly that interruptions are against the rules. 

 

Mr. Johnson: (Kerrobert-Kindersley) — I would draw the attention of the house, especially the Leader 

of the Opposition, to our own standing orders, Order 10, subsection 3, and it says this Mr. Speaker, — 

“When a member is speaking, no member shall interrupt him except to raise a point of order.” I think 

this is quite clear, Mr. Speaker. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

99 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — I‟ve mentioned that the big problem that will be facing the nation in the future is 

the growing problem of unemployment and I suggest that the kind of comprehensive and enlightened, 

imaginative agricultural policy that I referred to very briefly is part of the solution to this problem. I am 

looking at a recent press report appearing in the Leader-Post that mentions the unemployment insurance 

fund starts to plunge to bankruptcy. I am proposing, Mr. Speaker, that we do have a comprehensive 

program to provide able-bodied people with gainful employment and I am suggesting that providing the 

agricultural industry with adequate prices, to do all the things that I said, is rewarding people for 

productive labor, that if this were done in connection with a program directed towards not only solving 

the problem of unemployment but providing employment for increasing numbers of young people who 

will come on the employment market each year. These things we can do, and must do. And I say to the 

hon. Leader of the Opposition — you cannot avoid this kind of economic planning. And the kind of 

ranting and raving and destructive criticism that I hear from members opposite certainly is not adding 

anything in the direction of finding a solution to these problems. You can call it what you may but the 

facts are, governments will have to plan in the future, plan employment. 

 

Could the hon. members tell me, if they can, how they are going to continue to bolster these insurance 

funds to pay people to sit around idly, to pay farmers on an acreage payment basis? People must produce 

things, must either produce farm commodities or render some service to society. And if they are 

rewarded for doing something constructive and creative in terms of production, this adds to the gross 

national product. And any monies paid out in support of prices for example to encourage people to work 

is not wasted money and is not a burden on the taxpayer. The only time it is a burden on the taxpayer is 

when you pay people for sitting around doing nothing. 

 

Now I would like to make some comparisons. The Liberals have a policy too, they tell us. Let‟s take a 

look at it; the hon. Leader of the Opposition had a very limited provincial agricultural policy but all of 

the planks contained in it will be pretty well filled by 1964. 

 

But I was interested in the national agricultural policy. And here what do we find, Mr. Speaker. The 

same old hokum that we have been getting for the last 44 years, as I mentioned, culminating in lower 

wheat prices now than existed 44 years ago. What does Mr. Pearson say about agriculture? One — a 

shift in price supports from butter to skim-milk powder and cheese. This will help overcome the surplus 

problem without hurting the farmers‟ milk cheque. There is a surplus of butter, so they propose now to 

cut the price supports from under butter and raise the 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

100 

price of skim-milk. And this kind of juggling is what has been going on now for 44 years, Mr. Speaker. 

And they haven‟t found a solution to the problem. Hon. members opposite know this is no answer to the 

problem. They haven‟t got any. They are worried about surpluses. We wouldn‟t be worried about 

surpluses in a world where so much hunger prevails. One thing has been proven, as a result of the 

Chinese wheat deal, it‟s been proven conclusively that Canada alone could by long-term credit build up 

markets for all the farm commodities that we can produce in Canada. But what has the policy been of the 

Liberals and Tories. It‟s been attempting prosperity by restricting production. One can‟t bring prosperity 

by restricting production. So they introduce acreage payments. So they manipulate the price of hogs 

down at a convenient time when farmers produce too many hogs. They don‟t want to worry about too 

many hogs or too much butter. They don‟t seem to find the answer. They don‟t know that the answer is 

to find markets for the production that our agricultural plan can provide. Mr. Pearson says we are going 

to shift price supports from butter to skim milk. As a matter of fact, when the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition was in Ottawa, he didn‟t want any butter price support at all, none whatever for the farmers, 

and the farmers of this province haven‟t forgotten that yet, and the Liberal party is still preaching the 

same thing today. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Your government over there buys margarine. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — They mention a system of free milk for school children, a meritorious program but 

this isn‟t going to get rid of all of our production certainly. They go on again for support for a livestock 

nutrition research program to cut the cost of livestock enterprises. What does that mean? Nothing, 

nothing at all. And then they state continued freight rate assistance for the movement of feed grain — 

well, this has been going on for years; I think it is a meritorious program. They mention a more realistic 

system of grading livestock. Big stuff. More realistic system of grading livestock. Nothing fundamental 

contained anywhere. And they say then that the farmer, here‟s a profound statement from Mr. Pearson — 

an admission of what I am saying. He says the farmer was less able to share in the immediate post-war 

buoyancy and in the Diefenbaker years has been caught tighter than ever in the cost-price squeeze. He 

admits they had the cost-price squeeze under the Liberals but it tightened under the Conservatives, Mr. 

Speaker. So everything I say about their policy they confirm by this statement, so Mr. Speaker, they 

shouldn‟t say anything about agriculture in this house, Mr. Speaker. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

101 

I want to quote you another one of their great authorities on agriculture. And this gentleman happens to 

be the generalissimo of the Liberal party‟s federal election apparatus in this province. Here is a gem. 

And I wish the hon. members opposite would convey this to Mr. Argue, to tell him to go up and tell 

Dean Lang about his $2 wheat and about his parity concepts, go up and convince him, and tell the people 

of this province as well — Oh, nobody has repudiated the statements made by Mr. Lang, so we must 

accept that these are some of the things that the Liberals will do or won‟t do when they get into power in 

Ottawa. A most interesting observation this gentleman made. I want the hon. members to listen intently. 

He was talking to the Agriculture Graduates Association during Farm Home Week at the university. And 

I quote: 

 

He says: 

 

that there are many things with regard to the well, 

 

I ought to start here, Mr. Speaker. He starts off like a Mother Goose story, he says: 

 

Once upon a time the homesteader arrived in Saskatchewan, settled himself on a quarter section of 

land and there he chopped a bit and cleared a bit and planted a bit and built a house when he could or a 

shack when he first had to, and there in due course, with what additional improvements he had, he was 

able to make by simple savings in his labor. 

 

A beautiful little rhyme. I can just see it. Then he goes on. He says: 

 

But there are many things in regard to the family farm. 

 

Here is a man who is supposed to be concerned about the family farm and its preservation. 

 

There are many things in regard to family farm which may be possible to do on a more local and 

individual level. 

 

He doesn‟t believe in togetherness, co-operating, or anything. 

 

It may, for instance be possible to make this good life, which is the life on the farm, an even better life 

so that the men and the women who are living this sort of life are willing to stand for a slightly larger 

gap between the income which they are obtaining on the family farm and which they would obtain if 

they were earning their income elsewhere. 

 

And he goes on, in case there are any doubts in the hon. members‟ minds: 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

102 

And they will by that much also lead more and more men and women to choose this sort of life at the 

cost of certain economic sacrifices. And I will always want to urge that it is extremely important to 

remember the non-economic values which you can obtain from your family farm, indeed from your life 

wherever you may be living. 

 

He says farmers should live on fresh air and sunshine at a time when farmers‟ costs are rigidly fixed. 

 

I am saying the farmers‟ income must be fixed in relationship to these fixed costs. And it can‟t be done 

alone by just providing more income pricewise. There must be a system of building up an income 

stabilization fund from which a redistribution of income can be made within the industry to guarantee a 

minimum income, to every farmer in the country. And I say that crop insurance should be a part of such 

a plan. It is income that we are talking about and it should be integrated in one complete farm income 

insurance plan. This will have to be dealt with, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like to turn for a moment to rail abandonment. This is a dilly, Mr. Speaker. With a combination 

of cost-price squeeze ever tightening during the post-war years with a complete lack of national 

transportation policy, and no indication on the horizon that either the Tories or Liberals will provide a 

national transportation policy for Canada, which will integrate the various transportation systems that we 

have in the country into a whole so that none will be injured. In the post-war years the only means that 

they adopted was to increase freight rates. I think the Liberals increased freight rates around nine times 

when they were in power. The Conservatives have increased them too, and the farm income shrank and 

the railways continued to lose money, and now they throw up their hands in desperation and say we‟ve 

got to abandon rail lines in the provinces if the railways are going to operate economically. 

 

I want to say to this house, Mr. Speaker, that these railways were built originally on these prairies to 

bring the products of the farm, principally our grain products, to the markets of the world, and in this 

process Canada obtained credit from abroad to develop her industrial sector of the economy. It was very 

important in those days to put rail lines on these prairies and today, and with duplication too, this was 

private enterprise, competition, railways running side by side until, as Will Rogers said one time in 

Canada, he said “There‟s a couple of railroad lines, you can ride „em with one foot on one car and the 

other foot on the other car for miles and miles” — they are so close together. 

 

These prairies have been settled for a long time, 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

103 

actually we are producing more grain in most of these localities than was being produced when the 

railways were first put in. And here in 1962 we are talking about pulling those lines out. I am not 

suggesting that there is duplication, that there does not need to be some adjustment, but I am saying this 

— the full burden of cost should not be carried by the farmer and the local community. I haven‟t heard 

hon. members talk about rail abandonment at all. I don‟t think they are interested in it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I would like to call to the minister‟s attention that there is a resolution on the 

Order paper about rail abandonment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Oh, I am sorry. I will be very glad to speak to that resolution, when it arises in the 

house. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all I have to say is that never in the history of Canada was there such a great need for a 

national transportation policy and I have seen no evidence of it from either one of the old parties. 

 

The one other thing I want to just say a very few words about — and this is about medicare. I want to 

reiterate what I said in the speech in this house a year ago, that it seems to me that the forgotten man has 

been the little man. No one has talked about the benefits, either the hon. members opposite or some of 

the professions, they haven‟t said a word about the benefits this plan would bestow on little people, 

people who are unable to afford medical services, or other people who, if they did attempt to pay their 

medical bills, would face financial ruin as a consequence. 

 

This is the thing that grieves me, Mr. Speaker. And I am going to suggest this — that I believe that the 

time has now come when this continued harassment, and I am turning it the other way, harassment needs 

to cease. We will need co-operation to make this plan a success. And I mean great co-operation to do so. 

I am reminded of a statement made by Louis Pasteur, some of you have probably seen the Life of Pasteur 

recently on T.V., when he made this statement to his fellow research workers, he said: 

 

The benefits of science are not for science but for humanity. 

 

And I say in all sincerity that it is time for professional people to rejoin humanity, to become associated 

with their fellow-men in working co-operatively for a plan that will 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

104 

bring the blessings of medical care to every man, woman and child in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, the biggest hoax, the biggest political hoax that was 

ever perpetrated on the people of this province was that this legislation would somehow regiment the 

people and take freedom away from them. This was a complete hoax and a falsehood and, Mr. Speaker, 

the government has signed an agreement, the government will honor that agreement and it will not use it 

as any means of gaining additional advantage. By the same token though, other people will need to stop 

their harassment. 

 

All I‟ve got to say to them, and it includes the medical profession, they don‟t need to think for one 

minute they are going to hurt the image of the government any more. They loosed their best endeavors in 

that direction. All I‟ve go to say to them is if you continue this harassment it‟s your own image that will 

suffer. I say that to politicians and I say that to members of the medical profession as well. People are 

just getting a little fed up and tired and, as the hon. Leader of the Opposition — he made this statement 

— he said “that if the medical care plan is a success, we‟ll not be able to defeat this government.” I hope 

he . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. Would the minister say when I made that speech? I 

never recall it. Would you quote the date that I ever made that speech. You didn‟t do it for the member 

form Humboldt (Mrs. Batten) maybe you will do it . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, I took the hon. member‟s statement out of a newspaper clipping. I 

haven‟t it with me and I am sorry that I haven‟t. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well, if you haven‟t got it, then I demand that he withdraw it, Mr. Speaker, because I 

am telling you that I didn‟t make this statement. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

105 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — The hon. member intimated, according to a press report that I have, that if this plan 

were a success, that this government would be — „we wouldn‟t be able to get them out of here‟. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I say that the hon. member either substantiate that or withdraw it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Well, if the hon. member says that he hasn‟t made the . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Rules of the house, Mr. Speaker, . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . say that he must either substantiate that when I say it‟s not correct, or withdraw it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, he won‟t even give me a chance to. If the hon. member didn‟t make 

the statement, I am glad he didn‟t make the statement. I am also very glad he didn‟t make the statement. 

It would be quite unusual and not in keeping with his usual statements if he did. And I would suggest 

that if this is the case, that the hon. member refrain from continuous harassment of what the government 

is endeavoring to do and the commission as well in regard to making this plan work. I believe it can be 

made to work successfully, provided we have co-operation — there is no more need for any more 

controversy, and I would appeal again that everyone join the human race and we will associate together 

in order to make this wonderful service a success, insofar as the people of this province are concerned. 

 

I will vote against the amendment, and for the motion. 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

106 

Mr. Gardiner: (Melville) — Mr. Speaker, I can assure the minister if I hadn‟t thought he was going to 

make some important declaration on behalf of his department, I would never have acceded to the request 

that he be given a little extra time for his address. I thought possibly we might hear something tonight to 

solve some of the problems of the farmers of Saskatchewan, but instead we have the usual type of attack 

that we have had from the other side of the house, and I might just suggest that the actions of my friend 

across the way remind me of the editorial, that has appeared in one of the papers in Eastern Canada, in 

relation to what has been taking place in Ottawa. 

 

It appears that the Conservatives accept the fact that the Liberals are going to be the next government, 

and they kept acting like that, and the same thing is taking place in this house. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Instead of attempting to solve the problems of this province and providing a solution 

to them, the members on the government‟s side of the house, keep pointing to this side of the house and 

say “You give us a solution to the problems of the people of this province”. I can assure the Minister of 

Agriculture that within the next few months, whether it is three months or whether it is 18 months, that 

he will certainly hear the policies of the Liberal party, from the members of the Liberal party and their 

leader, which will receive the support of the people of this province in the next election and return a 

Liberal government.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — I just want to take a moment to say this, that I was never so ashamed of a Minister of 

Agriculture, as I was tonight, when he stood up here and said that he was no longer going to speak for 

the farmers of this province when problems came up relating to their affairs in this province, particularly 

the question of the drop in cattle prices within the last few weeks. He tries to make out that . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, I am going to ask the hon. member to withdraw the statement, I made 

no such reference whatever in 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

107 

my remarks. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Well, certainly it is the only thing that I could take — you said the opposition had 

said something about howling to Ottawa, that was the only thing to do; well that is all you did for years, 

and you didn‟t seem to mind it while the Liberal government was there, why now howl now, when there 

is a Conservative government, when you can help the farmers when they are facing a serious situation in 

the cattle industry. 

 

What has the Minister of Agriculture to say; he goes back . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nollet: — The hon. member doesn‟t know the difference between Liberals and Conservatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Is the minister rising on a point of privilege or a point of order . . . 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — He is not right, in any case, but he goes back to 1951, and starts comparing the prices 

in the year that a situation took place in this province, that he and his government didn‟t make any move 

to assist the government of that day . . . 

 

Mr. Guy: (Athabaska) — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — What happened at that time, Mr. Speaker, the foot and mouth disease threatened this 

province. The government for next used that item for their own political benefit in this province. Going 

up and down . . . 

 

Mr. Guy: — Going into orbit. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — . . . they had the civil servants going into beer parlors in the Last Mountain 

constituency, spreading one of the worst lies about a man in public life, in the Dominion of Canada, and 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

108 

did not have the nerve to get up on a public platform and make the statement, going from beer parlor to 

beer parlor, the servants of this government were helping to bring about the re-election of that 

government because of a catastrophe that had struck the livestock population in this province. 

 

Why didn‟t the minister point out that from 1950 to 1951, there was an increase of $7 a hundred in the 

price of cattle, during that year. He was quite ready to show that there had been a decrease in the 

following year, and that there had been a further decrease two years from then, and that decrease stayed 

at that point until the effects of the foot and mouth disease were over, and Canadian cattle were again 

allowed on the American market. 

 

Then the price began to go up. The minister knows, and I know, that the American price and the fact that 

we have been able to ship our cattle to the United States, has been one of the solutions as far as the 

livestock industry is concerned for the last four or five years. 

 

And so when the minister stands up and says nothing can be done about this present situation, he knows 

better; he knows the government could have controlled this situation; he knows that a protest to the 

government of Canada two months ago could have prevented this situation from arising, and prevented 

New Zealand beef from coming into Canada and bringing about the lowering of prices to the livestock 

producers in western Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Here is the man that dares to stand up and criticize the actions of other political 

parties. A few years ago he howled to high heaven every time the government did anything that he 

thought was against the best interests of the farmers of this province. But for the last four or five years, 

he sat almost silent as far as the problems of the farmers are concerned. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He‟s got the gout . . . 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — And he might well sit silent because he had as much to do as anyone else in seeing 

that the present government was in office in Ottawa, and he only has to look at the statistics that are put 

out by his own departments of government, to indicate what the true story is in regard to farm income in 

this province, both during the last five years while we have had a Tory government and in the previous 

five years completely under a Liberal government. We find this story, the net income of the farmers in 

the last five years has been a total of 



 

March 12, 1963 
 

 

109 

$1,443 billion. In the last complete five years under a Liberal government the net income of 

Saskatchewan farmers was $2,2 billion. In other words a difference of $600 million more that the 

farmers of this province received under a Liberal government than they have in the last five years. 

 

And yet our Minister of Agriculture would try to indicate here tonight that we have had better results in 

the last five years for the farmers of this province than we had in the previous five years. All I want to 

point out to the minister and his government is this — that the only assistance . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! It is now 10 o‟clock. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — If you stop the clock for a minute I will finish up. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nicholson: — It is 10 o‟clock. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — If you give me about two minutes I‟ll be through . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It is 10 o‟clock. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Well, I will adjourn the debate, the Minister of Agriculture took all the time . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The house now stands adjourned until 2:30 p.m. tomorrow. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 o‟clock p.m. 


