



















































Hansard: March 25, 1963


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

FIFTH SESSION — FOURTEENTH LEGISLATURE 

28th Day 

 

Monday, March 25, 1963. 

 

The House met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

MOTION RE MORNING SITTINGS 
 

Hon. W. S. Lloyd: (Premier) — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are proceeded with, on Friday 

I introduced a notice of motion with regard to morning sittings, and possibly Wednesday night sittings. 

This motion would ordinarily come up for discussion tomorrow. Perhaps I might say that I had a short 

conversation with the Leader of the Opposition Friday after having introduced the motion and I gathered 

from him an indication that the opposition would be prepared to waive the regular rules and accept the 

resolution today in order that there might be a morning sitting tomorrow. I am not pressing the point at 

all but if this is acceptable and agreeable I would be prepared to proceed with it. In that event, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is it agreed that the Premier should have leave to proceed with that motion under 24 

hours. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: (Premier) — I would move, seconded by Mrs. Batten, that by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That commencing Tuesday, March 26th, 1963 until the end of the session Standing Order 26 be 

suspended to permit sittings to commence at 10 o’clock a.m. with an intermission from 12:30 o’clock 

p.m. until 2:30 o’clock p.m; and that commencing Wednesday, March 27th, 1963 until the end of the 

session Standing Order 5 (2) be suspended to permit the assembly to sit from 7:30 p.m. until 10:00 

o’clock p.m. on Wednesdays. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 



 

March 25, 1963 
 

 

2 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd moved second reading of Bill No. 44 — An Act to amend the South Saskatchewan 

River Development Commission Act, 1959. 

 

He said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very short act to amend the South Saskatchewan River Development Commission 

Act. 

 

Basically it provides for an increase in the number of members on the commission. The problem here is 

that we have on the commission very adequate engineering skills and economic skills. The work is 

entering into a new phase, a phase into which there is added importance to the recreational planning 

aspects of the project and it has been suggested by the commission that they would like to have some 

additional members who might be able to participate with perhaps more background than they 

themselves have in this particular aspect of the work. 

 

The second suggestion in the Bill is that the commission be given the authority more specifically to enter 

into certain types of contracts. Here the necessity is that requests are coming forth from various 

organizations regarding contracts for the purchase of water at some future date and it is felt this authority 

is necessary. 

 

With that explanation I would move second reading. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read the second time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams moved second reading of Bill No. 48 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Government Telephones Superannuation Act, 1955. 
 

He said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill contains provisions that have been provided for similar superannuation acts during 

this session. The details are just the same as they are in the other amendments and can, if necessary be 

better discussed in committee. 

 

Wit that explanation, Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill No. 48, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Government Telephones Superannuation Act, 1955, be now read a second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Hon. Mr. Williams that Bill No. 48, An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Government Telephones Superannuation Act, 1955, be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:34 o’clock p.m. 


