



















































Hansard: April 03, 1963


 
 

1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

FIFTH SESSION – FOURTEENTH LEGISLATURE 

35th Day 

 

Wednesday, April 3, 1963. 

 

The House met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

PARLIAMENTARY ASSOCIATION DINNER 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Before I call the orders of the day, I would like to draw to the attention of the members 

that the Parliamentary Association Dinner will be arranged down below this evening in the Dome Cafe. 

We realize that this is getting late in the session for this gathering and I would appreciate the fact if the 

members would let the Clerk know as to which of them can attend. And I would ask the members to 

make this information available to their colleagues who are not present in the house at this time. 

 

Hon. R.A. Walker (Attorney General): — Before the orders of the day, may I ask if this invitation 

includes the wives of the members? With or without? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes, it includes the wives of the members. We are sorry that it hasn’t been arranged 

sooner but a number of circumstances kept the members busy every free night they had. It will include 

the members and their wives. 

 

Mrs. J.E. Cooper: — Or husbands? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes, or husbands as the case may be. 

 

 

RETURN NO. 36 

 

Mr. J.E. Snedker: — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I would like to ask the government 

when we may expect its Return No. 36 to be brought down as approved by a motion of this house 

February 27th. 

 



April 3, 1963 

 2 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, this motion for a return required the 

names and addresses of every member of every board or commission of the government, etc. etc., and 

the total amount of money paid to each. Now, there are a great many boards and when it asks for 

everything like this, this means that the whole thing has got to be gone through, and it is just a case of 

the information is not complete yet. It will be tabled as soon as it is ready. Just when it will be ready I 

certainly can’t tell the hon. member but I hope it would not be too long. 

 

COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS PROCEDURES 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd moved: 

 

That Mr Johnson, as Chairman, together with Messrs. Brockelbank, Thiesen, Strum (Mrs.), 

Berezowsky, Thatcher, McDonald and Gardiner be constituted a Special Committee to examine into 

and evaluate the function, terms of reference and methods of the Select Standing Committee on 

Public Accounts and Printing, and the adequacy of the information and assistance provided to the 

committee in its work of examining the public accounts, and to report thereon with recommendations 

to the Assembly at the next session; the said special committee to be empowered to consult with the 

Provincial Auditor, officials of the Treasury and other departments, to gather information from other 

jurisdictions and to sit after prorogation. 

 

Consequently I would move accordingly, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Walker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:30 o’clock p.m. 

 


