



















































Hansard: March 18, 1963


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

FIFTH SESSION — FOURTEENTH LEGISLATURE 

23rd Day 

 

March 18, 1963. 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mrs. Strum: — Before the orders of the day are called, I would like to draw the attention of the house 

to a fine group of students in the west gallery. These students are from the King George School in 

Saskatoon and they are here with their teacher, Mrs. Sutherland. We trust that they will have an 

interesting and happy experience today and that they will have a safe return home this evening. 

 

WELCOME TO REGINA IRISH CLUB OFFICERS 
 

Mr. Whelan: (Regina City) — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are proceeded with I would 

like to remind all members that with St. Patrick‟s day falling on a Sunday, there is a justifiable 

explanation for the Sons of Erin celebrating on Friday, Saturday and Monday. All members of this 

house, I am sure, did appreciate the shamrocks on our desks last Friday, but since the Irish people of 

Boston and the Irish Club of Regina felt that the 18th is more appropriate than Friday last, I am sure all 

members of this house will join with me in paying tribute to Saskatchewan‟s Irish citizens today. 

 

To be sure, Mr. Speaker, Irish people never exaggerate. They merely express in most enthusiastic terms 

a prejudiced point of view when making reference to the Emerald Isle, its music, its people, its 

hospitality and its colorful history. 

 

The Irish appreciation of music, Mr. Speaker, was evident to me as a small boy when I visited my 

grandmother Kelly. As a general rule we were not allowed to play the gramophone, but it didn‟t take me 

long to realize that if you played When 



 

March 18, 1963 

 

 

2 

Irish Eyes are Smiling, My Wild Irish Rose, Mother Machree, McNamara‟s Band or If you take the L 

out of Kelly, then there were no restrictions on the use of the gramophone. 

 

And in reference in particular to political Irish people, Mr. Speaker, where politics are concerned, I have 

accurate knowledge of an Irish family where the father was a Conservative. 

 

After he passed away his family grew up and one son became a Liberal member of the house of 

commons and another sits as a representative for the city of Regina as a CCF member of this legislature. 

To my knowledge, the political convictions of the members of an Irish family are not always unanimous, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The personalities of the Irish people are to found colorful, emotional, intelligent, chivalrous, and they 

vary in family groups. Each in his own way presents a personality that attracts, to be sure, and also 

astounds his fellow citizens. 

 

Vividly I recall as a boy hearing the story of two lake captains, one was Captain Jim Kelly and the other 

Captain Hank Kelly. Captain Jim Kelly chewed tobacco, was profane when his temper was roused, ran 

his crew with an iron hand — a good captain but sometimes resentment of the crew caused them to jump 

his ship. The story goes that a wheelsman jumped Captain Jim Kelly‟s ship in the harbor of Buffalo, 

New York. He grabbed the first vessel that needed a helmsman and as the boat headed out of the harbor. 

I am told that he noticed that the captain‟s signature on his new wheelsman papers showed the name of 

Captain Henry Kelly. The wheelsman looked up and he said, “You don‟t happen to know a captain by 

the name of Jim Kelly?” He received a casual reply, “I‟m his brother”. Well, the wheelsman 

contemplated jumping overboard but by the time he had reached the lower lakes the non-drinking, non-

smoking, quiet, studious captain had calmed his fears and the wheelsman stayed 17 years on the boat, to 

repeat the story of my two Irish uncles to every new deckhand who came aboard. 

 

As a boy I worshipped both my uncles and spent hours listening to their dramatic stories of the Great 

Lakes. The stories of one taught me some new but questionable expressions, the other convinced me that 

lake captains asked the Almighty for guidance when they were in a storm. 

 

Irish musicians by inventive genius have often been able to express not only music but have been able to 

poke fun at their rivals as well. I know an Irish musician very well, Mr. Speaker, who spent countless 

evenings perfecting a technique whereby he gave an accurate imitation of the bagpipes by holding his 

nose and hitting his Adam‟s apple with his knuckles while producing a whining sound in his throat. He 

delighted in presenting renditions of Scottish music to his 



 

March 18, 1963 

 

 

3 

Scots neighbors who begrudgingly admitted that the music was extremely realistic though they didn‟t 

appreciate the glint in his eye or the manner in which he held his nose. 

 

The ballads and history of Ireland accurately portray the story of a people who have fought many battles, 

written music and poetry, built castles, walked the halls of learning and occupied chairs in the 

assemblies of government. 

 

On this 18th day of March, on behalf of members of this legislature, I am pleased to welcome to this 

assembly the Officers of the Irish Club of Regina. All of them pack a brogue, one has married and 

changed her name, but each of them has walked the sod of the Emerald Isles. I am pleased to introduce 

to you, Mr. Speaker, and to all members of the house, first the handsome young president of the Irish 

Club of Regina, Mr. W.A. Robinson, and sitting next to him the charming and capable chairman of 

social activities for the club, Mrs. Georgina Nixon; — only an Irish club would be diplomatically astute 

and politically clever enough to choose such an attractive vice-president as Mrs. Mary Mackniak who 

has won the heart of a Polish lad since she arrived in this province — will you stand up please, and, last 

but not least, the well-known Regina City alderman, Mr. A.E. Wilson who is immediate past-president 

of the Irish Club in the city of Regina. 

 

I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that all members of the legislature will join me in wishing the sons of Ireland, 

and particularly the Irish Club of Regina, good health, good music, good friends and good luck. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker I would like to add my words of welcome to the Irish 

Club. I didn‟t know we had an Irish Club in Regina before I met them today, and I am very happy that 

there is somebody keeping up the good name of the Emerald Isle in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, I am not going to take very much of your time. I think I have told you all the stories I know, and I 

am not a good story teller anyway, but I want to repeat again on this day that there is only two classes of 

people — the Irish and those who wish they were. And a lot of the people over here you will notice, they 

are all properly dressed, they are all Irishmen for the day. I don‟t know how long that will last. But the 

fact that that holds true, that there are only two classes of people, the Irish and those who wish they 

were, was very well brought out in the speech from my friend who comes from 



 

March 18, 1963 

 

 

4 

Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) the other day. He said that the Irish had infiltrated into his country; I 

wasn‟t aware of that but I am sure that they will have helped to improve that country and I am sure that 

it upholds the old saying that you can‟t keep a good man down, and these must have been good men 

when they went in there. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am not going to take up any more of your time. I have a good Irish friend here who 

is good at telling Irish stories and he agreed to tell a story for me. Is that all right with you. 

 

Mr. Steuart: (Prince Albert) — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I was asked by the hon. 

member for Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) if I would, on behalf of the opposition, bid the officers of the 

Irish Club welcome. My qualifications don‟t stack up very high when you consider we have such names 

as Gallagher and Foley and McCarthy and O‟Thatcher on this side of the house. My qualifications 

actually consisted that I go around the 17th of March singing, off-key, Ireland must be Heaven because 

my Grandmother was born there, and that I flew out of Ireland for 17 months during the last war and I 

can tell anyone that if you have to fight a war, Ireland is a great place to fight it from. We were there so 

long that I can assure our Irish friends in the gallery that we came to the conclusion that Irish milk tastes 

much better than Scotch milk. 

 

I learned several stories in the 17 months that I was there — a few of them you can even tell in an 

assembly like this. The one that I liked the best concerned the Mayor of Dublin who went over to Venice 

and came back very thrilled and much taken with the beauty he had seen over there. And he immediately 

called the city council together and he said, “Boys, I‟ve been over to Venice and I‟ve got a great idea. 

They‟ve got some wonderful scenery over there. One thing I think we should do”, he said, “we should 

get 50 of them gondolas and put them on our canals and rivers”. So up jumped Pat O‟Flaherty, who 

must have been a good Liberal besides being a good Irishman because he immediately thought of the 

taxpayers, and he said, “Your Worship, I am not against bringing over them gondolas and putting them 

on the rivers, but I think you are going away out of your head in the cost of this thing, bringing over 50. 

I immediately make a resolution that we cut it down to a matched pair and breed our own.” 

 

Well, as I say, I have gone along for a number of years convinced that my grandmother had been born in 

Ireland and about a year ago I was struck, as the Irish would say, a terrible blow because I found out that 

she had really been born in Wales. Now I think the Welsh people are a wonderful 



 

March 18, 1963 

 

 

5 

people but I think you can all understand that the other day when we were in here and we saw the hon. 

Premier and the Hon. Minister of Health sporting the national flower of Wales, I am sure you will all 

agree that they are wonderful people, but, as the Irish would say, and my point of view. is that they do 

take a bit of getting used to. 

 

And so it is my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the opposition, to join with the hon. member from 

Regina in welcoming these fine people to the assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

CORRECTION TO NOTICE PAPER 
 

Mr. McFarlane: — Mr. Chairman, before the orders of the day are called, we‟ve listened to an awful 

lot of Irish blarney but the Scotch in me wouldn‟t let the records of this house get away without pointing 

out to you the very serious error on the white paper under notices of motions and questions, and I notice 

that it referred to me as Mr. McMarline. I don‟t mind being called an Irishmen after the last week-end, 

but I think for the records of the house we had better have that straightened to an “F”, where the “M” is 

at the present time. 

 

FAILURE OF SHAMROCK CROP 
 

Mr. Foley: (Turtleford) — Mr. Chairman, before the orders of the day are called: we‟ve been absorbed 

at some length in this chamber with the agricultural problems of Saskatchewan. I felt it only right that I 

should on this occasion draw to the attention of the legislature the very critical failure of the shamrock 

crop in Ireland during the past season. I am not altogether sure whether it was drought or storms or 

possibly some lack of support from some of Ireland‟s neighbors, nevertheless this has created a very 

critical shortage in the shamrock shipments to other countries. I draw this to the attention of the Minister 

of Agriculture and I trust that he will give it his very serious consideration. 

 

BOOK OF REMEMBRANCE 
 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: (Premier) — Mr. Speaker, the book which I hold in my hand is one which was 

presented to the government of Saskatchewan by Brigadier P.C. Elson on behalf of the Minister of the 

Department of Veterans 



 

March 18, 1963 

 

 

6 

affairs on Saturday of last week. The book carries the inscription: “In this book are written the names of 

Canadians who gave their lives for freedom while serving with the United Nations forces in Korea 1950 

to 1953. On earlier occasions the government has received a similar book with regard to the veterans of 

World War I, of World War II and of the Boer War. The book which contains the names of those who 

fell during World War I has for sometime been deposited with the Legion Branch in Regina and is in the 

chapel in the Legion Headquarters in downtown Regina. The other two books are in the legislative 

library. On enquiry, the legislative library tells me that they do receive a considerable amount of 

attention. It seems to be appropriate then that this book should join its two companion volumes in the 

legislative library. We have assured the Royal Canadian legion that if there are times when they would 

like to make use of them for any occasion, then of course they could be obtained through the library. 

 

Since the library, during the session, is under your supervision Mr. Speaker, I would turn the book over 

to you with the suggestion that it be placed in the legislative library and in the custody of the legislative 

librarian. 

 

SITUATION IN WILKIE UNION HOSPITAL 
 

Mr. Thatcher: (Morse) — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are called, I should like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Health. Is the minister aware of the serious situation which has developed in 

the town of Wilkie at their General Hospital, their Union Hospital, because of the strike of the nursing 

staff and the management? Is the department endeavoring to take any action to promote a settlement of 

this dispute? 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: (Minister of Public Health) — Mr. Speaker, the government is aware of the 

situation which prevails at the Wilkie Union Hospital, at least aware in a general way. On Friday last 

officials of the Department of Public Health were in touch with the chairman of the hospital board, Mr. 

Brandle, and at that time we offered any assistance which we might be able to give. The board has 

subsequently held a meeting and we are anticipating that if the board feels that we could be of any 

assistance to them in that regard they will be in touch with us. We believe that this is the most 

efficacious way in which we can render assistance to the board and its staff at this time. 



 

March 18, 1963 

 

 

7 

Mr. Speaker: — Just before I call the questions put by members, I would like to draw to the attention of 

the members of the house the request which I raised earlier for the Department of Industry and 

Information to take pictures on behalf of the Teachers‟ Federation, also they have requested to take 

pictures on behalf of the Tannoy system which they wish to have to send to Tannoy. Arrangements have 

been made that any of these pictures being taken during the session will be taken when the house rises at 

5:30 on Thursday. There are three or four particular ones which they want to make sure are in the house, 

but Industry and Information will make those contacts themselves, but I wanted to let you know that at 

5:30 on Thursday these pictures will be taken so members will be asked, if possible, to be here at that 

time. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Hon. Mr. Brockelbank for 

second reading of Bill No. 31 — An Act to amend the Education and Health Tax Act. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 31, which is now before us, proposes to amend The Education 

and Health Tax Act. We in the opposition certainly feel that this act needs amendment. However, the 

minor change which is now before us is not precisely the amendment which we had in mind. We had 

hoped that the minister, when he brought in this bill, would announce that the five percent rate was 

going to be cut to perhaps four percent or three percent. Or we hoped that he might be going to 

announce that clothing or some such exemption . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Point of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — The item before the house for discussion is the Bill as it is on our desks. If 

this bill gets second reading, then that means that the act is opened up but at the present time the only 

item for discussion, I maintain, is the bill as it is now on our desks. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I believe the point as raised by the Provincial Treasurer is well taken and I was trying 

to get my thinking straight on what the leader was following before I ruled on it. I think in committee of 

the whole anything is open. 



 

March 18, 1963 

 

 

8 

Mr. Thatcher: — Before you rule, Mr. Speaker, may I speak on the point of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I would very respectfully suggest this, Sir. In the many years that I was in the house 

of commons, whenever a bill was opened to amend an act, the whole act was opened for discussion. In 

other words, any aspect of that act could be debated. I appreciate that there is a difference of opinion on 

this. I would be quite happy, if you rule we can‟t debate the matter, to hear the minister or you or 

someone cite some place in Beauchesne which says that the bill isn‟t open under these circumstances. I 

can‟t find any such citation and I don‟t think there is one. Very respectfully, I would suggest, Sir, for 

that reason, that I should be entitled to debate any aspect of The Education and Health Tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I haven‟t the particular point at my fingertips, but my feeling is that the act, once it is 

officially before the house, is wide open. But until what is before the house has received second reading, 

the act isn‟t before us, there is just an amending bill before us. But once that bill is accepted, it opens up 

the entire act. In committee of the whole, clause by clause there would be a full range for discussion at 

that time to propose amendments. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Do I understand you, Sir, that I would be able to discuss any aspect of the act on the 

first clause in committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — No, you could propose amendments to any part of the bill. You could propose 

amendments to any part of the bill whether in this part or in another part. You could propose 

amendments and then they would be open for discussion. 

 

Mr. Snedker: (Saltcoats) — Mr. Speaker, on the point of order, I most respectfully suggest that the 

whole bill is before the house now. The fact that the government brought in an amendment opened up 

the whole bill and, therefore, we are entitled to discuss the principle of the bill on second reading, or 

anything we chose to discuss. 



 

March 18, 1963 

 

 

9 

Mr. Speaker: — This is taken from the records of the house of commons. It says: 

 

On the second reading of an amending bill it is the principle of the amending bill and not the principle 

of the act to be amended which is the business under consideration. The discussion, therefore, must 

relate exclusively to the principle of the amending bill. 

 

This is taken from the house of commons. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — But Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mrs. Batten: (Humboldt) — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, I think no doubt this is true of the house 

of commons and probably is the logical answer to the problem, but I would remind you, Mr. Speaker, 

that the practice in this house, in this legislature, has been that once the bill comes up for second reading, 

the whole bill comes up for amendment, and, therefore, it is open. And this has been consistently the 

practice since I have been in this house and the ministers have on various occasions discussed the entire 

bill when they have brought it in for second reading, even though the amendment was a very minor one. 

This has been consistently the policy of the cabinet ministers who have brought in bills and it was 

always the rule here. 

 

Contrary to the rule of the house of commons, that we discuss the entire bill, we discuss the entire bill 

once it was brought in for second reading. Once an amendment was brought in for second reading, the 

legislation which was to be amended was brought to the attention of the legislature and members could, 

therefore, discuss the principle of the bill itself or of the act itself, as well as the amending bill. And I 

think you will find, Mr. Speaker, that this has been our procedure in this house even though it is 

different from that that was followed in the house of commons. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I have to differ with the hon. member from Humboldt (Mrs. 

Batten) because I know, listening to ministers introduce their amending bills, I agree that they have often 

gone into too much detail of discussion of the amendment in that bill, but I never heard them discuss the 

act which was being amended but only the proposed amendment to the act, and I also don‟t think that it 

is a proper procedure for the Leader of the Opposition to try to make a bargain with you, that if he will 

allow you to do what is correct on this occasion, that you will allow him to do something else on another 

occasion. 



 

March 18, 1963 

 

 

10 

Mr. Thatcher: — There was no such thought as that. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Any further comments on this order? 

 

Mrs. Batten: — I don‟t think there was any suggestion of making a bargain with you. I don‟t believe 

that you are one or that the Leader of the Opposition is one that wants to make a bargain at this time. I 

think what the Leader of the Opposition is interested in is to know what your ruling is going to be when 

the bill comes into committee of the whole. But apart from that, Mr. Speaker, is it not true a few days 

ago when the income tax was before the house, then it was debated on second reading. This is only a 

few days ago. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: (Premier) — I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that a point of order was raised at that 

time with regard to it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I believe, as I said before and as I read from the record of the house of commons from 

Ottawa, that it is just the bill that is before us. The act as such is not before us until this carries. Once this 

second reading is concurred in, then it comes in committee of the whole. If any members want to place a 

proper amendment to any part of that bill, the whole bill is open for amendment or discussion, and it 

wouldn‟t be good for me at this time to allow the discussion to go away from what is before us. 

 

The Clerk has brought for my benefit two former rulings in this house. One of March 7, 1924. It says: 

 

During debate on second reading of an act to provide for a plebiscite on questions relating to the 

control and suppression of traffic in alcoholic liquors, Mr. Speaker Scott ruled that only the principle 

of the bill could be discussed and not the broad question of prohibition unless the latter could be 

connected with the principle of the bill.‟ 

 

And on February 28, 1930, Mr. Speaker Leslie ruled: 

 

That the principles of the act to be amended may be discussed on second reading of an amending bill 

provided that it can be shown that the principles involved in the amendments proposed in the bill do 

affect certain other principles in the original act. 

 

In other words, the amendments would have to be changing what was in the original act in order to 

debate the original act. So I think with these citations, I would have to rule that the discussion must 

remain to the bill which is before us. 



 

March 18, 1963 

 

 

11 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I regret that you feel that ruling is necessary but I have no 

alternative but to bow to it. However, so that I may get in order, I propose to move an amendment to the 

bill which is now before us. We think that it is absolutely paramount, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition 

protest the five percent sales tax in strongest possible . . . I am going to read my motion, Mr. Speaker. I 

would like to move, seconded by the hon. member for Moosomin (Mr. McDonald): 

 

That all the words after the word „that‟ be deleted and the following substituted therefore “this house 

declines to proceed further with this bill because it makes no provision for reducing the rate of the 

education and health tax”. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well May 16 edition on page 421, referring to amendments says “an amendment 

cannot be used for importing arguments which would be irrelevant in the main question” and there is 

another technical point on this motion that this in itself could be construed as reducing revenue. I just 

raise that as a possibility, but due to the passage which I read from May, I shall have to rule the 

amendment out of order. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well, Mr. Speaker, all that I can say then at a later date and more appropriate time we 

shall have something to say about this $37.5 million that my hon. friends are gouging from the taxpayers 

. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd: (Premier) — On a point of order. The rules prevent the gentleman and he tries to go 

around them. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. Mc. Nollet moved second reading of Bill No. 42 — An Act respecting Watershed Associations. 

 

He said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, in explanation of this bill, I want to point out that it is just what it says it is — a Watershed 

Associations Act. It would permit legally constituted agencies such as municipalities or irrigation 

districts or the Water Users‟ Association or a conservation area authority to co-operate together and 

establish a board to operate and maintain works that are in common interest to all of the agencies 

concerned. 



 

March 18, 1963 

 

 

12 

Two of the reasons for it are: 1. P.F.R.A. expects that some agency should assume responsibility for 

continued operation and maintenance of reservoirs and since more and more reservoirs are being used, 

or the water there from is being used for various purposes, it is necessary to pass legislation of this kind 

to enable interested, legally constituted agencies to operate together on a watershed basis. 

 

In addition, the ARDA program makes it imperative that we have a kind of an agency because a good 

many ARDA projects will also be dual purpose projects. 

 

With this very brief explanation, Mr. Speaker, and I believe the rest of the legislation can be better 

discussed in committee, I would move second reading. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney moved second reading of Bill No. 43 — An Act to amend The Mental Health Act, 

1961. 
 

He said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill proposes to amend the Mental Health Act, 1961, and members will recall that in 

1961 there was introduced a new Mental Health Act which made some fairly substantial procedural 

changes in the treatment of mental health. The new act has now been in force for about 18 months and a 

number of minor amendments are found to be necessary or desirable in order to make the new act and 

the new procedures operate more smoothly. 

 

The 1961 act provided for the issue of renewal certificates, the idea being that when people were in 

mental institutions there ought to be issued renewal certificates from time to time to ensure that their 

condition had been examined to see whether it was necessary that they continue to be institutionalized. 

There are certain changes in the times of issue of these. Certain changes are necessary with respect to 

the issue of certificates of incompetence to make the operations of the office of the administrator of 

estates mesh a little more perfectly with the procedures under the Mental Health Act. There are also a 

few small changes in trial leave procedures, a few small changes in the manner in which a person may 

be referred to a facility for psychiatric examination by a judge or magistrate, and a couple of small 

changes in the manner in which people may be apprehended in a public place where it appears that they 

are suffering from a mental disorder, providing that they shall be forthwith examined. All of these are 

changes dealing with principles which were dealt with 



 

March 18, 1963 

 

 

13 

in earlier mental health acts. None of them, I think, is a new principle to our legislation in Saskatchewan. 

All of them I think can be adequately and effectively dealt with in committee, Mr. Speaker, and 

accordingly I would move that the said bill be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o‟clock p.m. 


