



















































Hansard: March 19, 1963


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

24th Day 

 

March 19, 1963 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

ON ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mrs. Cooper: — Before orders of the day are proceeded with, I would like to call the attention of the 

members to a very fine group of students in the Speaker’s Gallery. They come from grade 8 at 

Athabasca school, and their teacher is Mr. McDonald, and we would like to thank Mr. McDonald for 

bringing the students, we think it is an excellent thing that so many students do visit our legislature and I 

am sure that you would all like to join me in wishing them welcome, and hope that they enjoy their stay 

with us. 

 

Mr. A.T. Stone: — I would like to draw your attention to a group of students in the west gallery from 

the Queen Elizabeth school in Saskatoon, with their teacher, Mr. Caldwell. I am sure all members will 

join with me in saying how delighted we are in having them here today, and hope their stay will be a 

pleasant and informative one. 

 

PRESS RELEASE 
 

Mr. Brown: — Before the orders of the day I would like to call the attention of the members to the 

press release, which they will find on their desks, this being stagnation Tuesday, I would point out that 

this is another case of one of these major companies who are afraid to come into Saskatchewan, having 

decided to build another one of these non-existing manufacturing plants in the province. 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

2 

 

 

In all seriousness, Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct the attention of the hon. members to this 

announcement, which I think is of importance to the province of Saskatchewan. We are happy, indeed, 

that Armour and Company, one of the leading industrial organizations in the United States, an 

international organization as a matter of fact, has seen fit to select Saskatchewan and the city of 

Saskatoon, as the site of their first move into actual manufacturing here in the dominion of Canada. 

 

I am sure, Sir, that all members of the house will want to join with me in speaking on behalf of the 

people, whom they represent, in extending a very warm welcome to this major American company, to 

the province of Saskatchewan and to express the hope that they will have a 

very successful future with their operations here in this province. 

 

All Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to associate the members of the opposition with the 

remarks just made by the minister. I suppose this is the exception which proves the rule. I don’t know 

whether the company came to Saskatchewan because of the government or despite the fact that the 

government was here; but we certainly do welcome them and we hope the minister can make other 

announcements of the same nature in the days ahead. 

 

Hear! Hear. 

 

ESTEVAN BRUINS — REGINA PATS 
 

Mr. MacDougall: — Before the orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I should like to draw the attention of 

this house to the fact that the Estevan Bruins effectively white-washed the Regina Pats. I want to bring 

this to the attention, especially the members from Regina who are prone to bragging about everything 

and sundry, from sporting events to being Irish. Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the members I would like to 

congratulate the Estevan team. 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 4 
 

Mr. J. Thiessen (Shellbrook) moved: 

 

That this Assembly is of the opinion that the Government of Canada should, in co-operation with the 

provincial governments, adopt comprehensive national highway policy which would assist the 

provincial governments to meet the major road transportation needs of Canada 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

3 

He said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, this motion with regard to highway planning, has been dealt with before in this house, and 

I imagine it has been dealt with on a number of occasions. Much has been written and much has been 

said in regards to highway planning with the federal government in conjunction with provincial 

governments. 

 

When transportation first opened in this country, it was felt that all we really needed was railways. 

Railways can handle our products which were sent out of the provinces, as well as those which were 

transported in. It was felt that you needed a minimum of road beds and you could haul loads. Then in the 

field of highways it was pretty well left up to the provincial governments, and local roads were pretty 

well left with the municipal governments. This was carried on for a good many years and we find now 

that the transportation which the highways have to handle is changing so rapidly that provincial 

governments and municipal governments both cannot cope with it. We have the many more miles which 

are made, we have the much heavier loads which are being looked, which have to be handled by roads. 

 

This, too, is done by farmers, they want to travel ever so many more miles than we used to travel, and 

we have school buses, and we have so very many things to handle. The farmer is no longer content to 

just drive to the village for mail, or flour, or coal, like he used to. No longer does he only want to go to 

his neighbors, but he may have brothers, sisters, and a mother, in Manitoba, and he will make a weekend 

trip to visit. 

 

This altogether means that we have to have long planning for roads for years ahead. We seem to build 

highways and roads today, Mr. Speaker, and when we have them completed they are being pretty well 

being used to their fullest extent. The only real highway which we have in Saskatchewan, which is not 

being used to its fullest extent is our good road out of Regina, and I think this is the planning that we 

need. We need highways something like we have between Regina and Lumsden. 

 

I’m not going to say too much on this subject, Mr. Speaker, there has been, as I have said before, an 

awful lot written and said. I would like to read something that was in the Prairie Transport of May, 

1955; this is in regards to general trucking. 

 

―Although it is impossible to fix precisely the date to mark the beginning of general freight service, 

because a certain amount of general freight has been carried on trucks from the first. (I imagine this 

was from the beginning of the 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

4 

 province of Saskatchewan). ―It was in 1926 that W. Cochrane of Indian Head, started a fairly regular 

service between that town and Regina, two years later in 1928, Skingles of Moose Jaw, started their 

route also to Regina, in a ―manner that illustrates the newness of the new transport medium.‖ 

 

It came about almost by accident, Mr. Skingle was operating a number of trucks in connection with his 

coal, sand and gravel business and one of the trucks had been sent to Regina for an overhaul. Some 

freight was offered for the trucks return trip, and Mr. Skingle immediately recognized a new business 

opportunity. Within a few months, two trucks were providing regular service, weather conditions 

permitting. There was no gravel on the roads then, and when it rained the trucks could only get through 

by brute strength and ignorance. (Mr. Skingle’s words) It started the same year with Harry Hooper’s 

service to towns south of Shaunavon, and in the next few years a spreading network of truck service, 

tied together Saskatchewan’s cities and towns, as highways gradually improved. The path ahead was 

staked out, and this Mr. Speaker, is what has been taking place ever more rapidly ever since 1926 and 

1928. 

 

I remember one time in 1920, when my mother and dad wanted to take a trip to Swift Current, they were 

living in Aberdeen at that time, and this was a two week holiday tour; they had quite a time getting there 

and also quite a time coming back. Today, I know that my mother and father, living at Aberdeen, go to 

see their relatives at Swift Current on Sunday morning and they are back on Sunday night. And this is 

something we have to cope with. 

 

And then again, reading some more, Mr. Speaker, John McKee, executive secretary of Canadian 

Trucking Association, of July 1962, has set this up very well. 

 

―To a degree it is understandable that trucks, even collectively, did not have the impact on federal 

transportation thinking, that came so easily from such projects as seaways, airlines, and the pipelines. 

The government was not alone in its failures to assess the economic implication of highway transport. 

The early development of highway transport led others off the track, for the industry had developed 

initially as a local inter-regional service. In the first postwar decade, our highway plan was sadly 

inadequate and fragmentary. Inter-provincial highway links were particularly weak, and no national 

highway system existed. Some of the most important inter-regional highways transport had to use 

American highways, and still does. Long distance highway transportation became economically 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

5 

feasible at a time when the trucking industry was still regarded as a regional transportation medium. 

Even when the railway strike in 1950 dramatically demonstrated the capability of long-distance 

highway transport, such transport was still considered a passing phenomena; useful perhaps in an 

emergency; suitable perhaps for certain highly specialized transportation tasks; but essentially an 

uneconomic possibility. 

 

In spite of this expert opinion, some of it within the trucking industry, long-distance trucking continues 

to grow‖ 

 

and it does to this day, Mr. Speaker, and as I have said before it has not only been discussed in this 

house, it has also been discussed in the house of Commons in Ottawa, and I would like to read you a 

little part that was read into Hansard in Ottawa: 

 

―The need for support for rural income, the need for the development of agricultural programs, is very 

great‖. 

 

I want to remind the Minister of Agriculture that in his statement about the program he was putting 

forward there was no reference to the need of assistance to farmers in the development of a system of 

adequate farm-to-market roads. The minister may throw up his hands and say this has no part in the 

national government policy, and I differ. 

 

I think it is time we have a national road policy in this country. The United States have had one since 

1912, whereby federal money and federal leadership are provided in establishing transcontinental 

highways and in constructing farm-to-market roads, and roads over which school buses can travel. The 

cost of roads in rural Canada with its diminishing population is one of the heaviest burdens that exists 

for farmers today. 

 

Taxes for roads are high, and if the government wishes to do something that will assist the small farmer, 

and will assist the development of rural areas, I suggest that this is a provision that can not be 

overlooked. 

 

Again, the same thing took place somewhat later in 1961, at this time they were suggesting that we go 

into a national highway program to take care of unemployment in this country, and again it was stated 

something about the highway system in the United States. And then in the Financial Post, 1962: 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

6 

―Although over $111 million dollars a year is being spent on Canada’s highways and streets, there is 

still no solution to the traffic problem in sight. Roads and expressways built today are jammed with 

cars and trucks in tomorrow’s rush hours.‖ 

 

Sometimes when we leave here about five o’clock, Mr. Speaker, Regina’s streets are also pretty well 

plugged with traffic. 

 

I found a very good article in the Western Business and Industry of August, 1960, which has a fairly 

large write-up and they claim 

 

―That the highway problem in the Dominion of Canada, comes only second to its national defence 

policy.‖ 

 

And I believe that we should probably read a part of this, 

 

―The federal government’s interpretation of its responsibilities under the act of confederation, contrast 

largely with the broader readings of constitutional privileges and responsibilities in the United States. 

There a system of federal financial aid has been in existence since 1916. The constitutional relationship 

between federal and state governments is virtually the same between the governments of Canada and 

provincial governments. But as far back as the Federal Road Act of July, 1916, there has been a solid 

cornerstone for a system of co-operatively building of inter-state, primary and secondary roads.‖ 

 

And then they go on to show what money has been spent by the federal house by the state house, and 

what they have done to complete their highway system 

 

They have a system which is second to none in the world, and in Canada we spend less federally than 

any nation in the world, which travels on wheels something like what we do in Canada. 

 

They give us a graph here of mileages travelled in the various provinces, showing what mileage has 

been done in 1962, and in Saskatchewan we have travelled two and a half billion miles. Two and a half 

billion miles travelled in Saskatchewan during 1962 and this is figured out at the rate of 13.72 miles for 

every gallon of gas consumed. 

 

Manitoba had two billion miles, Alberta three and a half billion, B.C. four billion, and in the four 

western provinces there is twelve billion miles being travelled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is another industry which interested me, and this is the industry of tourists, and I was 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

7 

looking for information which would give us an inkling of what the tourist traffic was in Saskatchewan 

and this we could probably say for every province in the dominion, so I brought Harvey Dryden’s report 

to the Saskatchewan Tourists’ Association of November 15th, 1962, and I want to read you parts of this 

report, because I feel that this is probably something that not too many of us are too sure about, and he is 

starting off here with going back about ten years: 

 

―Needless to say there have been some tremendous strides taken in the travelling and recreational 

division of this province during that time. Ten years ago there were no paved highways to take you 

from the southern part of the province up to the northern playgrounds, and there was still plenty of 

hard slugging ahead to complete the Trans-Canada highway. A road north of Lac LaRonge was only a 

conservation office dream and there was no Hanson Lake road. Ten years ago in this capital city of 

Regina, there were only two motels, now there are thirteen, with a total accommodation of 438 rooms 

or units. During this ten-year period there has been a five-fold increase in the work program and 

activities of the provincial travel bureau, and I am happy to say that 200 per cent increase in staff to 

help us keep pace with these activities. 

 

Even in the early years of our work we would receive a small stream of tourist inquiries every day, but 

nothing like the present when a hefty bundle of 400 letters per day of tourist inquiries is not considered 

out of the ordinary during the bureau’s busy mail period from late January to mid-summer. And a good 

percentage of these inquiries now come from Canadians in other provinces, from Saskatchewan people 

who are showing more interest every year in travelling and holidaying in their own province.‖ 

 

There is a lot of information in this, stating some mileages on cars, and here is what he says in another 

part, page 3 of his report: 

 

―Our attitude in the travel bureau, is simply this, the best market for the travel and recreational 

activities we have to offer are the 900,000 plus people of Saskatchewan. The more of them we can 

encourage to enjoy their travels at home, the better it will be for industry, and we want to direct this 

message to Saskatchewan people, in every way we possibly can.‖ 

 

and I might add with a great deal of success too. These 900,000 people on wheels, need a lot of 

highways in our province of Saskatchewan alone. 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

8 

This is a very good report and I wish that members who haven’t read it, I would commend it to their 

reading, because there is a lot of material in here, which is good not only for Saskatchewan people, but 

for those who take to the roads on holiday time. 

 

And then again on page 8, 

 

―Under our tourist information program this year we will handle approximately 40,000 letters of tourist 

inquiry by the end of the year. These inquiries request detailed information of roads, highways, and 

byways, or whatever you have. Besides these 40,000 letters received at our office, it is estimated the 

bureau staff will handle about 60,000 other tourist inquiries.‖ 

 

This, again, Mr. Speaker, is more or less using roads and facilities. We have had some outstanding 

increases in the number of other travel areas in the present year. In the new Meadow Lake provincial 

park, for example, there was an increase of 7000 cars, carrying an estimated 28,000 people over the 

corresponding period of July and August of 1961. This is a lot of cars over a stretch of highway, Mr. 

Speaker, and they didn’t only come from Saskatchewan, they came from many points in the dominion of 

Canada and in the States. 

 

Last year during July and August Duck Mountain provincial park welcomed 19,616 cars, this year 

during the same period they welcomed 25,000 cars, an increase of nearly 5,500. There were over 3000 

more cars in July and August of this year used the facilities of Cypress Hills provincial parks, compared 

to the corresponding period of 1961. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to read this into the record, because it shows another need for assistance in 

highway construction. 

 

New road developments in the north, improved highways in all parts of the province, and improved 

resort areas are encouraging the construction of these facilities to cater to the travellers and to the 

vacationists. That and the tremendous faith these investors and realtors have in the future of the industry 

in this province. 

 

Most of you are familiar with the Hanson Lake road, and no doubt are aware of the many new facilities 

developing along this road, and this is one of our northern development roads with more to come. 

Preliminary estimates are that the Hanson Lake road attracted 35,000 more people this year than it did in 

1961. This is talking about 1962. No doubt, many of these 35,000 might have visited other resort areas 

in Saskatchewan if they hadn’t gone up to the Hanson Lake road, so you can readily see the keen 

competition that will be felt. 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

9 

We in the provincial travel bureau have set a goal of a million annual visitors to Saskatchewan by 

Canada’s centennial year of 1967. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is I think an ambitious program and it will keep the department of highways busy 

constructing highways so that millions of people could come into Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have only one other little thing that I would like to bring to your attention and this 

is part of The Second World War. The motor vehicle has emerged as perhaps the one single thing that 

has done more to shape our way of living than any other development. Truly, we are a nation on wheels. 

This we must be if we are going to enjoy continuously improved standards of living, continuously 

improving educational, social and recreational opportunities. In 1945 there were, in use in Canada, about 

one and a half million motor vehicles, or about 1 motor vehicle for about every 10.4 persons. In 1961 

this had grown to over 5.5 million motor vehicles, or something like 1 motor vehicle for every 3.3 

persons. During the same period total motor vehicle travel in Canada increased by nearly 5 times, from 

around 9 billion vehicle miles in 1945 to over 45 billion vehicle miles in 1961. Startling as these 

statistics are the direct and indirect costs of highway transportation are even more startling. 

 

It has been estimated that total highway transportation costs in 1945 were approximately one and a half 

billion dollars; currently the total highway transportation costs in Canada are approximately $9 billion. 

The Canadian people are currently spending nearly $5 billion in the direct cost of owning and operating 

motor vehicles. Considering the wages and salaries paid to people employed in commercial trucking 

firms, taxi operators, bus drivers, and so on, the total direct cost of highway transportation today exceeds 

$8 billion. 

 

The net road and peak expenditures of all governments in Canada today exceed $1 billion. 

 

Now I think, Mr. Speaker, we have covered that ground, there is a lot more that could be said, I have 

some more here, but the ground has been pretty well covered and I want to move, seconded by Mr. 

Stone, that this Assembly is of the opinion that the government of Canada should, in co-operation with 

the provincial governments, adopt a comprehensive national highway policy which with the provincial 

governments can meet the major road transportation needs of Canada. 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

10 

Mr. Stone (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, the mover of the motion has presented the case of a 

national expanded highway program fairly well, and there is not much left for me to say. However, I 

think it is perhaps fitting an important problem such as this is brought to the attention of our citizens 

when they are in the process of electing a government to Ottawa. 

 

Both the Progressive-Conservatives and the Liberal party will be promising, no doubt, if elected, a 

stepped up national highway program. 

 

In fact a resolution was passed at the Liberal convention in 1958 which read as follows: 

 

―Assistance to the provinces and territories for developing roads for the north and consideration of a 

policy for a federal, provincial and municipal highway program aimed at providing a modern network 

of trunk highways.‖ 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if I am skeptical of the promises of the two old parties, my doubts are shared by 

others and I would like to quote from Hansard of 1959, page 1331, vol. 2, and this is what one of the 

members of the House of Commons had to say, and I quote: 

 

―We have had the programs of the two old parties. When the Conservatives were in opposition they 

were in favor of a national highway system. They wanted an expanded program. When they become 

the government they continued the Liberal policy that was in effect. Members of the Liberal party, 

once they became the opposition see the error of their ways in 22 years of government and they have 

broadened their policy. They have had a national convention and now they have a Liberal version of an 

expanded highway program. The trouble with the two old parties is that they always plan a visionary 

program when they are in opposition.‖ 

 

Mr. Whelan (Regina City): — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member could tell us who he is 

quoting? 

 

Mr. Stone: — I am quoting from the Hansard – the member from Assiniboia, Mr. Hazen Argue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I submit that Canada cannot continue 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

11 

much longer muddling along with the question of transportation. There is a great need for an overall 

plan for almost all modes of transportation in this country. The highways — railways — waterways — 

airways — and pipe lines. 

 

There is no doubt an overlapping of services in some places and a lack of services in others, and it is 

high time for a national program, planned for transportation, to bring about an efficient and at the same 

time an adequate transportation system to fit the needs of this country. 

 

The need for an adequate transportation system is universally recognized. Almost every ton of freight 

traffic requires the use of a truck at some stage in its movement. Almost all the personal transportation 

needs are met by the automobile on the highways. Educational, cultural, social and recreational resort 

utilization demands adequate road transportations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Canadians today are paying dearly for adequate road transportation and they are not 

getting it. For instance, federal sales tax and excise taxes on motor vehicles alone, amounted 

approximately to $167 millions in 1960, and the estimated expenditures by the federal government on 

highway in 1960-61, was approximately $121 million. Some $46 millions more collected than spent, 

and this, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t include the federal sales tax on gasoline, on diesel fuel, on rubber, parts 

and repairs. 

 

Because of the tremendous increase in motor vehicles and the heavy type truck vehicles, the province 

and the municipalities are not financially able to construct all the highways and trunk roads that are 

necessary to provide an adequate highway system to meet modern day requirements. Because of 

congested traffic conditions, many of our larger urban centres are hard pressed to cope with this 

situation. An illustration of this was evident in the city of Saskatoon, not too long ago . . . that was 

before the Canadian National decided to withdraw from the centre of the city. The traffic survey of the 

city of Saskatoon, showed a need for two bridges, underground and elevated highways at an estimated 

cost of $24 million. Now, by the time that the program was finished in 1980 no doubt it would have cost 

considerable more than $24 million. They expected to get some help from the provincial and some from 

the federal government, but even at that, Mr. Speaker, I should guess that there is quite a burden on the 

taxpayers of a city of the size of Saskatoon. 

 

But the real cost to this city of Saskatoon, and this is equally true of other large centres in Saskatchewan, 

such as Prince Albert, North Battleford, has been the loss of industry, and the hundreds of millions of 

dollars tacked on the consumer because of high rates due to the lack of competition from other means of 

transportation. 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

12 

Now, the city of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, has all the advantages of other centres, and they have better 

facilities for industry, but the city of Saskatoon has been the highest freight rate city in Canada, outside, 

of course, the far north. And because of this reason, any industry would pass up Saskatoon, and this was 

a well known fact in determining the location of the steel plant, which is now in Regina. Our citizens 

have been forced to pay through the nose for everything they buy, because of high freight rates. 

 

To give you some examples, in January of 1955, automobiles shipped from eastern Canada to Saskatoon 

were charged a freight rate of $5.05 per hundred lbs., or approximately $182 per car. Now today, since 

the building of the Trans-Canada highway it costs $105 to ship the same car. A reduction of 42 per cent. 

Even the impact of the completion of the Rogers Pass link of the trans-Canada highway is also noted. 

The rates on fresh fruits from the Okanagan valley to Regina and Saskatoon, have decreased 14 per cent. 

Rates on imported whiskey, if anybody is interested, from Vancouver has been reduced from $3.97 to 

$2.00 per hundred pounds. And there have been similar commodities moving from Saskatchewan to the 

west coast have had their rates reduced. Fresh meat from Saskatoon can now enter the Vancouver 

market at a rate of $2.00 per hundred and formerly the rate was $3.12 per hundred. 

 

General rates covering a whole range of manufactured articles have had substantial reductions in the 

past, due to the more favorable highway access to the Pacific coast. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we don’t seem to care how much we spend on motor vehicles, but we do complain 

of the cost required to build good highways to run them on. And there has been a marked differential in 

our personal spending in relationship to our public spending. More and better highways is a crying need. 

And there is no better way to put many of our unemployed to work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Then, of course, there is the matter of opening up our natural resources by developing roads in the north. 

The tourist trade alone is a big item in our economy. The building of more and better highways will 

return to our economy many times the cost of construction and maintenance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal government has been dragging its feet on our national highway program. In my 

opinion the federal-provincial relations have deteriorated since the present government has been in 

power in Ottawa. It is only fair to say that the St. Laurent government did make an honest attempt to 

bring about better federal-provincial relations. There were two conferences held during that regime, one 

of four days, and another of five days duration. There were held with the federal cabinet, and the 

premiers of the province, and the premiers had an opportunity to let their hair down, and present and 

grapple with their problems. 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

13 

Besides these two conferences there were also two other meetings of three and four days, to discuss 

constitutional problems. Now, perhaps the results from this, Mr. Speaker, were disappointing from a 

standpoint of the province, but I suggest that this was only to be expected. The matter of federal-

provincial relationship is a very complex one, a very difficult one, in a country such as ours, with a 

federal form of government, the geographical nature, the concentration of industry and wealth in a very 

small area of this country, and many, many other problems. But I suggest a good start was made and it is 

unfortunate the same honest desire is not maintained during a regime of the present government. 

 

It will be noted that a two day conference was held with Prime Minister Diefenbaker, in 1957, and 

another three day conference in 1960, but only on one of these days was the prime minister and the 

premiers in attendance, and on that occasion the premiers of the province were given a lecture by the 

prime minister and handed a take it or leave it package. 

 

I believe the scuttling of the tax-rental agreement was in the opinion of many a retrogressive step and 

done only to appease the government of one province. It appears to me, Mr. Speaker, that a decision has 

to be made. A decision whether grants from the federal government for such things as highways, 

educational needs, health, social welfare, grants can be cut off at the whim of the government in power 

at Ottawa, but this decision has to be made whether grants should be made, or whether a greater share of 

the tax dollar to the junior government would not be a better answer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, money spent on highways, is not a total loss, rather there are tremendous revenues to be 

obtained, by more use by our own citizens, by the revenue from expanded tourist trade, by revenues in 

the opening up of pleasure and natural resources, the need of good highways as a defence measure, and I 

cannot stress too strongly, the need to put to useful work many thousands of our unemployed, which in 

turn will help to bolster our economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion. 

 

Government: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Foley (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, I just wish to speak briefly with regard to this motion, to say, 

Mr. Speaker, that to the extent that co-operation with the federal government with regard to highway 

expansion will benefit northern Canada, and in particular, the northern part of our own province, I wish 

to express my support for the motion. 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

14 

I would like to, with regard to highway expansion, refer particularly to the efforts that have been made 

in recent years by the northern trans-Canada route association, and the efforts of district boards of trade 

and chambers of commerce, across the northern part of our province to sponsor this route. Now, as you 

know, the route that has been suggested by the northern trans-Canada association, comes east from 

Edmonton to Lloydminster and on a line due east, through to Prince Albert. Now I realize there has been 

considerable discussion about the route which a second Trans-Canada highway might follow going 

through northern Saskatchewan. However, might I point out that the southern route from Lloydminster 

through North Battleford to Saskatoon, is already a paved highway, and if the route were to swing north 

from Lloydminster then it would pass through some of the most scenic areas of northern Saskatchewan. 

This route would do a great deal to open up this part of the country to tourism and, of course, eventually 

to settlement and industry. 

 

Now, we have a considerable stretch of the North Saskatchewan river extending all the way from North 

Battleford through to west of Lloydminster at Lee Park. We have had for years, several ferries operating 

in this connection, Mr. Speaker, I want to suggest that very serious consideration need be given to a 

bridge, and if a northern Trans-Canada highway were built along the route suggested by the association, 

this, of course, would be a very strong argument for the construction of a bridge somewhere, probably 

half way between North Battleford and the Lee Park bridge in Alberta. Many hundreds of our lakes in 

northern Saskatchewan are not being utilized because of a lack of easy access to them. 

 

When we think of the additional revenue which would come to our province with an expanded tourist 

trade in the north, I believe this lends considerable impetus to serious consideration being given towards 

this route. 

 

Now, from time to time the northern Trans-Canada highway has been discussed in this legislature, 

however, it seems to me that it has not received the attention which it merits. And thus, Mr. 

Speaker, I have taken this opportunity of drawing it to the attention of the legislature today. 

 

Now, I listened rather carefully to the remarks of the mover and the seconder of this motion. I might say 

that a good deal has been done and, no doubt, will be done with regard to the freight rate problem in 

northern Saskatchewan, which the member for Saskatoon mentions as one of the drawbacks to 

increasing industry in our northern cities. And I, too, of course, feel that a northern Trans-Canada 

highway would do a great deal in this regard. 

 

So, very briefly then, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all of those individuals and associations throughout 

northern Saskatchewan, who have made considerable effort over the years, on behalf of a northern 

highway and then to the extent that 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

15 

the spirit of this motion would contribute towards such a route, I have pleasure in speaking in support of 

this motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I think I may have a comment or two I would like to 

make. I think it is a grand thing when we see this legislature bringing in such a motion as this, giving, I 

hope, unanimous support to a Liberal resolution which was passed in 1958, and I think someone said 

endorsing the policy of co-operation between Canada and the provinces in the construction of highways. 

 

This certainly is not new, and I think it was pointed out too, that if this pattern of co-operation between 

Ottawa and the provinces has extended a long way. The institution of the Trans-Canada Highway was a 

move in this direction, it is now near completion, and certainly we are interested in moves to expanding 

this field of building highways with co-operation between Ottawa and the provinces. Certainly, it is a 

theme that is being accepted across Canada; it is a thing that can be justified on the basis of linking 

Canada together through provincial and dominion co-operation. We have done it in other fields, in the 

field of health, in the field of social welfare, and construction of the Trans-Canada Highway and so 

forth. This is just a resolution endorsing the principle that has already been established in the hopes and 

desires that it will be carried on to greater fulfilment than it has as yet, and for that reason I have great 

pleasure in supporting this resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Willis (Minister of Highways and Transportation): — In rising to support the motion 

before the House, Mr. Speaker, first, I want to congratulate those on this side of the House who moved 

and seconded the motion, and brought it to the attention of the legislature, and secondly, to those on the 

other side of the House who have expressed support for federal assistance. 

 

We have had federal assistance here in Canada. First of all, we had an agreement in 1920 under the 

Canada highway act, where limited assistance was given to the various provinces in Canada to assist in 

laying out and designating the highway routes across the various provinces in Canada. 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

16 

We had assistance too, in the thirties, based upon relief work, where the whole idea behind the 

assistance given in the thirties was to provide jobs, no planning, no idea of just what was to be done, 

except the idea of providing work for people who were unemployed at this time. 

 

And then in 1950 we had the Trans-Canada agreement. Now this Trans-Canada agreement has been very 

beneficial to Canada as a whole. It has opened up a Trans-Canada route from Rupert Land across to 

Vancouver Island, in British Columbia. This has had many beneficial results across Canada. 

 

Now, Saskatchewan has benefited particularly from this. We had 406 miles of high-class highway 

extending from Manitoba border to the Alberta Border. 406 miles of high-class highway with the federal 

government giving us approximately 50 per cent of the cost of building this road. However, we in 

Saskatchewan, completed our section of the Trans-Canada Highway in 1957. Since 1957 we have had 

very little assistance from the federal government. The Trans-Canada agreement came into existence in 

1950 and it was supposed to end in 1957. We were the only province in Canada which had completed 

their section of the Trans-Canada by that time. Since 1957, the Trans-Canada agreement has been 

extended year by year, until now it is supposed to come to an end in December 31st, 1963. 

 

Since 1957, the Department of Highways in the government of Saskatchewan, has pressed for further 

assistance from the federal government. We have claimed there is a need for such assistance, to help the 

various provinces in providing high-class highways running not only east and west, connecting the 

various provinces, but running north and south throughout our provinces. We claim too, that we should 

have assistance to attract tourists to Saskatchewan, not only to Saskatchewan but to all the provinces in 

Canada. And there is no doubt it that another highway assistance program would be a major factor in 

alleviating unemployment problems in the future; for it is estimated that the labor content of road 

construction is in the order of 27 per cent of total expenditures, and this, Mr. Speaker, is only in regards 

to on-site labor, and there are many other indirect effects which are substantially greater than this 27 per 

cent. 

 

And then too, there are the benefits derived by secondary highway industry, where ever one sees a 

highway, a high-class highway is constructed across our country, service stations, motels, other 

industries, spring up to serve the tourist industry in the country. 

 

Another major reason for federal assistance has already been given by the seconder, in that today, 

federal governments collect from the owners of motor vehicles a very substantial sum. Since 1950 the 

federal government has collected through various taxes levied on motor vehicles, a total of 

approximately, $2 billion, $400 million. The Trans-Canada agreement itself is set out so that it would 

return to the 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

17 

provinces an amount of $400 million, and this is a very small amount, this $400 million when you 

consider that the federal government collects from motor vehicle owners an amount almost six times 

this. 

 

Now, for all of these reasons, we, here in Saskatchewan, have been pressing on the federal government 

the need for a second federal assistance program. 

 

Now, I would differ from the member from Turtleford, in that we do not want in this province, a 

highway system based on just one road. I know the association he has referred to, the Northern Trans-

Canada Association, there is another association called the Yellowhead Route Association, both 

associations very active in pushing for a second Trans-Canada through their area. Now we think this 

would be a mistake. We think there should be assistance from the federal government, but this assistance 

should be on our main roads, on our primary highway system, the roads which go north and south as 

well as east and west. We think that if we had assistance on just one road, we would be in exactly the 

same position as we were in the trans-Canada, where we finished our portion of the road very quickly, 

and then wait for the other provinces to finish theirs. Wait without any federal assistance. 

 

Now there is another reason here in that any assistance which would come from the federal government 

would have to be on a national basis, and I would submit, Mr. Speaker, that a second Trans-Canada, 

while it is applicable to western Canada, Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta and British Columbia, it 

would not have the same application to Ontario or the eastern provinces, and for this reason we would 

probably not have success in obtaining assistance on a second route from Ottawa. 

 

Now for these various reasons, Mr. Speaker, we have advocated further assistance from the federal 

government and on a network of highways within the province. A network of highways or a system 

based upon a similar set-up which they have in the States, which has already been referred to by either 

the mover or the seconder previously, where they have a net work of 41,000 miles in the states, where 

the federal government provides the state which does the work of building the roads, assistance up to 90 

per cent of the cost of the road. Now if we had such an assistance here, Mr. Speaker, on a net work of 

roads within Saskatchewan, a net work of roads which had connections with Manitoba on one hand and 

Alberta on the other; if we had substantial assistance percentage, say, up to 90 per cent, we in 

Saskatchewan here would really be in heaven, Mr. Speaker, as far as assistance for highways is 

concerned. 

 

I want to congratulate the members in the opposition who have indicated approval of this resolution, I 

am certain that all the members in this house will approve and that the motion here will be unanimous, 

and that our 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

18 

efforts here, would probably influence the federal government in setting up a federal assistance program. 

 

I could say further, before I sit down, Mr. Speaker, that there is unanimity among the highway ministers 

across Canada, as to the type of program which we should have in Canada. At the last Canadian Good 

Roads Association meeting in Quebec, the highway ministers assembled there, and I think there were 

eight out of 10 at that time, agreed to approach the federal government asking for federal assistance on 

the type of road assistance which I have outlined, that we in each of the provinces would agree with the 

federal government on a net work of roads, which we would build with federal assistance. We asked the 

president of the Canadian Good Roads Association, to arrange a meeting last December, with the federal 

government, this meeting didn’t come off because the president, the highways minister of Prince 

Edward Island, was occupied at the time in a provincial election, and now with the federal election 

coming up again, this meeting has been delayed, but I hope that shortly after the federal election that the 

highway ministers will be able to sit down with the federal government and work out an acceptable 

program, based upon not just one road across the four western provinces, but based upon assistance to a 

network of roads running east and west, north and south, in all of the provinces, thereby helping the 

economy of not only our various provinces, but of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure in supporting the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Foley: — Mr. Speaker, just for clarification, I wonder if the minister would answer a question? 

 

Did I understand him to say that he opposed the second northern Trans-Canada highway, or was it 

merely opposition to the method of financing? 

 

Mr. Willis: — I did not say that I opposed the northern Trans-Canada highway, Mr. Speaker. I would 

inform the house that the northern Trans-Canada highway has support from my constituency, it runs 

through my constituency, as well as the member for Turtleford. 

 

I do not oppose any improvement to any one road, 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

19 

but I do oppose the method of federal assistance based only on one road, that this assistance should be 

on a net work of roads within the province rather than just one road. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ROYAL COMMISSION ON PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 

 

Mr. W. R. Thatcher moved: 

 

That this house is of the opinion that the government should give consideration to appointing a 

commission to enquire into and report on organization and methods of operation of the departments 

and agencies of the Government of Saskatchewan and to recommend such changes as in the judgment 

of the Commission, will promote efficiency, economy and improved services in the dispatch of public 

business. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak on resolution no. 5 as it appears on the order paper. May 

I express the hope that it will receive the same degree of unanimity as the previous resolution did. 

 

This subject is a rather technical matter but I feel it has some importance at this time. The purpose of the 

resolution is to suggest methods of promoting efficiency and economy in the dispatch of public business. 

 

This resolution proposes the setting up of an independent and politically impartial committee, to 

investigate all aspects and phases of government spending in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Among other things, as I see it, this committee should endeavor to recommend first of all where savings 

in government could be effected; where expenditures could be reduced; where duplication and 

overlapping could be eliminated; where unnecessary operations, agencies, or branches could be 

curtailed. In other words it seems to me this commission could recommend how governments in general 

could be streamlined. 

 

I can’t see why even members on the government side could not support a resolution with those 

objectives. Now, Mr. Speaker, I am quite aware that this is not a new resolution. Some years ago the 

American government set up what came to be known as the Hoover Commission. It went all through the 

various government services, agencies and proposed major savings. As hon. members know, the Glassco 

Commission in Ottawa, a few years ago, was set up to do precisely the same thing. 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

20 

Now, the first three reports of the Glassco Commission have now been made public before the demise of 

the Twenty-Fifth Parliament; other recommendations will follow. It is still too early to say how much of 

the Glassco Commission’s reports will be adopted, that will depend, of course, on the next parliament. I 

have no hesitation in saying that there were some things which the Ottawa Commission recommended, 

with which I didn’t agree. However, I think no one will deny that the Glassco commissioners found 

numerous instances of waste and inefficiency, during their critical examination of government operation, 

and they pointed out many ways where future savings could be adopted in a variety of ways. 

 

The Glassco Commission reports indicate that if their recommendations are adopted, tens of millions of 

dollars could be saved at Ottawa. 

 

I think that all governments services are pretty much alike in their basic organization; their basic 

operation; regardless of the political stripe of a government, all are prone to the same weaknesses. 

Governments in office too long, like an old ship, accumulate barnacles, accumulate deadwood, and in 

consequence, even though the Glassco reports deals specifically with the federal service they are 

valuable as a guide to critical study of government services at the provincial level. 

 

Well, now, Mr. Speaker, since World War Two, in all Canadian provinces and at Ottawa, there has been 

a tremendous growth in governmental activities. There has been a huge expansion in government 

spending. Month by month in every single province this upward spiral continues. There is no indication 

that in the near future that trend is going to be reversed. 

 

No where have government costs gone up more rapidly in proportion than they have in our province of 

Saskatchewan, since 1944. In 1944 total government spending, that is overall spending, was $33 million. 

This year our gross provincial debt will exceed $560 million. Fifteen years ago the annual interest on our 

provincial debt was about $5 million. This coming year it will exceed $27 and ¼ million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the socialist budget a few days ago set a number of records; provided for the biggest 

spending, the greatest debt, the highest interest and the highest taxes in the history of this province. 

 

This huge increase in spending, of course, inevitably has been accompanied by ever-expanding taxation. 

There is no magic in government finance. In government as in business, before you can give a dollar to 

one person, you have to take that dollar away from another person. Indeed, I think it might be truer to 

say that before a government can give a 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

21 

dollar to one person, by the time the bureaucrats get through with it, they have to take away a dollar and 

a half. Now the Liberal party in this province, has consistently maintained that the tax burden on the 

back of the Saskatchewan taxpayer has long since reached dangerous and oppressive levels, has long 

since reached the danger point. We maintain that excessive provincial taxation is hindering industrial 

development and it is endangering our employment opportunities. 

 

Now, I’m not going in to the whole tax field at this time, but I want to state the reasons why I believe 

that some kind of an independent commission is needed to be set up in this province. I want to remind 

hon. members of some of the increases in taxes that have been made in recent years in this province. 

Sales tax, back in 1944, my socialist friends promised that if they were elected to power they would 

eliminate the 2 per cent sales tax, instead of that in 1950 they increased it to 3 per cent, and then last 

year to 5 per cent. 

 

And I want to remind hon. members that back in 1944, this tax was only taking $4½ million from the 

pockets of our taxpayers, this year the sales tax will take $37½ million. Under this government the 

gasoline tax has gone from 7¢ a gallon, today it is 17¢ a gallon; or I could mention land and property 

taxes. My hon. friends back in the depression years and in the war years, promised that if they were 

elected they were going to eliminate, at least they were going to ease the tax burden on the farmer, and 

on the property owner. Instead of easing it, since they took office, land and property taxes on an average 

in this province have gone up about four times. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Can’t hear you, Ross. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Or as I mentioned the other day, Income Tax. Under my hon. friends, every 

Saskatchewan citizen this year as he fills out his income tax, finds out that he will be paying 6 per cent 

more than people in eight other provinces. Well, one could go on and on. 

 

Whether it is liquor taxes; whether it is corporation taxes; whether it is mineral taxes; or whether it is 

some other tax field, Saskatchewan is always high on the totem pole. 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

22 

We in the opposition have repeatedly pointed out that since 1944, under my hon. friends opposite, there 

have been 600 new taxes and levies, 650 increased taxes and levies. Now, Liberals believe, Mr. Speaker, 

that this trend cannot continue indefinitely. We believe that the very well-being of our province makes it 

imperative that some way must be found to alleviate or at least ease, the tax burden on the hard pressed 

Saskatchewan citizen. 

 

We are realistic enough to know that if taxes are to be cut, government spending also must be cut. 

Where and how could government spending be reduced in a major way? 

 

We Liberals have certain definite ideas in this connection. Liberal members will make the major 

decisions in this field if we should form a government. But before we make those decisions, we would 

like to have the viewpoint of independent experts. Surely there is nothing unusual about this proposal. 

Private industry, time and again, calls in efficiency experts to go over their various operations. 

 

This very government back in 1947, called in efficiency experts — the George M. May Company of 

Chicago. We in the Liberal party are not particularly concerned about the exact method or the mechanics 

that will be used, although personally, I believe that a commission type of investigation of every agency 

and department, might prove to be the best way to begin. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am quite aware that the classical way of pushing a problem aside is to refer it to 

some kind of a commission. This is certainly not our desire nor our intention. We want an independent 

body to do a comprehensive survey. We want that body to make specific recommendations as to how we 

can best achieve government economy, and then we hope and intend to act upon as many of those 

recommendations as seem feasible to us. Now, the premier and the government have shown little 

interest in this suggestion, indeed, I think the Premier speaking in the throne speech expressed 

opposition to a Glassco type investigation in this province. Small wonder, Mr. Speaker, because the 

results for the socialists of this kind of an investigation would be spectacular and devastating, such a 

report would probably shake the administration of my hon. friends to its very foundation, because a 

swollen bureaucracy after two decades in office, naturally fears the consequences of this type of an 

investigation. 

 

However, I am quite convinced that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan would see a good deal of merit in an 

impartial investigation. Now, the government has a bill on the order paper providing for a public 

administration foundation. We think that bill was only put there as an . . . 

 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

23 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. The hon. member is aware that he cannot discuss the bill on this debate. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I realize that, Mr. Speaker, but I wanted to point out Mr. Speaker, why we think an 

independent commission would be infinitely more effective than the kind of board which my hon. friend 

the minister is proposing. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The proposed bill can be debated at a later date, not on this occasion. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — All right, Mr. Speaker, I will accept your ruling. But what are some of the tasks that 

the commission which we envisage, would undertake. I want to suggest three or four this afternoon, first 

of all, I think an independent commission if it was set up, should begin their operation by investigating 

the activities of the dozens of boards and bureaus and agencies, that have been set up since 1944 by my 

hon. friends. Is each performing a useful service? Is each one required in the public interest? Is each a 

necessity? Or does it fall in the category of a luxury or a frill expenditure? Socialists appear to see in 

these various boards the means of imposing a planned economy on the province. Speaking again in the 

throne debate, the premier said ―Saskatchewan doesn’t need a Glassco type commission because we 

have already adopted. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. I don’t think the hon. member should be referring constantly to the statements 

made in the throne speech or the budget. I realize sometimes a reference . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — All right, Mr. Speaker, the premier has also said this in various speeches around the 

province, according to newspaper reports; that we don’t need a Glassco commission because this 

administration has already done things that the Glassco commission recommends. For example, the 

premier said on one occasion, out on the hustings, that Saskatchewan already had a Budget Bureau, it 

already had a Treasury Board and so on. 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

24 

Well, it is quite true that we have a Budget Bureau, and it is quite true that we have a Treasury Board. I 

want to suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that they certainly haven’t been very effective ones; because the 

Budget Bureau, the Treasury Board and the fifteen cabinet ministers opposite have been completely 

ineffective in controlling expenditures in our province. It has gone up eleven or twelve times since they 

took office. Every year we bring in a budget, it goes up a few million more. I say that there is nothing in 

Saskatchewan today, that needs investigation as badly as does our Budget Bureau. With what activities 

do they occupy their time? Do they make any constructive proposals for controlling expenditures and if 

they do, who is responsible for relegating their proposals into the discard? 

 

Well, then I have heard a few of my hon. friends opposite say ―We don’t need a Glassco commission, 

because it recommends a purchasing board — we have already got a purchasing board. Personally, I 

support the principle of a purchasing board, I think it is sound. However, the activities of the 

Saskatchewan purchasing board, in my opinion, require some kind of investigation, because its policies 

are frequently determined more by political influences than they are by the needs of business. For 

example, I think our government is paying more for its printing than it needs to pay if they called for 

tenders. Extensive purchasing is being done by the purchasing board from co-operatives; frequently at 

higher prices than the same merchandise could be obtained elsewhere. Now we have no objection 

whatever to purchasing being made from co-ops, if that business is given on a competitive basis and on 

a fair basis, but we do object to this government, or any agency, paying more to co-operatives for 

merchandise than they could obtain it for elsewhere. 

 

Now in the Crown Corporations, Mr. Speakers. The bus company, the minister of highways indicated 

that the bus company hasn’t called tenders for seven years, for the purchase of gasoline or diesel fuel. 

We say that they could get that diesel fuel and gas cheaper if they would call for tenders and I will prove 

that to the minister of highways on some future occasion, if he will let me. Certainly, it is their duty at 

least, to call for tenders in cases of that kind. Now there is one other thing. 

 

Mr. Willis: — We did. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Yes, you did seven years ago. It is seven years since you called for tenders. You are 

not interested in getting the best deal for the taxpayer that you can. 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

25 

There is one other feature which is causing concern in Saskatchewan, as far as these boards and agencies 

are concerned. Increasingly some of these boards are taking on to themselves the functions of our courts. 

Even the functions of this legislature. For example, I remind the house that there are some decisions of 

the labour relations board, the liquor board, workmen’s compensation board, which are frequently not 

subject to appeal. The process, it seems to me, that certain of our basic freedoms are being trampled on, 

and I believe that this commission should decide whether their arbitrary boards’ powers should not be 

discontinued, and moreover, I believe that the commission should investigate whether every board and 

agency is accounting to the legislature in the proper manner. 

 

Now the second thing I would like to see this commission do if it were set up, is to have a full 

investigation of all advertising and all literature, which is turned out by the government or any of its 

agencies, including pamphlets, bulletins, leaflets, and so on. The Glassco commission at Ottawa found 

that literally hundreds and thousands of bulletins, pamphlets, etc., were distributed from parliament or 

from Ottawa, many of them with very dubious facts. 

 

Well, if this was true in Ottawa, I believe, Sir, that it is certainly true in Saskatchewan. Many of the 

bulletins, many of the pamphlets, that come out from Regina, are merely consigned to the waste paper 

baskets by their recipients. 

 

Dozens of the reports I have seen have little value, except for the sake of propaganda put out by my hon. 

friends opposite. 

 

Opposition: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — So I believe that a commission should thoroughly analyze the need and utility value 

of every piece of literature put out by the government, put out by its agencies, or put out by the crown 

corporations. 

 

Over the years this administration spends hundreds of thousands of dollars on advertising. According to 

a return tabled in the legislature last year, Mr. Speaker, Sessional paper 139, much of this business was 

given to two agencies, owned or controlled by Mr. George Bothwell. 

 

Last year $153,000 of this business. Now Mr. Bothwell, is of course the publicity chairman of my hon. 

friend’s party, long time party worker. We maintain that this kind of giving of business is unethical. I 

would like to see the commission look into the reasons why Mr. Bothwell has been getting all this 

business without any tenders being called. 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

26 

Another thing I think the commission should do, is look into the matter of political patronage — hiring 

of the civil servants. The Glassco commission was concerned with the influence of political patronage as 

government employees were hired. 

 

I would like to quote one paragraph from the Ottawa report — 

 

The Glassco Commission said the government has a special problem not encountered by employers 

generally in recruiting for the public service. The pressure of improper influence on appointments. 

Such influence can seriously impair the quality of the public service, and the need for special 

machinery has gained wide public acceptance. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if patronage impairs the quality of the public service under the federal government, it 

must be ruinous here in the province of Saskatchewan, because no provincial government since 

Confederation, with the possible exception of the Duplessis government in Quebec, has ever used 

patronage to the extent that my hon. friends opposite use it. Large numbers of CCF defeated candidates, 

both provincially and federally, have been put on the payroll. Several defeated candidates from other 

provinces have been put on the payroll. I think at the moment of Mr. Cass-Beggs. Sons! Daughters! 

Friends! Relatives of cabinet ministers, have repeatedly been put on the public payroll. 

 

Back in 1944 the socialists promised to take politics out of the civil service. Instead we say they have 

put politics into the civil service. Advancements frequently are made, depending not on how much you 

know, but on who you know. When the top jobs are passed out repeatedly civil servants complain, that 

only the defeated candidates, or the left-wingers, or the pinks, need apply. Years of seniority have very 

often meant very little as far as this government is concerned when advances in the civil service are 

being made. 

 

As I pointed out earlier in this session, Mr. Speaker, when my hon. friends held a convention in 

Saskatoon, a year ago, they said even this isn’t enough, we think that every civil servant appointment 

should be made only after he has been checked through and found that he is politically okay. 

 

I say then that if an investigation was needed at Ottawa as far as patronage is concerned it is certainly 

needed here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The next item, I think an independent commission should investigate, is what the Glassco commission 

called 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

27 

the ―make or buy‖ problem. The Glassco Commission was concerned with the expensive manner in 

which governments and agencies were doing the work and producing articles which might have been 

purchased at a much cheaper price from private enterprise. The Glassco Commission found that the ―do 

it yourself‖ trend in the federal service was proving more costly to the taxpayers, than if the government 

used private suppliers and manufacturers. True actual costs, said the Glassco Commission, would 

frequently be 50 per cent more or greater than the figure provided in governmental accounts. The 

practice of making goods led to fixed commitments in staff and equipment which could not be adjusted 

to changes in requirements, and this led to the use of ―make work‖ techniques, to keep the staffs and the 

equipment employed. 

 

In other words Parkinson’s law began to work. Work had to be expanded to fill the time allowed, and 

the Glassco Commission points out that this kind of governmental operation is prejudicial to the position 

of the privately owned business sector. It withholds from it a volume of business and it also deprives the 

government of the revenue which could be obtained from those privately owned businesses if they did 

the work. 

 

Now, if all those things applied in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, again I say, how much more do they apply in 

the province of Saskatchewan? Because our socialist government engages in all sorts of activities, which 

probably could better be done better by private enterprise. 

 

More than in any other province, our government has embarked on an extensive program of having done 

work by government agencies, which customarily is done by private concerns. For instance, my hon. 

friend the Minister of Highways, as much of the maintaining and building of roads is done by the 

government instead of calling for tenders. Government is in the business of automobile repairs; the 

government has put in most of the bridges in this province; the government provides northern air 

service; much of the government’s printing is done by a Crown corporation; the construction industry 

together with several unions, recently pointed out that Saskatchewan Power Corporation, by doing its 

own work in certain fields was paying about 50 per cent more than that same work could have been 

done by private enterprise. 

 

And so I say that I believe that one of the duties of an independent commission, such as we recommend, 

would be to expose the real costs of government in business and to recommend which activity should be 

returned to private enterprise. 

 

A Glassco-type commission, such as we suggest, should look into all of our Crown corporations. It is 

quite true that our crown corporations go through the motions of 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

28 

reporting to the Crown corporations committee, and to this legislature, once every year. However, the 

government’s attitude has been to provide a minimum of information for curious opposition members, 

especially in the vital field of spending. Repeatedly we are told, when we ask for information that it 

would not be in the public interests to divulge that information. 

 

We claim that cabinet ministers and the government must accept the responsibility for the spending of 

these corporations, and we also believe that there should be a greater financial accountability to this 

legislature, by each of those corporations. 

 

Now, in Saskatchewan, each of our Crown corporations has a director. Time and again, we have found 

that there are no businessmen on those directorates. Instead the directorates is made up of a number of 

members of the government, a few civil servants, and a few of the party faithful. Now, we think that 

there are dangers in that practice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These, many of them, are million dollar enterprises, Mr. Speaker. They are spending millions of the 

taxpayers’ money. Yet they are being run in many cases by theorists who have little or no business 

experience. So I believe that one of the major tasks of the commission such as we suggest would be to 

thoroughly examine all of our Crown corporations. They should make recommendations as to their 

efficiency, et cetera., and state whether or not it is in the public interests for each operation to be 

continued. 

 

I repeat that the main job of reducing expenditures must continue to remain with members of the 

legislature. However, I believe that a commission of experts could give our members valuable and much 

needed guidance. For thirteen years the practice of this government has been to engage in ever greater 

spending and ever greater debt creation. They have left future governments and generations the legacy 

of paying the shot. Now, we hope and expect, to take over the government after the next election, when 

my hon. friends get their courage up to call one. 

 

We are determined when we form a government to have a program of fair going reform and taxes. 

However, before we commence that kind of a program we would like to know precisely what kind of a 

muddle we are inheriting. We want a revelation of the inefficiencies, the waste, which exist. We need 

expert recommendation respecting proposed remedies. 

 

Now, for all these reasons, Mr. Speaker, we ask for the immediate appointment of a competent, 

independent commission. If we don’t get that kind of a commission now we shall be obliged to appoint 

one as a necessary first 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

29 

measure to reorganizing government activities when we take office after the next election. 

 

We take the position, and I suppose my hon. friends won’t, but we take the position that the public good 

far transcends in importance any desire that the government may have to conceal the consequences of its 

incompetence. 

 

Therefore, I hope that the house will unanimously see fit to support this resolution, and I should like to 

move, seconded by the hon. member for Prince Albert: 

 

That this house is of the opinion that the government should give consideration to the appointment of a 

commission to inquire into, and report on organization and methods of operation of the departments 

and agencies of the government of Saskatchewan. To recommend such changes as in the judgment of 

the commission will promote efficiency, economy and improved service in the dispatch of public 

business. 

 

Mr. Johnson: — When the mover of the motion began, he, of course, started on a topic that is of very 

considerable interest to this house, and he started off in a manner in which he indicated that he expected 

the house to give considerable agreement to this motion, and at the beginning I might have been 

prepared to. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, as he ended up I found that I was listening more to a Liberal campaign speech 

than to a motion that I could have a great deal of sympathy with, and therefore, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave 

to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS PROCEDURES 

 

Mr. E. A. Johnson moved:: 

 

That this Assembly recommends to the consideration of the government that a special committee be 

appointed to examine into and evaluate the function, terms of reference and methods of the Select 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts and Printing, and the adequacy of the information and 

assistance provided to the committee in its work of examining the public accounts, and to report 

thereon with recommendations to the Assembly at the next session; the said special committee to be 

empowered to consult with the Provincial Auditor, officials of the treasury and other departments, to 

gather information from other jurisdictions, and to sit after prorogation. 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

30 

Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, I think the matter of the performance of the legislatures and parliaments, 

is a matter of great concern to all such bodies, and I certainly share that interest and concern, and to 

review a bit of past history. I would call the attention of the house that in 1961, in that session, I 

introduced a motion to this house, which called for the investigation and study of a very important 

committee of legislative and parliamentary procedure, and this very important committee that I wish to 

have studied is that of the Public Accounts Committee. It is one of the most important agencies through 

which parliament can maintain control and scrutiny of finances and the money that has been spent. 

 

Now, apparently, Mr. Speaker, the intent of my motion was misunderstood, and it did not receive the 

support of at least some members of the opposition, because I felt that such a committee, if it was to be 

effective, needed the co-operation and support of the entire House, and for those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I 

withdrew this motion. And now, Mr. Speaker, I have given further thought to this matter, and I have had 

further conversations with many people who know a great deal more about it than I do, and I discussed 

this matter also with many members who have been on the Public Accounts Committee. And I feel more 

strongly than I did before that a motion such as the one I am about to present is very desirable, and I 

hope that I can convince the House of this matter. 

 

The reasons I will emphasize again why it is important, is that in the post-audit scrutiny of expenditures, 

parliaments and legislatures usually assign this function to a committee that is known as the Public 

Accounts Committee, and these committees, of course, exist in the British House of Commons, and in 

the Canadian House of Commons, and also in the legislatures across Canada. 

 

I don’t need to dwell at great length on our own committee, because I believe every member in this 

house has had some experience with it; either having been a member, or having been a cabinet minister 

before. 

 

I believe that many of the members have had experience with the Public Accounts Committee, have 

found some feeling of dissatisfaction, and I find that some of these reasons for this dissatisfaction are as 

follows. 

 

One of the first apparent reasons for dissatisfaction is that there is, let us say, a disagreement within the 

committee as to its scope, and this could also be expressed by saying that at times usually the committee 

has not had an understanding of a sense of direction as to what its scope and function should actually be 

in the context of parliamentary scrutiny and control of finance. 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

31 

I think this is evident by the nature of some of the questions — very often we will find questions like 

this asked ―Who is so and so, and what are her qualifications?‖ rather than a reference to the actual 

authority for money that has been spent, and whether parliament has given its assent to the expenditure 

in that way. 

 

And I believe, therefore, Mr. Speaker, to help resolve this, I think it is desirable to establish a legislative 

committee that would look into the scope and function of the committee, and make recommendations in 

accordance with this resolution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think further criticism is possible, that there is room for doubt as to the effectiveness of 

this committee. Of course public accounts committees are the creatures of the assembly of parliament 

which appoints them; committees must report to that body and we can find very often or usually, some 

gauge of their effectiveness and work in the report, and I find that in perusing the reports of the Public 

Accounts Committee to this Assembly, in most years, it has simply been a routine report. There are 

some exceptions during the Anderson government, and so on, but usually the report has been routine, 

and of course, one can gather from this information either one of two possibilities, that everything has 

gone on as it was intended to, or one can also assume that there is room for believing perhaps the 

committee has not always been entirely effective. 

 

A further criticism might be that the committee itself is too large. I am sure that all members that have 

done work on other committees, and certainly in my own view, and in the view of many of whom I have 

talked this matter over with, a committee of 35, which has been the usual size of our Public Accounts 

Committee is rather large for good committee work. And in relation to this many members have the 

feeling that this committee, as it has been functioning, has been wasteful of the time of members. 

 

I’m not saying primarily that the time of members, as such should be saved, but I am saying that while 

we are in session that we should use the time that we have at our disposal to absolutely the best 

advantage, and there is quite a strong feeling that this time is not being used as well as possible. 

 

A further criticism of this committee, is that it is usually quite partisan; and we find, of course, the 

committee divided into two ranks, and this is not conducive to good committee work. It may be utopian 

to think that this can be eliminated in a party system of government, however, if we refer to the British 

public accounts committee, I believe, there is room for holding this view. 

 

Another very minor criticism I have of it, is that in our own committee, it is called the Select Standing 

Committee 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

32 

of Public Accounts and Printing and I don’t see any reason why printing is included, it is only a small 

encumbrance, but it seems that there are other committees that perhaps could do this work more 

appropriately and leave the public accounts committee for the purer function of scrutinizing the post-

audit of expenditures. 

 

I could also add that the work of the committee is often superficial; we deal with a large number of 

figures; we deal with an immense book on figures, which in my own opinion, well published, but it is an 

overwhelming job to try to cover this book as perhaps it should be done. 

 

I should also add in favor of the committee that very often it has been an instrument of dispensing a very 

considerable amount of information to, especially, newer members of the committee. This is something 

that has been done. However, this should only be incidental to a committee, and I suggest that a public 

accounts committee should have its role clearly defined and that if it is one of examining the post-audit 

of expenditures that the main function, therefore, shouldn’t be one of simply disseminating information. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would expect that members having heard a criticism of this, would have to have 

reasons for assuming that some other action is possible. Some other way of doing this committee is 

possible. 

 

And I don’t presume to encroach upon what might be the conclusions of the committee, should the 

house see fit to pass this motion, and should the government see fit to act upon it. I don’t presume to 

encroach upon that field, however, I have gained a good deal of very helpful information from the 

comptroller of the federal treasury, Mr. Herbert R. Balls, who presented a most excellent paper to the 

Institute of Public Administration, which meeting was held in Regina last September. It was with a very 

considerable willpower that I detached myself from my combine seat on that day, I did come into the 

meeting and I benefited from it very much. And Mr. Balls, dwelt on public accounts committees 

generally, and he spent a considerable amount of time describing the British public accounts committee. 

 

This committee has been in its more or less modern state since the year 1861, it has been aided by the 

legislation of the exchequer and audit Act of 1866, and they have had a good deal of experience in the 

committee of the mother of parliaments. 

 

I think I should pass on some of the information I derived from the presentation of Mr. Balls. Observe 

that the British public accounts committee is a relatively small one of 15 rather than our committee of 

35, the one in the federal house of 50. And it is also observed that on this committee the government 

members don’t feel that it is necessary at all times to have a majority on it; this is rather interesting. It 

has been the practice to have this 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

33 

committee chaired by a member of the opposition, and I think there is some merit in that. The committee 

meets in camera, and the committee in its hearings deals with the permanent departmental officials, 

rather than with the minister in charge. I think members will gather that this would have some 

advantages. And even though the committee meets in camera, there is still full opportunity for the 

publication of reports, because publicity must play a part, in lets say, the possible deterrent effect that a 

committee might have. Another comment that Mr. Balls makes on the British public accounts 

committee, is that in any recommendations that it passes on, it is restrained and moderate, and in this 

way it maintains the co-operation and sympathy of the departments of government. 

 

And something else that Mr. Balls comments on, is that the scope of the committee has been quite 

precisely defined and this is something that I believe to be most essential, and the committee does 

receive, of course, considerable assistance from the department of the comptroller and the auditor-

general. 

 

Now these are some of the characteristics of the British public accounts committee, which in the opinion 

of Mr. Balls, and I am sure in the opinion of many, has been outstandingly successful as a committee. 

 

And Mr. Balls comments also in his report that it has been able to work in quite a non-partisan way, and 

I think this is encouraging; I feel that some of our committees do work in a non-partisan way, and there, 

of course, have been some special committees that have done remarkably good work, such as the Liquor 

Inquiry Committee that was comprised of members of all parties, and which has done remarkably good 

work in handling a particular problem. 

 

For those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by Mr. Thiessen: 

 

That this Assembly recommends to the consideration of the government that a special committee be 

appointed to examine into, and to evaluate the functions, terms of reference and methods of the Select 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts and Printing and the adequacy of the information and 

assistance provided to the committee in its work of examining the public accounts, and to report thereon 

with recommendations to the assembly at the next session; the said special committee to be empowered 

to consult with the Provincial Auditor, officials of the treasury and other departments, to gather 

information from other jurisdictions, and to sit after prorogation. 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

34 

Mr. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I must be in a very congenial mood today, because we 

have had three motions, and I find myself in agreement with all three, and on this particular one here, I 

take it from the resolution that this special committee will be a committee composed of the members of 

the legislature, to give some further service to the study of public accounts, and how to improve the 

efficiency of the Public Accounts Committee. 

 

As I understand the resolution, the committee is to examine and evaluate the function of the Public 

Accounts Committee and the terms of reference of the Public Accounts Committee, as to whether or not 

the terms of reference are broad enough. Something of the method of selecting the committee, besides 

ways and means; something to evaluate the adequacy or otherwise, of the information provided to the 

members of the committee, and whether or not we have adequate assistance available to the members in 

their analysis and work of the examining of the accounts of the public accounts. 

 

I have felt for some years past that the Public Accounts Committee as composed at present, and the 

manner in which we proceed to examine these accounts, have not met my judgment of what a public 

accounts committee should do, and I will be frank in stating that I think for some two or three years, 

now, I haven’t found myself even induced to sit on the Public Accounts Committee because I couldn’t 

see the value of the work that they were doing. 

 

I think that as members of the legislature, these committees could be revised in such a way so that 

members in doing their work could make a real contribution, not only to the analysis, but to the 

understanding and to the suggestions to the legislature in connection with the work that they have 

completed. 

 

I don’t believe the present method is adequate, at all. I think we could find a much superior form of 

outlining the information to the committee, than in the present way of reporting. I think there is a lot of 

inconsequential material in the Public Accounts Committee, which is, in my opinion, not necessary. I 

think that on the other hand there could be much more vital information given that the committee could 

do a job on in assessing. 

 

Probably the terms of reference should be broadened, in order that we can call for further assistance if 

need be. At any rate, I do believe that it is time we had a full investigation or study of the needs first, if 

need be, of a public accounts committee, and secondly, if it is decided that a public accounts committee 

is worth while, and makes a contribution to the work of the legislature, 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

35 

than to set forth some terms and conditions and material, in order that a public accounts committee could 

make a worthwhile contribution to governing of the province, and to the information of the members of 

the Assembly. 

 

I think there is a great weakness here. I cannot consciously feel that the Public Accounts Committee, and 

the material that we have at our disposal, is of any great advantage to the members in assessing the 

activities of the government in making contributions towards the governing of the province. 

 

For that reason, I would welcome such a study of public accounts, in the hope that we could bring in 

something more vital, streamlined in some extent, in order to give the members better public accounts 

submitted to them, to get more information, and worth while contributions as a result of it, and thus, to 

gather information and to give information, and to add to the improvement of the understanding of the 

functions of government debates in the legislature, in order that we may have better, more efficient, and 

more enlightening government than we have. 

 

For that reason I am very happy to support the resolution. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I would just like to say one or two words on this motion. First of all I would like to 

congratulate the hon. member for Kerrobert-Kindersley, in the way he presented this resolution. I will 

say very frankly, last year when it came in, I had some doubts about it. However, like the hon. member 

for Maple Creek, I think that if there is any way that we can streamline the public accounts, if there is 

any superior way that we can handle them, or if there are any better rules that could be adopted, then we 

would certainly support them. 

 

At the same time, I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I am certainly one who believes there is a place for a 

public accounts committee in this legislature. I think the hon. member for Kerrobert-Kindersley, said 

that some hon. members think the public accounts is wasteful. I can’t agree with that at all. I think the 

Public Accounts Committee is what each member makes it. If you want to do your homework, which 

entails a lot of work, and go into that committee prepared, you can do something useful for the 

legislature in the province. 

 

Of course, if hon. members want to go into that committee, and not having done their homework, just 

look at a page, and a figure here and there, and ask some obvious questions, not very much can be 

accomplished. 

 

Now, I believe firmly that the main duty of the opposition is to scrutinize expenditures. Now, if we don’t 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

36 

do this effectively we are not doing the job we should be doing. Whether we do it in public accounts, 

whether we do it in estimates, or anywhere else, the main job of the opposition is still to scrutinize 

expenditures. Now, when this committee reports, I would hope that it would make certain that none of 

the rights of the opposition to perform that function, were curtailed in any way. I’m all for having the 

public accounts committee made more efficient; we are all for having it more streamlined; I for one 

would certainly hope that no thought would be given to throwing out the public accounts committee 

altogether. 

 

I believe the hon. member for Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) wishes to speak on this matter. He is out of 

the house this afternoon, and I will ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Second Readings 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker moved second reading of Bill No. 45 — An Act Respecting Insurance Against Certain 

Losses Resulting From Certain Vehicle Accidents be now read the second time. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Perhaps the first principle which I should refer to in this new bill, Mr. Speaker, is that 

the government is interested in maintaining the clarity of the ease of access to the law by those who have 

copies of the statute. 

 

We want to ensure that the provisions of the Act are as readily available as possible to members of the 

public, who are interested in reading it. Anyone who looks at The Automobile Accident Insurance Act, 

chapter 371 of the revised statutes of 1953, together with the amendments, passed in the 1954-’55-’57-

’58-’60 and 1962, will agree I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that a consolidation of this Act will make for 

greater ease and convenience for the public in dealing with the Act. 

 

Before turning to the changes in the act, I would like to say something about the plan, the insurance plan 

which was brought into being when this act was first passed about 15 years ago. 

 

One cannot read journals of proceedings in court and other jurisdictions, without becoming aware of the 

very great problem that this is causing; that the backlog of legal cases is causing in the courts of other 

states and provinces. 

 

It is also significant, Mr. Speaker, that a large number of the victims of automobile accidents in other 

jurisdictions, are being left without compensation, or if they have compensation, then it is limited to the 

amount of financial 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

37 

solvency of the person who was the cause of the accident. These problems of congestion in the courts, 

and lack of compensation for a large percentage of accident victims, rouses the anxiety of lawyers, 

particularly, who are confronted with clients suffering from these problems. But highway safety minded 

people can hardly meet together at conferences, discussions, without commenting upon the seriousness 

of this problem. 

 

Every time I go to a national highway safety conference I am struck by the frequency of the comments 

that come from safety officials, lawyers, people in the insurance fields, and other parts of Canada, who 

are urging that some kind of plan of automatic compensation, something similar to the one which was 

pioneered in this province, should be introduced in other parts of Canada. 

 

I think the time is coming close when we will see either a co-operative venture, shared in by the 

insurance companies and the governments of other provinces, to provide a universal compulsory auto 

insurance in other parts of Canada will launch some kind of universal compulsory auto insurance in 

other parts of Canada. The virtues of that kind of plan, the obvious advantages of this kind of plan, are 

so great that I find it difficult to understand why other jurisdictions have taken so long in adopting this 

type of scheme. 

 

The Saskatchewan plan is unique and distinct from almost any other kind of automobile insurance that 

you will find in North America, in several respects. 

 

Firstly, it is sold practically without acquisition costs. The cost of agent’s fees are practically 

nonexistent, because it is sold along with something that has to be sold anyway. 

 

The terms of the policy are certain and clear. No one needs to be in doubt about the major coverages 

included in the policy. They are covered in detail in the statute, available to everybody, and summarized 

briefly on the back of the automobile licence. This is much more convenient than any kind of insurance 

policy can possibly be, for the convenience of the policy holder. 

 

The second difference, Mr. Speaker, is that in other provinces, an injured motorist can recover 

compensation only if he can find some other person who is legally accountable for the injury. Some 

person who is to blame for the accident, and then the amount to be recovered is limited by the financial 

responsibility or by the public liability insurance policy, which that person may have. 

 

No amount of public liability property insurance can provide the financial benefits which the policy 

holder under our plan gets, under Part 2 of the Act. You can have any amount of ordinary automobile 

insurance and you get no benefit if your car blows a tire and you roll over and are injured. Your 

dependents get no benefits. If through no 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

38 

fault of anyone else, you are killed in an automobile accident, under Part 2 of this plan, where a licensed 

motorist blows a tire, rolls a car over, and is unfortunate enough to be killed in the accident, his 

dependent wife, merely on proof of the death, and that he was insured under this plan, is entitled to 

receive $5000 for herself compensation and a $1000 for each of her dependent children. 

 

If he is injured, he will receive financial out-of-work benefits, or he will receive, and he may receive 

disability benefits as well. These benefits are not available under any other kind of automobile insurance 

that can be purchased anywhere in North America. 

 

Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, under part 2 of the act, there is no necessity for the injured person to incur court 

costs, legal fees, in order to recover. Because there is really no legal question involved, under part 2 of 

the Act. 

 

Under liability insurance, as it exists elsewhere, the injured person or the dependents must establish 

liability on the part of someone else. This is a complicated and difficult thing, requiring the use of the 

courts, or at least the services of a lawyer. Under Part 2 of the Act, as I have already said, the fact of the 

death, the fact that the vehicle was insured, is all that needs to be proven. This removes a very 

substantial area from litigation in our courts. It is this kind of litigation that is clogging the courts of our 

big metropolitan centres, making it impossible to get compensation in many cases for years afterwards. 

 

A fourth advantage of our plan, Mr. Speaker, is the administrative costs are extraordinarily low. Since 

the plan is administered by the Saskatchewan Government Insurance office, in conjunction with its 

regular commercial operations. We have evidence that the private insurance companies in other parts of 

Canada, and in Saskatchewan, and in other parts of North America, require to devote approximately 52 

per cent or 50 per cent of their premium income to cover acquisition costs, administration costs, and the 

costs for the adjustments. In contrast, under our plan in Saskatchewan, all these three things in 

categories of costs, add up to less than 20 per cent of the premium income. 

 

This plan is also remarkable for the fact that it is one of the few insurance plans in North America, that 

is run entirely without profit, on a non-profit basis. Surpluses from the good years are placed in reserves, 

and accrued to the fund to cover losses in the bad years. If we had operated this plan every year, with a 

view to providing a profit, Mr. Speaker, the premiums would have been higher. Last year they would 

have been higher than the year before than they actually were. 

 

Indeed, if we expected to make a profit next year, we would have to levy higher premiums than we 

propose in fact to levy next year. 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

39 

The earnings from investments in this fund are used for a reduction in premiums. Since the plan began, 

some 2½ million dollars has been earned as interest income on the investment reserve plan. 

 

This 2½ million dollars has been reflected in lower premium levies on the motorists of Saskatchewan. 

Because this plan covers all the motorists in Saskatchewan, the concentration of customers in any given 

area is high, where as any private concern company would be lucky if they had ten percent of the 

motorists in any area as their customers, this plan has 100 per cent. This makes it possible . . . 

 

Mrs. M. Batten (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to interrupt the hon. member but I thought 

we had a ruling the other day on these Bills and I just want clarification on it, if it doesn’t disturb the 

attorney-general. 

 

I realize that this is a consolidation of a Bill, but I would think that it were logical for the ruling that you 

gave the other day, Mr. Speaker, that the principles be discussed on second reading is that of the 

amendment, whatever changes are being brought. Surely this shouldn’t open up the entire Bill, and as I 

understand it, the amendments are very small, and not particularly pertinent to the entire opening of the 

Bill and discussing the principle of the original Bill. 

 

If it is your ruling, of course, that when a bill is consolidated, we start all over again and discuss the 

thing in theory; I would like to have a ruling because this subject will, no doubt, come up again with 

other Bills. 

 

Mr. J. H. Brockelbank: — I think it is quite correct that the whole Act, in the form of a Bill, is before 

the Assembly and this can quite properly be discussed. I realize the implications of this ruling because 

next year for example, we bring in a consolidation of the education and health tax, my hon. friends, the 

Leader of the Opposition, will have a field day; but what is a rule for one should be a rule for another. I 

think that the attorney-general is right now, and any other Bill that is brought in as a consolidation, I 

think the whole subject is there. 

 

Mr. Walker: — On a point of order. The amendment is there merely when an amendment is 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

40 

introduced merely, it is perfectly clear that the amendment is before the House, and that one would 

discuss contents of the Bill itself, only if they were relevant to the amendment itself. Well, I submit, Mr. 

Speaker, here that there is no question about that, because this Bill repeals all the old Act, it repeals all 

the amendments to the old Act, and substitutes a completely new set, and I submit that this is what is 

before the house, Mr. Speaker, and this is what is going to be debated. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I believe the hon. member for Humboldt raised a point which is well to be clarified, 

and I would have to rule that when it is on the order paper as an Act, to amend an Act, then we are 

discussing that Act, therefore, to amend the Act, but this is listed as an Act, in itself, so, therefore, I 

think the Act in its entirety is before the house. This whole thing is up for second reading, if this doesn’t 

pass at second reading, the whole Act is out, not just the amendments. This is an entire Act; so I would 

have to rule that this is in order. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when I sat down I think I was talking about the differences between 

the automobile accident insurance plan, and the kind of insurance that is available to private agencies. I 

pointed out that one of the advantages of the auto accident insurance plan, was that it has a large 

concentration of customers, in a given area, than is possible for any competitive private company to 

have. Now this, of course, is an advantage to the insurance plan, but it isn’t the kind of advantage that it 

should be allowed to sit back and enjoy without having to give corresponding advantages to the 

customer. This is, of course, one of the advantages of having this plan publicly owned, rather than 

owned by a group of private insurance companies, because this plan concerns itself with how best can 

we use the funds we collect for the benefit of the public. 

 

The private insurance companies, or any group of private insurance companies that is operating this kind 

of scheme, or purporting to operate this kind of plan, would be concerned primarily with using their 

position to make as good a return as possible, for the owners of the insurance companies. So one of the 

advantages, of The Auto Accident Insurance Act, being a public body, is that it has no motive nor any 

incentive to seek to gain from the public, without paying back to the public all the benefits equal to all 

the premiums which it collects. 

 

And one of the ways that this plan has been able to pay back in benefits to the policy holders, is by 

providing drive-in claims service centres, in the larger communities. As you know, we have these in the 

larger cities 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

41 

of Saskatchewan, and our policy is to extend these service centres to other communities as fast as 

possible. 

 

The advantage, Mr. Speaker, of having these service centres, claims service centres, is not that we do 

any repair work in them, but we do appraise and assess the damages done to the automobile, and when 

the vehicle is then taken to a garage of the policy holder choice we are in a position to protect him 

against any possibility of exorbitant charges, for the services that he has to buy. 

 

And we find from an analysis of our claim statistics, Mr. Speaker, that our average claims runs better 

than 10 per cent less in those communities where we have maintained a claims service centre, as 

compared to those communities where we have no means of checking the vehicle before it is repaired. 

 

This means, of course, that we are able to pass on this savings to our policy holders in the form of lower 

premiums. This is one of the difficulties that private companies have in operating insurance businesses, 

is to maintain adequate control of the claims adjustments and where there is padding, or excessive 

claims paid, it simply means that the policy holders must pay higher premium rates to cover that extra 

expense, and this is one of the ways in which we have been able to benefit our policy holders through 

lower premium rates, is because of maintaining a uniform method of assessing claims-damages, right at 

the time of the accident. It also has the additional advantage that it provides the public with a ready place 

to go to get adjustments immediately on short notice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under this plan, every motorist can enjoy the normal minimum of public liability, and 

property damage protection, to the amount of $10,000, $20,000 for public liability, $10,000 maximum 

for one person, $20,000 for more than one; a maximum of $5000 for property damage, plus 

comprehensive coverage for fire, theft and collision. The mere fact that this coverage costs less in 

Saskatchewan than any place else in North America, notwithstanding the fact that there are substantial 

benefits under part two, which are not available anywhere else, proves, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Saskatchewan plan is the most effective means of providing this service to its people. 

 

If it was possible for private interests to provide this service through non-government sources, at a cost 

comparable to what can be done under this publicly owned and universally operated plan, you can 

depend upon it, Mr. Speaker, that they would do it. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You won’t let us. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there are 50 states in the union, 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

42 

and there are nine other provinces, which if the private insurance interests, were capable of competing 

with our plan, our plan wouldn’t be the lowest cost plan in North America. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We have a smaller population than other places in North America. 

 

Mr. Danielson (Arm River): — Farmers only run their cars about three months in the year. 

 

Mr. Walker: — The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that as my friend from Arm River, wants to buy from any 

other company, if he lived on a farm near Red Deer, Alberta, or in Portage La Prairie, Manitoba, would 

pay more than twice as much as he pays on the farm at Davidson for the insurance that he gets. 

 

And, so, Mr. Speaker, the most difficult thing, the most sensitive area, is in the matter of rates. Private 

companies normally can’t compete, and the Leader of the Opposition is quite right we won’t give them 

this area either in Saskatchewan, but if they could beat us in Saskatchewan, they could show us that they 

could do that in either Alberta of Manitoba. 

 

They can’t come anywhere near us, Mr. Speaker, and I say that it is possible to do this, not because of 

any inherently or honest kind of administration in government service, compared with private service, 

not because of greater skill or administrative ability, by government administrators, by private 

administrators. Nothing of the kind. Simply because this is the only economically way to provide this 

service, Mr. Speaker. Any other way is just wasteful and extravagance at the expense of the policy 

holders. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this new Bill proposes to increase the benefits to the public for disability, under part 

two by adding a small new class, namely disability of the anklyosis, specifying a degree of impairment 

that will be attributed to certain defined levels of disabilities. This is set out in section 21, class 5, of the 

Bill, and I admit this is not a significant or substantial area. 

 

Much more significantly, Mr. Speaker, it is proposed to substantially increase the public liability and 

property damage benefits. I have already referred to the old public liability limits of $10,000 for one 

person injured, and $20,000 for two or more persons injured in any one accident, 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

43 

and $5000 dollars limit for property damage. It is now proposed to provide a comprehensive limit of 

$35,000 for public liability and property damage, with a $5000 limit for property damage, and the 

balance of the $35,000 not used for property damage, available for compensation for bodily injury or 

death; whether to one person or to a number of persons. This means that where there is no property 

damage involved, one person injured may claim the liability provision, a total of $35,000, compared 

with the limit of $10,000 under the present statute. 

 

This represents an additional coverage which will entitle Saskatchewan motorists, carrying only the 

compulsory insurance to meet the minimum requirements of financial responsibility in any province of 

Canada. 

 

It is estimated that this additional coverage will cost up to $500,000 in an ordinary year. 

 

Before, I take my seat, Mr. Speaker, I would like to lay on the table a copy of the Saskatchewan Auto 

Insurance and Safety Guide, 1963, for the benefit of the members. This is put out jointly by the 

insurance office and by the Highway Traffic Board, and I am sure that all hon. members will be glad to 

look at it, and if you have any suggestions or comments for the improvement of the booklet for future 

years that you will let us have them. Because every year we make some improvements and it isn’t 

perfect by a long way and if you have any suggestions we would be glad to hear them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with these few words of introduction I would move that the bill be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I haven’t got very much to say on this bill. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Agreed. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Oh, there are many objections to some of the features that you have in it. One of the 

things that I have noticed, and I could probably mention several cases, probably one of the reasons that 

you probably have been in a position to come out somewhat on top with your automobile insurance, is 

the fact that you have been not as quick, and not as easy, in adjusting the claims, as some of the private, 

free-enterprise insurance companies have. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 19, 1963 

 

 

44 

Mr. Coderre: — If you want me to I’m going to hold this bill and I’m going to bring out this evidence. 

There are many cases where people have been involved in car accidents, and they have one heck of a job 

to get their claims from you; or else you have done everything possible under the sun to cut back on the 

amount that is actually due. 

 

I would bring a case in point, my own case, for example, where I was involved, not involved in an 

accident with any one else, the road was icy, I ended up in the ditch, and then the question of adjustment 

came around. At that time, and this is still there, at that particular time, this is how you still do it, at that 

particular time there was a $200 deductible clause on the insurance. Anyhow, my wife was slightly 

injured in the accident, and I thought my duty as a member of the family, was to look after the rest of the 

members of the family and see that everyone was taken care of. When I came to the insurance for 

adjustment, the amount I had to pay now amounted to $283.00. Now you chiselled $83.00 out on my 

case alone. 

 

And here was what had happened, the automobile had gone into the ditch, had created a short in the 

electrical system, the battery was discharged, and the battery broke. That was my fault. How in the heck 

can anybody that was involved in an accident, where there would be injury all around how in the Sam 

Hill would you expect that person to look after these situations? That is exactly what you have done in 

all cases, in many cases, unless probably they are friends of yours, where you constantly chisel back on 

the situation, and when this bill comes into committee of the whole we will certainly do something about 

it. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meakes moved second reading of Bill No. 47 — An Act to amend The Family Farm Credit Act 

 

Mr. Meakes: — Mr. Speaker, this bill is an act to amend The Family Farm Credit Act, 1959, the 

amendment is to extend to July 7th, 1964, to encourage the making of loans under The Family Farm 

Credit Act, and with these few remarks I will move this bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read the second time. 


