



















































Hansard: March 08, 1963


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

17th Day 

 

Friday, March 8, 1963 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On Orders of the Day: 

 

SASKATCHEWAN SAVINGS BONDS 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Before the orders of the day are proceeded with, I would like to report to 

the members in regard to the Saskatchewan Savings Bonds. I wish to apologize to the press gallery in 

that I intended to come to the press gallery this morning in time for the deadline for the newspapers but I 

forgot about it this morning, but the third day of sales, as we have received at the present time, were 

over a million dollars, and the total now, for the three days, $2,748,000, which is almost exactly the 

same as Series No. 1; Series No. 2 last year was a considerably larger amount at that time. But I would 

say still that these are going quite satisfactorily. 

 

CORRECTION RE TELEPHONE SERVICE TO LAC LA RONGE 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams: — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are proceeded with, I would like to 

correct a statement I made in this house last week when I was asked by the member from Athabaska 

(Mr. Guy) when we expected to provide long distance service to Lac la Ronge. I replied sometime this 

fall. Actually, we are going to be able to do better than that and provide the service, we think, during the 

first part of July. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are proceeded with, I would like to 

take this opportunity to call the attention of you, Sir, and the house to a group of students, two groups of 

students in fact, in the west gallery. There is, firstly, a special interest group of some 39 or 40 students 

from the Douglas Park school here in Regina under the leadership of their teachers, Mr. Sannus and Mr. 

McNeill. I think we all know that special interest groups are students who have shown a particular 

aptitude, and we hope that they will find this afternoon’s discussion useful in the course of their studies 

of British parliamentary procedure. I am sure we would all want to welcome them here. 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

2 

There is another group from Saskatchewan House who are also in the west gallery and we would also 

want to welcome them and express the hope that they will enjoy this afternoon’s proceedings and find 

them very instructive. 

 

GOLDEN WEDDING ANNIVERSARY GREETINGS 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — While I am on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might beg the indulgence of 

the house to mention an event here in Regina. Today is the golden wedding anniversary of Mr. and Mrs. 

William Zeluski of 4124 Regina Avenue. I am sure we would all want to wish this couple many more 

happy years together. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: 

 

That Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair. 

 

Hon. E.I. Wood (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to make 

reference to a remark that was made yesterday by the hon. member from Gravelbourg (Mr. Coderre) in 

this debate. I must admit, Mr. Speaker, that I meant to answer the remark yesterday, but in speaking I 

became rather carried away with my own exuberance and verbosity and forgot about it. 

 

The hon. member from Gravelbourg spoke of the government and accused them of dictatorial methods 

and the big lie technique in regard to dealing with municipal reorganization. I was not too sure what he 

means by the big lie technique, maybe he is more familiar with this than I am and he can explain it to 

me. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What a hope. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wood: — He must have been in the house last year when the Municipal Unit and County Act 

was discussed and passed unanimously by this house, and he must have realized that at that time it did 

make it very clear that there would be no reorganization of municipalities anywhere in the province 

unless it was requested and voted in by the people of the areas concerned. And I do not see how he can 

continue to say that the government is being dictatorial and endeavoring to force these things upon the 

people of the province. 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

3 

He also asked me who was sending out the maps in regard to these proposed conterminous units in the 

province. I took it for granted that he knew that the municipal advisory commission was dealing with 

these matters and that was why I asked him the question that I did. I assumed that he must have been 

referring to some other maps, but apparently he was not aware that the municipal advisory commission 

was dealing with these matters and sending out these maps. I must say, Mr. Speaker, that I have had 

some delegations of municipal people and others from his constituency, and they seem to have no doubt 

about these questions. They were quite informed about them. It would appear to me, possibly, that they 

may have put themselves out to become informed upon these provincial matters more than what the hon. 

member from Gravelbourg had. 

 

I would like at this time, Mr. Speaker, to talk a little more about some of the programs that are 

administered by this Department of Municipal Affairs. One that has meant a great deal to the people of 

this province, especially those in the smaller urbans, has been that concerned with municipal water 

assistance which is handled by our department. We have during the current fiscal year made grants 

totalling $539,268 to 22 towns and villages throughout the province. Since its inception in 1960, 56 

towns and villages have been given authorized grants totalling $1,494,873; of this total of 56 

installations, 31 were for combined water and sewer system, 16 were for waterworks only and 9 were 

for sewerage systems only. These grants varied from a low of $2,048 to a high of $75,000, with an 

average of $26,436. And they say, it is my understanding, that about half of the grants were above this 

average and about half were below this average. 

 

This program has been giving out grants based upon the amount left of the sum necessary for capital 

cost of the installation of one of these systems in a town or village, over and above that which can be 

reasonably financed by the users of the system. This meant, of course, that in some instances some 

towns will receive a larger grant than others, but even where the grants have not been large, it has been 

such that along with the assistance that has been given these towns and villages in working with the 

project which they have in hand, and also by the fact that many of their bonds have been picked up by 

our Treasury Department in giving them assistance in financing these projects, this has meant enough to 

these people that they have proceeded in this work which otherwise quite possibly would not have been 

undertaken. 

 

I think this program of assistance in regard to municipal water and sewerage projects has meant that in a 

good many of the small urban municipalities in our province, they now have sewer and water systems, 

something that has been very necessary through the years, something that has meant and will mean a 

good deal in the future in health, services and also in the convenience and just the plain liveability of 

these towns. And I think it is a real step in the right direction in bringing better living to the people of 

this province. 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

4 

And now, Mr. Speaker, if I may I would like to speak this afternoon for a few minutes about municipal 

reorganization. I think that the house will grant me that. Usually I do not follow my notes too closely but 

this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, I am dealing with a question which I believe is of real importance to all of 

us and I may find it necessary to follow my notes quite closely, and I trust that you will forgive me in 

this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Shortly after the formation of this province, it was divided into a system of rural municipalities, mostly 

square, nine townships in size. They and the councils elected to administer them have served the people 

of this province well for half a century. There are many, however, who believe that time, which has seen 

our means of transportation change from the horse or ox-drawn cart or stone boat to the fast automobile 

or aeroplane, our prairie trails develop into all-weather grid roads and black-top highways, and has 

chipped away at the usefulness of these municipalities as we have known them. It is maintained that 

communities and trading areas have expanded in size and the operation of their public business is 

hindered rather than helped by the multiplicity of boundaries. 

 

Through the years, other special purpose jurisdictions have been built up; school districts and units, 

hospital districts, health units, conservation and development areas have superimposed their boundaries 

over those of the rural municipalities and have taken over sections of local government administration. 

Coupled with surrender of responsibilities to the provincial government, actual responsibility is hard to 

establish, and in some respects our rural municipalities have become only tax-collecting agents. 

 

There are many other arguments advances which I will not deal with now. Let me simply say that the 

advocates of municipal reorganization believe that larger municipal units, drawn around our trading 

centres, with boundaries conterminous with school units and possibly other jurisdictions, would better 

serve the people of the province and would greatly strengthen local government. The idea of counties, 

where the municipal and school functions would be combined under the control of one council, is also 

advocated by some. These proposals have received wide acceptance elsewhere — in Alberta, large 

municipal districts have been established for over ten years, and approximately one-half of these have 

now been converted into counties. The states to the south of us and Ontario have used this principle for 

many years. In Manitoba, the urban and rural municipal associations have set up a committee recently to 

study the problem, and this committee has brought in a report strongly recommending sweeping changes 

in the municipal system along the lines I have just mentioned. 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

5 

There is, however, another side to this picture. There are those that contend that the rural municipalities 

we now have have stood the test of time and should not be lightly discarded for something new and 

untried. It is argued that the smaller municipalities allow the councillor to have a closer contact, with 

knowledge of the problems in their division. This also allows more of the supervision to be done by the 

elected representatives, living in the neighborhood, than by salaried personnel based up to 30 or more 

miles away. 

 

These arguments do have validity and the Saskatchewan government has, ever since discussions started 

on these matters several years ago, taken the attitude that reorganization would only proceed on a basis 

of constant consultation with the local government groups and the people concerned. Let me read you a 

few of the excerpts from statements made by the former Premier Douglas, along these lines. The first I 

have here, Mr. Speaker, is taken from the record of the proceedings of the provincial local government 

conference in 1956, when these matters were broached here. 

 

The government itself believes that some kind of basic reorganization, at least in the rural areas, is an 

essential and inevitable first step in meeting the problems of local government today. I want to make it 

abundantly clear, however, that the government will not embark upon a program of municipal 

reorganization unless this program is assured of the co-operation of the local governing body, and has 

the wide-spread support of the general public. 

 

The next quotation I have, Mr. Speaker, is also concerning former Premier T.C. Douglas, where he had 

spoken at the S.A.R.M. convention in the spring of 1957, and is quoted in the Star-Phoenix of March 13 

of that year. 

 

Premier T.C. Douglas stated emphatically his government has no intention of embarking on any plan 

of municipal reorganization without the solid backing of local governing bodies, and the wide-spread 

support of the general public. The government, he said, was prepared to lead but not to dictate. “We 

will go just as far and just as fast as the local governing body want us to go but we will go no further 

nor any faster”. 

 

My third quotation is taken from vol. 26, page 6, of the legislative Hansard of 1957, quoting Premier 

T.C. Douglas. 

 

Then, assuming that the government, the legislature and the provincial organization are all in 

agreement on the proposals, we would then consult with these provincial 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

6 

organizations regarding the best method of ascertaining the wishes of their rate-payers. There is very 

strong possibility that when these discussions are held, a plebiscite or a vote or something of that sort 

will be what the provincial organizations recommend. How it will be taken, by what method it will be 

taken, will be something for them to make suggestions to us about. 

 

A further quotation, Mr. Speaker, from the Leader-Post of March 19, 1958, quoting Premier T.C. 

Douglas at the 1958 S.A.R.M. convention. 

 

I want to make it clear, without any shadow of a doubt, that the government has no intention of forcing 

change on you that you don’t want, Premier T.C. Douglas told the Rural Municipal delegates in 

convention in Regina Tuesday. He assured the convention several times that the present rural 

municipal system or boundaries would remain the same until a proposed change was assured the full 

support of local government. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that these quotations make it very clear the stand that has been taken through the 

years in regard to municipal reorganization by the government of this province, and I will continue, Sir. 

On March 4, 1959, quoted in the Star-Phoenix, the Premier, speaking again at the S.A.R.M. convention, 

says as follows: 

 

The Premier said his government remained convinced that some form of reorganization is essential and 

desirable if local government is to play its proper role in our society. However, he assured delegates 

the provincial government would accept the wishes of the rural people. Any decisions finally made 

will only be on the advice of the local government organization. No arbitrary action will be taken by 

the government, nor will any pressure be exerted to bring about changes either in structure of 

boundaries or local government. 

 

Mr. I.H. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — That’s what they told the doctors too. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Boy, oh boy . . . dictating then . . . 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

7 

Hon. Mr. Wood: — From the Star-Phoenix of March 15, 1961, again in regard to the S.A.R.M. 

convention of that year: 

 

The Premier scored a direct hit with his audience when he announced that the government statement 

concerning its stand on local government reorganization issued at its initial meeting in 1956 still 

stands. “We are not trying to ram this down your throats”, said Mr. Douglas, “and we have no intention 

of taking any action without discussing it thoroughly with you”. Reiterating the government’s stand as 

expressed at the opening of the 1956 provincial local government conference in Regina, Mr. Douglas 

read parts of his original statement. 

 

And then in the Western Producer of March 23, 1961, referring to the same convention, again quoting 

the former Premier: 

 

“My plea is, let’s study this report; let’s talk about it; let’s sit down and read it together; if we do that 

we will have kept faith with those who have gone before and those who will follow. It is not enough 

that we leave this province no worse than we found it; we must leave it better so that those who come 

after can rise up and call us blessed.” Mr. Douglas said there was no foundation for daily newspaper 

suggestions that reorganization was to be forced in Saskatchewan by the provincial government. He 

read transcripts of statements he made in 1956 and again at the 1960 annual meeting of the S.A.R.M. 

in which he pledged there would be no precipitous action on any report that the committee had handed 

down. 

 

I would like to state further, Mr. Speaker, that the present premier, Premier Woodrow Lloyd, has also 

associated himself with the stand that was taken by Premier Douglas in regard to municipal 

reorganization. In speaking to the S.A.R.M. convention last year, he said as follows: 

 

May I however repeat to you some of the statements made on behalf of the government by Mr. 

Douglas over a period of years in connection with this subject. I do this in order to emphasize the 

consistency with which the government has approached this particular problem. 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

8 

I submit, Mr. Speaker, that these excerpts from the different news media, records of the house, and 

others substantiate very strongly the fact that the government has always stated quite clearly that we 

would not put ourselves in the position of endeavoring to make the municipalities take something in this 

regard that they were not entirely in favor with. 

 

I may say again, Sir, that I think we should make it very clear that it has been the policy of this 

government that reorganization would not be forced upon the people or municipal men of this province. 

It is true, as some have maintained, that the better way of obtaining the views of the people concerned in 

such an intricate problem as this was by discussion rather than by a vote, but this did not mean that at 

any time this government accepted the idea of reorganization without due consultation and obtaining 

approval of the people concerned. It was certainly in line with the expressed policy of this government 

that the Municipal Unit and County Act was passed by this house nearly a year ago. 

 

This act made it plain that there would be no reorganized area set up unless requested and voted in by 

the people of the areas concerned. It was thoroughly discussed in this chamber and passed by this 

legislature. How some of the members of the opposition had either the ignorance or the audacity to go 

on saying out in the country and in this house that the government was forcing reorganization down the 

throats of the people of this province is to me something of great amazement. I used the word “some” 

advisedly because I do not think that all the members were involved in this, but some were. And let me 

say, Mr. Speaker, that if this is the kind of misrepresentation that it takes to win elections, I do not desire 

to continue as a politician. 

 

The stand taken by this government has been that there is some evidence of the desirability of municipal 

reorganization uncovered by commissions established in this province to study the problem and by 

examples shown in other provinces, and that it is incumbent upon us to make these changes available to 

the people of the province who wish to have them. The arguments against reorganization are such that 

we believe, and have always maintained, that it should not be forced upon them. The steps that we have 

taken in implementing this policy were taken with a good measure of support by the S.A.R.M. executive 

and we have throughout endeavored to keep faith with them. In a written statement presented to the 

government in July, 1961, the executive of the S.A.R.M. recognized the necessity of setting up a 

boundary commission. They did request that a direct representative of their association be included on 

this commission. The government did not feel it advisable to have on this commission direct 

representatives of any of the organizations involved but felt, rather, that individuals be appointed who 

were free to work on this commission but who had close associations with the organization, and that the 

elected 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

9 

representatives of local government bodies act on the local government council who would be consulted 

in regard to matters affecting reorganization. This latter group, composed of representatives from the 

Saskatchewan Association of rural Municipalities, the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association 

and the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association has been acknowledged by the local government 

associations and has been of real assistance in drawing up the Municipal Unit and County Act and 

dealing with related problems. Their advice has been valued and followed in a great many instances, and 

we wish to thank them for the time and expense which they have given and we will be continuing to 

consult with them further in regard to these matters. 

 

The municipal advisory commission was expanded to form the required boundary commission. This was 

comprised of Dean F.C. Cronkite, former dean of law at the University of Saskatchewan, former 

Saskatoon city alderman and recognized authority on local government matters as chairman, Dr. C.H. 

Fisher, former president of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities and former reeve, Mr. 

T.W. Garland, past president of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, former member 

of the local government continuing committee and presently reeve of the Rural Municipality of 

Riverside, no. 168, and Mr. L.H. Johnston, former reeve, these three people representing the rural 

municipal interests, Mr. W.N. McGillvray, former past president of the Saskatchewan, also the 

Canadian, School Trustees Association, and Mr. A.B. Douglas, former president of the Saskatchewan 

School Trustees Association, and former member of the local government continuing committee, these 

two men representing the school interests, and Mr. V.W. Van Allen, village overseer, and member of the 

executive of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, representing the urban interests. 

 

This commission has conscientiously applied itself to this task for the last eighteen months, and 

endeavored to draw boundaries suitable for both municipal and school purposes. They have held 

meetings throughout the province with municipal councils, school unit boards, superintendency boards, 

and other interested groups. They have endeavored to keep in mind the needs of municipal, as well as 

those of education, institutions. They have received countless delegations and written submissions. They 

have found it impossible to agree with all the advice that has been given them, but their approach has 

certainly been democratic to the extreme, and, I know for a fact that they have given careful and 

thoughtful consideration to the proposals submitted to them, whether they have acted on them or not. 

 

Following the first series of meetings they have drafted their preliminary boundary proposals, which 

were returned to the rural municipal councillors and school unit board members for their consideration. 

Further representations were received 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

10 

and in the light of these, revised maps of the proposed areas have been drawn up, sent back for the 

consideration of the interested organizations and submitted to the Hon. Mr. Turnbull, Minister of 

Education and myself, as their final recommendations. This has been done area by area throughout the 

province and now their final submission has been made for the last area of the province and the work 

has been completed. 

 

It has been made abundantly clear to all that the final maps submitted were not necessarily those that 

would be proclaimed by the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council. We have reserved our decision on this and 

have invited further comments to be sent to Mr. Turnbull and myself. Many people have done this. We 

appreciate the interest they have shown and the representations they have made will be taken into 

consideration before any of these local government boundaries are proclaimed. 

 

Such a democratic process has not been carried on without a good deal of discussion, pro and con, 

throughout the country. If the commission had closeted themselves in with their own ideas, a system of 

boundaries might have been devised without causing much interest in the country, but this discussion on 

boundaries has been carried by the commission to the very people of the country who are vitally 

interested, and truly democratic exchanges of ideas has resulted; there has certainly not been unanimity 

of opinion expressed in many instances, for some people wished a boundary at one place, others wished 

it at another, but this is a normal, healthy reaction in a democracy. 

 

Other problems have arisen in regard to the dividing of existing municipalities by the proposed 

boundaries. I might point out here that the statement from the S.A.R.M. executive of July, 1961, to 

which I have earlier referred, accepted the splitting of present rural municipalities if the project had been 

requested and had received a favorable vote of the residents therein. However, let me say in this regard 

that it is not the intention of the government that these boundary proposals should be as inflexible as the 

laws of the Medes and Persians. The wishes of the local people should be taken into consideration, in 

this as in other things, especially in those cases where a municipal unit was being considered with no 

immediate likelihood of a municipal unit or county being formed abutting it. 

 

The question has been raised that the municipalities amalgamating within proposed conterminous units; 

I am sure the government is prepared to give consideration to such amalgamation so long as they are in 

the interests of local government in the area, and not just to the advantage of the municipalities involved. 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

11 

Let me recapitulate. This government has repeatedly made it very clear that they would not proceed with 

reorganization of rural municipalities unless it was desired by the people concerned. We have passed the 

Municipal Unit and County Act that made it plain that neither a municipal unit or a county would be set 

up unless requested and given a favorable vote by the residents of the area in question. We have set up a 

qualified boundary commission, which has made a detailed survey of the province, and has now 

submitted an adequate framework, taken in conjunction with submissions made to Mr. Turnbull and 

myself, and others which have not yet been made, upon which local governments in this province can be 

reorganized if so desired by the people concerned. 

 

Our part of the task, that of providing evidence, of wide-spread consultation, of making a possible 

pattern of reorganization available, seems to be completed. Consequently the government proposes that 

the future initiative should come from the local government organizations. Unless it is the desire of the 

convention of the Saskatchewan Association of rural Municipalities that we proceed with the 

proclamation of boundaries for local government purposes throughout the province, we will proclaim 

such boundaries only where requested and voted in by the local government in accordance with the 

Municipal Unit and County Act. 

 

If the S.A.R.M. does not show the desire to proceed with the reorganization of municipalities, this does 

not mean that local government authorities in the field of education may not wish to take steps to change 

the boundaries of their own units. If so, the government must proceed to accommodate the wishes of 

these authorities. Let me make myself clear; it is quite possible that the reorganization of municipalities 

may or may not be desirable, but to make it perfectly plain that the government is not forcing any such 

thing upon the people of this province, even in the matter of boundaries, we will proceed no further 

unless we are requested to do so by those who speak either for the municipal reorganizations or for the 

local people interested in municipal reorganizations in their own area. 

 

Local government is a very important section of our society; it is true grass roots democracy where local 

people elect from among themselves representatives to deal with matters that concern their community 

and for which they have responsibility. This, Mr. Speaker, is much more desirable than having a 

centralized government dealing with such things from afar. I believe we all have a responsibility to see 

that our local governments lose none of their present powers, but that their powers be increased as much 

as it is right and advisable to do so. This authority is not so likely to be lost by encroachment by some 

other jurisdiction as it is by lack of use and lack of interest. We should see that the framework upon 

which our local government is built is the best to accommodate 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

12 

such increased responsibility. We should sift for ourselves the best from the old and new, not accepting 

or rejecting either simply on the basis of its relative age. 

 

I earnestly ask, Mr. Speaker, that the local and provincial governments, and all the people of our 

province should endeavor to work together; that local government, one of our most desirable institutions 

be strengthened and not diminished. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D.T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, in rising at this time to take part in this 

debate I want to prove to you and to the people of Saskatchewan and to the members of this legislature 

most emphatically and conclusively that this NDP government has no program to develop this province. 

This NDP government has no leadership to get our economy rolling again. This socialism will and is 

ruining this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — The positive proof, Mr. Speaker, is right here in their own budget figures. You and 

I know that agriculture is the basic industry in this province. We have the experience of the depressed 

economic conditions after ten years of drought in the 1930’s. We saw what happened after the disaster 

of the 1961 crop failure when we had a net per capita drop in income of approximately $300 per man, 

woman and child, or roughly $1,000 per family of four. That resulted in the net income of Saskatchewan 

people being almost the lowest in the whole of Canada. 

 

We know that our natural resources are not being developed to the extent they should be. We realize that 

because of these conditions adequate employment opportunities do not exist for the young people 

leaving school in this province, and they do not exist for our young farmers who are being forced from 

the land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in view of the facts I have just mentioned it is indeed a tragedy that we have before us a 

budget designed to extract, tax, and gouge from the people the largest amount in taxes; once again, 

nothing offered to help the people raise the money to pay these taxes; once again, no indication of relief 

from this heavy tax burden in the future. What are the cold, hard facts of this budget, Mr. Speaker? 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

13 

The first shock, Mr. Speaker, is that over $27.25 million will be spent this year on social welfare. This is 

truly an indictment and a tragedy. 

 

Hon. A.M. Nicholson (Minister of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation): — On a point of order, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — What is your point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nicholson: — The hon. gentleman is reading from a document. I wonder, would he identify 

the document and the figure he just quoted. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to indicate to the Minister of Social Welfare that the 

document I am reading from is the budget which is before us in this debate. I wish the Hon. Minister of 

Social Welfare would acquaint himself with the rules of this house. 

 

The first shock, as I said to you, Mr. Minister, is that over $27.25 million will be spent this year on 

social welfare. This Mr. Speaker, is truly an indictment and a tragedy. We will be asked to spend about 

$4.5 million more for social welfare than for the construction and maintenance programs of our entire 

highway system in this province this year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nicholson: — I thank the hon. member for correcting his . . . 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — $27.25 million for social welfare; only $22.75 million for our highway system and 

its maintenance. This is the picture the cabinet ministers refer to when they stand up one by one and say 

Saskatchewan is rapidly moving ahead. The NDP government has no program to cure this dilemma. 

They are not building up the agricultural industry, they never were and they never will be a party for the 

farmer. They have seen fit to allocate only $11 million for agriculture, our basic industry. Compare only 

$11 million allocated to our basic industry to $27.25 million allocated to social welfare, or about two 

and one-half times as much for social welfare as for our basic industry. Is this the new economic 

development program the Provincial Treasurer boasts about? 

 

What are they doing to stimulate mineral and natural resources development to correct this serious 

situation? Here are the figures — $1.6 million for mineral resources development; $4.25 million for 

natural resources development. A total budget allocation of only $5.75 million for this development of a 

second basic industry in this province. 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

14 

Mr. Speaker, they are only spending $5.75 million as compared to $27.25 million for social welfare. 

Almost five times as much as is being spent to develop the natural resources and mineral resources of 

this province. This is stagnation of the worst kind. Is this guaranteeing a dignified and varied life, 

according to your vice-president, Mr. David Lewis, as was referred to in the budget by your Provincial 

Treasurer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are going to sit idly by and spend $10.25 million more for social welfare than for the 

combined expenditure on our two basic industries, agriculture and resource development. This points up 

the complete failure of the socialists philosophy to develop our province. This is a condemnation of their 

Lloydist example of NDPism and its togetherness. 

 

How well we remember the promises of these socialists, years ago, when they said no one would be 

unemployed. All of our social services would be paid by the development of our natural resources; that 

never again in this province would anyone who was able to work be unemployed or on social aid. We 

remember their promises to have everyone on a work and wages program, building roads, highways, 

houses, mining the minerals and developing the natural resources. How hollow these promises read now. 

 

And then I am going to quote a statement read by the Provincial Treasurer in this budget, accredited to 

the recent provincial treasurer, Mr. C.M. Fines: 

 

The function of any well-organized society should not be primarily to provide employment (well you 

are certainly not providing employment) but should be to develop its industries and resources (and you 

are certainly not doing that.) 

 

These conditions as I have pointed out didn’t just happen, Mr. Speaker, they just didn’t happen this year, 

this has been building up ever since they took office in 1944. There is an old saying “that we get too 

soon old, and too late Schmart”. The people of this province have grown “schmart” to this government, 

but they were beaten to the draw by the former premier, T.C. Douglas, and they were beaten to the draw 

by the former provincial treasurer, Mr. C.M. Fines, and many of their former cabinet colleagues, who 

refused to run in the last provincial election. They saw this situation and flew the coop before they got 

their wings clipped. These were some of the original socialists who promised us this Utopia. It is only 

fitting that the late premier was properly dealt with by the electorate of this city last summer. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan received a measure of consolation when he gave the assurance in a 

statement “I will not return”. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, no General McArthur, that fellow. 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

15 

Mr. Speaker, it must be evident to everyone in this province that these socialists have been more intent 

in building up a political machine to maintain themselves in office rather than give a higher income to 

the people who must pay the bills. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — As I pointed out in my early remarks, just a year ago our net income was among the 

lowest in Canada. We in Saskatchewan are being taxed to the breaking point. We are the highest taxed 

per capita in the nation. This has been our penalty for an experiment in socialism. And this “ism” is 

creeping more every day; it has infiltrated every organization in this province. There is only one that it 

has failed to eradicate as yet, and that is our local government. But, Mr. Speaker, the handwriting is 

surely on the wall; the maps are drawn; and final ratification maybe only weeks away. I refer to the 

persistent and unceasing determination of this government to go ahead with its massacre of the 

municipalities program in this province. We are being asked to again vote another $15,000 in this budget 

on top of the $317,000 already spent to date through the municipal advisory commission so the finalized 

county maps can be handed to the government. 

 

As we all know, this change has met bitter resistance from the majority of the people in the province. 

Chaos and confusion have been prevalent since the big push was started some two years ago. The 

situation is no clearer today. Many of our rural people and their municipal officials feel it will be the end 

of self-government on the grass roots level. They feel it will lead to socialist bureaucracy; they feel it 

will be the death of our smaller community centres, villages and towns; and they have every justification 

in trying to save and preserve them now. They see the fallacy of the Premier’s argument when he says 

loss of railway lines will ruin our smaller centres; yet he is willing to allow the same results by virtue of 

centralization by a county system. The Premier is surely caught with a leg on each side of the fence. He 

will have to face the people squarely on this issue, and he cannot put them off by locking the doors and 

hiding under the table as he did last July. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — The attitude of the government has been one of bureaucracy and dictatorship on the 

whole issue. They have stood by and let a member of the commission, and I refer to Dean Cronkite, 

refer to the municipal men and all the representatives of the local governments as political yahoos, 

because they dared to differ with this government. This proves, beyond a shadow of doubt, that when a 

county system is set up, direction will come from 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

16 

the top down and not from the bottom up. A political bureaucracy, a bureaucracy controlled by this 

government will overrule the wishes of the people concerned, and that is the price that the people will 

pay should this government be elected in the next election. 

 

And then I was interested in the remarks of the Minister of Municipal Affairs who just spoke. He 

chastised the member for Gravelbourg (Mr. Coderre) by saying that the member inferred that a vote 

would not be taken, that a vote of the people concerned would not be taken. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, that 

is true; certainly the Premier knows and so does the minister that when the county act was drawn up, the 

only people who have a vote on the proposed county are the people who reside within the boundaries of 

that proposed county. But those municipalities who are going to be wrecked and ruined around the 

periphery of this proposed county, the people who are going to see their municipality ruined and broken 

up, those are the people concerned, Mr. Speaker, who are not getting the vote and that is something that 

the people of this province should know. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — And then what about the school boundaries? Surely, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

Education, and surely the Minister of Municipal Affairs know that the people in the superintendencies of 

Melville, Indian Head, Regina west, and Rosthern are not going to have a vote on this issue. Legislation 

was passed here last session putting these people within the boundaries of the proposed counties without 

the vote concerned, and the Premier can shake his head, and I suggest you go back and read this act and 

see if that isn’t true. 

 

And then the Minister of Municipal Affairs dealt at great length with the platitudes, promises and 

pledges of the premier, Mr. T.C. Douglas. It took up about ten minutes of the time of the members of 

this house. Well, I am going to tell the Minister of Municipal Affairs this, if the promises and pledges of 

the recent premier, Mr. T.C. Douglas, aren’t any more sincere in regards to the municipal reorganization 

than they were to the medicare program, then they are not worth the paper they are written on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — The government, because of this municipal controversy, has the municipal and 

school officials in a state of uncertainty. The rural municipal and school officials do not know when 

boundary changes are going to be made. They are uncertain whether to expand or introduce new 

services and equipment. They do not know when their rate-payers will be put in a different school unit 

administration. They are justified in these fears, and 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

17 

they are equally justified in their opposition to the wrecking of their local administration get-up. 

 

The success of the people being able to meet the revenue conditions of this budget depends to a large 

degree on the political complexion of the next federal government. In order that commitments of this 

budget may be carried out, it is necessary that a stable, practical, strong, efficient majority government 

be in power in Ottawa after April 8. 

 

This is necessary to stimulate our national economy and to improve economic conditions in this 

province. That, of course, will have to be one of the two national parties; the party that appears to be 

headed for that position at the moment is the Liberal party. In the last Gallup poll, support for the 

Liberal party has increased in every section of Canada. The NDP was soundly rejected by the people of 

Saskatchewan in the general elections of 1958 and 1962. They failed to elect a single member; their 

support as indicated by the recent Gallup poll is declining all across the nation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — The stand taken by the farmers and the municipal men on the county system 

controversy shows they no longer have any faith in this government. 

 

Hon. A.G. Kuziak (Minister of Mineral Resources): — What document is the hon. member reading? 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — I am quoting from the Gallup poll, Mr. Minister of Natural Resources, because I 

wanted to get the figures straight. That is why I am reading from the Gallup poll, and I hope you are 

satisfied now that the NDP is finished as a national party in Canada. The stand taken by the Premier and 

his cohorts last July resulted in the people showing that they have no confidence in this administration. 

 

It is evident that the majority of the people of this province are now convinced they must unite to stop 

this erosion of our individual liberties by this Lloydist version of state socialism. The people of this 

province well realize that each successive budget reveals the cost to them of the price they must pay for 

the loss of freedom as a bureaucracy takes over. Mr. Speaker, Cuba’s swing from socialism to 

communism, and the events in that country since registers with profound clarity. 

 

The people of this province realize they cannot pass the buck or delegate the fighting for the 

preservation of individual freedoms to any one group or groups alone, such as 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

18 

the farmers, the local governments or the medical profession. They realize now that this must be done by 

a united effort on the part of all. 

 

More people would be able to get on their feet sooner if this government would stop pulling the rug out 

from under them by way of terrific taxation. This budget does exactly that. It represents in millions of 

dollars the cost of the philosophy of the Lloydist group. Mr. Speaker, it is the enaction of socialization 

by taxation. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that what I have said you will agree was in order. 

 

The motion before us states that you, “Mr. Speaker, do now leave the Chair”. Mr. Speaker, you appear 

most comfortable and most attentive in the chair so I will not support the motion; in order that you may 

hear further evidence from my colleagues on this side of the house that this budget will not solve the 

serious difficulties confronting the people of this province in the year ahead. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, there is one nice advantage of sitting in your chair 

until this time in the debate because it gives you the advantage which earlier speakers don’t have, that is 

that you can sit and assess what is going on in the chamber. Before I turn to more of the specific aspects 

of the budget, I would like to point out what I think is one of the outstanding features of this session. 

That is that the government members are consistently going back to the thirties, every speaker. They 

said, we drove the dirty Liberals out of Saskatchewan at the end of the thirties and with them went every 

evil of the province. They would let us believe that because of this one act alone, they are destined to be 

crowned in heaven. They would lead us to believe that a special place is reserved for them beside St. 

Patrick who drove the snakes out of Ireland. Having assured themselves of this distinguished place, it is 

interesting to note the comments of the different members. The Minister of Mineral Resources was 

putting up a great plea about the great growth in population. I pointed out to him what his own 

department of vital statistics had to say. 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — I have not yet taken part in this debate. I haven’t talked yet. 

 

Mr. W.R. Thatcher (Morse): — Can’t you take it, Alex? 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

19 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — Now he’s mentioning the Minister of Mineral Resources . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — The Minister of Agriculture. I was interested in what my seat-mate who just sat down 

had to say about agriculture, because I picked up the Leader-Post of December 5 and the Minister of 

Agriculture was addressing the Farmers’ Union at Saskatoon and he said, first, I am not happy with our 

farm agricultural program. I thought, well that is one thing we can all agree on. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Nobody else is either. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Secondly he said, I deplore these press reports that would indicate that the farmers 

are so rich. He said press reports that would indicate that the net income of farms this year was four 

times that of last year. He inferred from that that the press were giving a false impression of the farm 

income. And I wondered where the press had obtained that information. I wasn’t like the Minister of 

Agriculture; I wasn’t content to see this headline, I wanted to know what train trust had come up with 

this great suggestion, and I find if you turn to page 2 of the Saskatchewan Financial and Economic 

Position, issued by the Treasury Department, you will read this: 

 

The forecast for farm net income in 1962 points to a net return from farming operations of $500 

million, more than four times the farm net income total of $114 realized in 1961. 

 

That’s where the press got their report; from the report issued by a government department, itself. 

 

Coming to press reports, Mr. Speaker, I want to take a moment to deal with press reports about the 

settlement in the Swift Current Health Region. The press and T.V. announcements I noticed said that the 

settlement had been reached between the government and the commission in the Swift Current Health 

Region and the Swift Current Health Region had been granted autonomy, or the right to run their own 

affairs. It is true the question revolved about autonomy, but I think it is right to point out to this chamber 

the true situation because many people are questioning in their minds why Swift Current Health Region 

should be granted autonomy and not MSI or other carriers. I would point out that the negotiations and 

the battle on behalf of Swift Current was not to get concessions from the government, not to be granted 

autonomy, but the battle was to retain the autonomy they had enjoyed for 17 years. And I think probably 

a better heading for the press report would have been “Health Region No. 1 successful in battle to retain 

their autonomy” and here I would like to pay tribute to the secretary and the chairman and the board 

members of the health region for the 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

20 

consideration, the dignity and the modesty with which they conducted these negotiations, typical of 

these people that have set up this plan and operated it successfully for 17 years. 

 

I would point out, too, this plan is all the more remarkable because it is operated by the little fellow, by 

the reeve and the councillors, of the so-called inefficient villages and municipalities that this government 

talks about. It is remarkable that the health region board and our doctors, in the negotiations as in 

everything else, speaks with one voice, a voice emanating from the co-operative effort of the people and 

the doctors themselves in the field of health. They speak with one voice because they haven’t any third 

partner. Incidentally, I would like to commend the minister here for recognizing that we in Health 

Region No. 1 have no quarrel with our doctors, they have no quarrel with us. And may I assure him that 

these relations will remain in Health Region No. 1 so long as we exclude any third force that would 

divide neighbor against neighbor. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I now want to turn a moment to highways because I was amazed at the number of 

members who stood up in their seats and talked about the number of roads and paved highways, the 

number of miles that they have in their constituency. And some of them would lead us to believe that 

they have so many paved roads that a gravelled road is an obsolete thing. . . . He says it’s right. I know 

they actually believe that. I believe it’s a fact too, in some of these constituencies. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Not Rosthern. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I made a trip the other day out to the resort at Fort Qu’Appelle, travelled east to 

Qu’Appelle on the Trans-Canada highway, turned north on 35 — a paved highway — and I went right 

into Fort Qu’Appelle. I remarked to some of my friends there that they were very fortunate that they 

have had these good roads for so many years to travel on, and their comment was, Oh, we’re tired of this 

highway; we’re trading it in on a brand new super model. They said, Why this year they are going to 

build us a super highway from Balgonie, cutting straight across to the resort. Well, I said, that is fine, but 

what do your farmers think about crossing their land and cutting up their farms all the way from 

Balgonie to Fort Qu’Appelle. He said, Oh, they are hopping mad about it but the people of Regina sure 

love it because it gets them to the resort for the weekend. I would point out to the Minister of Highways 

that there are great areas, particularly in south western Saskatchewan where we’ve been happy for years 

to travel on gravelled highways. And I am going to suggest to him that I think the time has 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

21 

arrived, rather than to be tearing up good big highways in order to replace them with some super 

highway, that you give consideration to putting oil on the gravel roads that are now existing in the 

province. If the minister is interested in cutting down his losses in the government insurance office, the 

greatest thing he could do is to get out and to oil these gravelled highways, because I am sure that the 

accident rate on these gravelled highways, in accordance with the miles travelled, are frightening. I think 

that is the primary need that we should follow in regard to highway construction at this time. 

 

Someone has remarked that we have a surplus budget. I think the remark of the Provincial Treasurer was 

that we have a handsome surplus. Mr. Speaker, I want to point out just how handsome that surplus is. 

Last year, the Provincial Treasurer brought down his budget and he told the people that the bill for 

government services would cost $175 million. However, he said, because of the crop failure in 1961, it 

would be difficult for the farmers and others to pay the amount required so the government proposed to 

collect $175 million and to borrow the rest, and the people’s share of this bill was to be approximately 

$100 million; that is approximately $100 for every man, woman and child in the province. However, 

what the government proposed to do and what the government did are two different things. When they 

reached into the pocket of each one of the taxpayers for his $100, they found there was an extra $20 bill 

left, so they took it too, and then they found that they had a surplus of $20 million unaccounted for, in 

the process of balancing their budget. They found that they had short-changed the people of 

Saskatchewan by $20 million. 

 

The code of ethics governing such a transaction in business would demand either that the money be 

refunded or that additional services be given in its place. This, however, Mr. Speaker, is not the code of 

ethics of the government. Not only did they refuse to refund the money, they attempted to hide the fact 

that they even had it. They have been scratching Mr. Speaker, like cats on a marble floor to cover up this 

hot money that they’ve got, and they found a place to cover it. They hid it under a little piece of paper, 

and I have that paper here called supplementary estimates. 

 

Now, supplementary estimates, Mr. Speaker, as you know, is to take care of a department that has over-

expended the amount the legislature voted them last year. If, for instance, the Department of Highways 

had been voted $25 million to conduct their program of highway construction and they found due to an 

exceptionally heavy snow-storm or icy conditions they had to do more maintenance then they had 

forecast, and they ran into an over-expenditure of half a million dollars, they would come back in the 

form of a supplementary estimate and ask the legislature to vote that additional one-half million dollars. 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

22 

That is what supplementary estimates are for. This is a different supplementary estimate. This piece of 

paper, Mr. Speaker, is a request to the members of this legislature to help the government hide this 

surplus. This piece of paper is asking us, the members of the legislature, to say to the people of 

Saskatchewan that the government no longer has this money. They are asking us to say that the money 

was spent last year. They are asking us to say, for instance, that $1 million of this money was spent on a 

veterinary college; they are asking us to say that $2 million of this was given to the economic 

development corporation; they are asking us to say that $1 million was given to the Saskatchewan Public 

Administration Foundation; that is the way they are attempting to hide this surplus, to ask us to say that 

it has been already spent. I would point out, Mr. Speaker, there is no veterinary college, there is no 

economic development corporation . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — And there never would be . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — There is no Saskatchewan Public Administration Foundation. These are fictitious 

firms, non-existing firms, and yet you would ask us to vote that we have spent and given to those firms 

last year these sums that I have enumerated. It is a deliberate attempt to cover up this misdeed of the 

government, to cover this surplus $20 million; the government is asking us to resort to this type of thing 

to cover it up. But I would say, Mr. Speaker, that if any business firm in this province attempted to 

create a false picture such as the government is attempting to do in here by juggling their books, they 

would receive a jail term of up to ten to 15 years. 

 

This document is designed to cover up the proceeds of an organized pickpocketing on a scale that the 

people have not yet heard of. You can bring in who you wish; Perry Mason himself couldn’t get you out 

of this jam. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — We got the . . . here. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Surely, Mr. Speaker, the honorable thing for the government to have done would first 

be to admit that they had this surplus money, to admit that they overcharged the people by $20 million, 

and then, if they didn’t see fit to refund this $20 million to the people in the form of tax rebates or tax 

cuts, at least to be forthright and honest enough to show how they are going to spend it. People are 

prepared, Mr. Speaker, to forgive governments for many faults, but they will never sanction such brazen 

attempt at juggling the books as is shown in here to hide this surplus. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is education week. I was interested particularly in what the Minister of Education had 

to say in regard to education. I had hoped that after he explained what 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

23 

he thought was the challenge facing education today, he would have laid before the legislature what he 

thought was an appropriate program to meet this challenge. He picked at bits and pieces, the need for 

new subjects in the program, the need for research, the uncertainty of the world these youngsters face 

and how we might best prepare them to meet it. Then he ended there. He didn’t put forth any proposals 

as to what he suggested we should do. I suggest to the Minister of Education that we must be realistic 

enough to assess the rightful place of education in our society. Having done this, than we must be bold 

and courageous enough to take the necessary steps to clothe it with the skills and the finances necessary 

to the fulfilment of its role in society. If we are to meet this challenge, I think we must first divest 

ourselves of a lot of this horse and buggy thinking in regard to education. 

 

This challenge, we believe, Mr. Speaker, calls for an attack on two fronts. Firstly, it will demand a 

completely new concept of financing education, to assure an adequate and fair and equitable distribution 

of the taxes. 

 

Secondly, it demands the re-assessment of the basic aim of education. This re-assessment necessitates a 

curriculum revision that will allocate subject matter according to its importance in relationship to its aim 

in education. 

 

I want to turn first to the approach to financing education. I was greatly interested in the press report that 

was issued by the Premier. He is always saying that for years he has been unable to understand anything 

the Liberals have to say in regard to education. I believe he remarked at one place that he had heard 

better speeches in his dreams than speeches given by the Liberals. To me this is not surprising, Mr. 

Speaker, because for years the Premier and his government, in my thinking, have been suspended in a 

state of self-imposed twilight sleep. They have been suspended in this state and they find themselves 

neither able to prevent nor to direct the things that are about to occur, and suspended in this state, they 

have been hesitant to embrace a dream and they have not been wide enough awake to face realities. 

 

Now I think, Mr. Speaker, it is because of this twilight sleep that the Premier was unable to recall that in 

1958 he spoke of and voted in support of a resolution which I moved in this house pertaining to 

financing education. I want to read that resolution which I proposed at that time: 

 

That this assembly request the provincial government to consider the advisability of the immediate 

establishment of a foundation program for education in Saskatchewan. 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

24 

Was the Premier talking in his sleep when, in reference to an amendment adding the word “for”, he 

stated he would support the motion, even without the amendment. Was the Premier not then sufficiently 

wide awake to realize the import of this resolution? Did he not realize that such a resolution, calling for 

the setting up of a foundation program, incorporated these features; a recognition that our present tax 

structure provides neither equity of costs nor equality of opportunity; the establishment of a minimum 

standard of instruction all across the province; this minimum standard would be available to every child, 

whether the child lived in an urban centre or whether he lived in the remotest area. And this program too 

would set a flat mill rate for education all across the province. Such a tax rate would assure each 

taxpayer, the big and the little, the rich and the poor, paid the same for education per thousand dollars of 

assessment. It would remove the inequality which we find of rich productive areas, coasting along on a 

nominal mill rate, and the less productive areas saddled with an unbearable burden to meet their 

educational costs. 

 

Such a foundation program, Mr. Speaker, was a practical and a constructive approach designed to put 

our educational system on a sound financial basis. The Liberal party didn’t keep this program under 

wraps to be used as the political plum in the election. We didn’t do so because we believe, Mr. Speaker, 

that education of our children is too vital a thing to use as a political football. What did we do? Because 

of the immensity of the financial problem plaguing the school and municipal officials, the Liberal party 

lifted this plank out of its program, laid it before the legislature and asked the members to consider its 

merits. The merits of this program were so appealing that all members of the house gave it unanimous 

approval. Did you ever, Mr. Speaker, witness a more golden opportunity for a government to launch a 

bold and an imaginative undertaking? Here was the most practical and appealing plank in the opposition 

platform. Here was the plank, not to be stolen, but freely offered, together with unanimous support in 

implementing it. Political pundits from time to time say an opposition should not offer constructive 

proposals to the government for fear they would do it. I would only say it is evident that these pundits 

have not studied the mind of the socialist government. 

 

The opportunity here was so great to do something that the Premier thought this must surely be a dream. 

That is why the Premier thinks he hears these good Liberal speeches in his dreams. Let me remind you 

these dreams will yet become a nightmare and they will return to haunt you. They will return to haunt 

you because this government didn’t have the intestinal fortitude to oppose the resolution nor did they 

have the courage to implement it. 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

25 

While this government has sat since 1958 doing nothing to recognize even the grave financial problems 

facing our trustees and large communities, other governments have. This chamber will be interested to 

know that the government of Alberta has now instituted the identical program that I had the privilege to 

lay before this legislature five years ago. B.C. has instituted a program incorporating many of those 

features of the foundation program, together with other innovations. B.C. incorporated a clause 

exempting the first $1,000 of assessment on rural property from school tax. They also, by this method I 

understand, relieved the burden of the rural people by 25 percent of their school tax. They have 

incorporated a plan which gives to the home owners a home owners’ grant towards the cost of the school 

tax bill. And, in addition, B.C. pays one-half of the approved level of the school district costs as a whole 

in the form of grants. I was interested to note, according to the B.C. budget of 1962, the province of B.C. 

paid 75 percent of the school districts’ budget as they relate to farm and residential property. The 

government here has now come forward with a program to ease and to correct this financial problem. 

And I was amazed when I read it. 

 

The minister was speaking in Saskatoon and he outlined how this government proposed to meet this 

grave financial problem. They must have believed that great things come in little packages because it is 

a very, very small news clipping and it was a very, very small package. He stated what he proposed to 

do. He said, the Department of Education has now worked out a plan to relieve the taxpayer of this 

burdensome school tax. He said this plan is designed to relieve the burden of property tax needed to 

meet secondary education costs. What was this plan? He said, we want school boards to stream their 

high school students into vocational and technical training, tax relief would follow because the federal 

government would share most of the cost. 

 

That’s the major program to meet the financial crisis facing school officials in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t wish in any way to down-grade the technical and vocational training program and I 

made my stand clear the other day. It can play a very important role. But surely, Mr. Speaker, this 

program was not designed for the purposes as indicated by the minister; this vocational program which 

Ottawa pays 75 percent of the capital cost and 50 percent of the operating cost is a most worthy one. Let 

it not be said to Saskatchewan’s shame that she intends to use it as a dumping ground upon which to 

unload our responsibilities in regard to education. 

 

Where does the Liberal party stand in regard to financing education? I want to lay before this house 

today our stand as we see it in the current situation that is facing us. 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

26 

We say that immediately upon assuming office the Liberal government will conduct an exhaustive study 

of the benefits accruing now to Alberta from the effects of the foundation program; we will look into the 

program as it is operating now in the province of British Columbia; and in the light of such a study we 

will incorporate such portions of these programs as are most applicable to our conditions in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nicholson: — How about the Liberal provinces? 

 

Mr. Cameron: — And we will act with dispatch in laying this before the legislature for action. A 

program will be designed to remove the inequalities in the tax load, to make available equal educational 

opportunities to our children whether they live in the urban centres or whether they live in the remotest 

area of the province. Such a program, we believe, will recognize our belief that education is a social 

responsibility, it is the responsibility of all, not the obligation of a few. 

 

We realize that finding the money for education is one of the most pressing problems facing municipal 

and school officials in Saskatchewan today. We must, however, recognize that education will continue 

to make greater and greater claims upon the taxpayers’ dollar. We must recognize too that the cost of 

education will remain an ever-growing problem. Something of the scope of this problem of financing 

education can be better realized when we stop to think today that the teachers’ salaries this year will 

exceed $43 million, that the sum total of school taxes levied both on urban and rural property do not 

raise sufficient money to meet the teachers’ salary bill, let alone anything else. Of all the school taxes 

collected on property, it is not sufficient to meet the teachers’ bill alone. 

 

This, however, Mr. Speaker, I would hastily point out does not justify any conclusion that the teachers 

are receiving too great a salary. Because we must recognize that we require an ever-increasing number 

of teachers in order to staff our classrooms. In fact, it is interesting to realize that one percent of our 

population are school teachers actively engaged in the classroom. Putting the cost of education in 

Saskatchewan another way, the combined cost of teachers’ salaries and the upkeep of schools is greater 

than the combined cost of both hospital and medical care. That gives you some conception of the 

enormity of the problem of financing education and I believe that it is nothing short of folly to believe 

that such expenditures can be supported on the tax base that was devised a hundred years ago. 

 

It is true, the Saskatchewan government must carry a far greater share of the cost of education than it is 

doing today. We must not only put our own house in order; we must look further afield. The plight of 

Canada’s schools and universities, tied to an outdated financial base, presents a 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

27 

national problem. We believe it must be solved by national means. We have made a beginning at the 

university level, the vocational level, wherein the federal government contributes toward our university, 

vocational and technical training. What we have done in these areas has not been a violation of the 

British North America Act. If we are to meet the challenge of this uncertain and technical age in which 

we live, we must be aware that Canada’s survival in years ahead is hinged, more than ever before, on the 

effectiveness of Canadian education; on the effectiveness of education in every province. 

 

And the effectiveness of our education in turn hinges upon the funds allotted to research, to university, 

to vocational schools, and to elementary and secondary schools. Provincial and municipal resources are 

no longer enough to meet the necessary demands in financing education. 

 

Because of this, the Saskatchewan Liberal party pledges itself to support, and we will vigorously work 

toward, federal aid toward education in both the primary and the secondary level. 

 

To those who may feel uneasy about the invasion of provincial rights in education, let me state 

categorically that a Liberal government will preserve those rights. A Liberal government will not be a 

party to auctioning off those rights for monetary rewards. Surely no one would claim that Saskatchewan 

has lost any of her autonomy, or is any less free because Ottawa pays a portion of her autonomy, or is 

any less free because Ottawa pays a portion of her hospital costs or social aid costs, or because Ottawa 

contributes to Saskatchewan’s portion of the cost of the construction of the Trans-Canada highway. 

Would anyone claim that the University of Saskatchewan is less academically free because Ottawa 

makes grants to its operation? We believe, Mr. Speaker, that Canadians have sufficient ingenuity to sit 

down together and to work out a financial formula for education which will not only preserve the 

provincial rights in the field of education, but one which will insure the province of sufficient financial 

resources to carry out their obligations to education as set out in the constitution. 

 

We believe this can be done; we believe it will be done; that is why the Liberal party is pledged to 

support the principle of federal aid for education both on the primary and secondary levels. 

 

Education, Mr. Speaker, presents not only a financial problem, but likewise we must look at education 

today in regards to the curriculum and the type of education which we are giving to our children in the 

classrooms. 

 

Let us look at the Canadian educational picture as we see it today. Should we as Canadians be proud of 

an educational system when we consider that out of every 100 tots in Grade 2, 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

28 

only 30 will emerge with a Grade 12 diploma, and of these 30 youngsters, 23 will enter such fields 

perhaps as nursing, technicians, tradesmen; at least they will make a comfortable living and a 

worthwhile contribution to society. What of the other 70? How are they faring? Forty-five of them will 

complete one to two years of high school; they will be holding down semi-skilled positions; with good 

hard work they probably will make ends meet. What about the remaining 25? These 25 will not 

complete Grade 8; most will be found in the ranks of the unemployed. Little to look back upon and even 

less to look forward to. And at the other end of the picture, we face an alarming shortage of skilled 

personnel, in such fields as research, in science, in technical fields and in industry. Can we be proud of 

an educational system which has neglected to meet the needs of the tops and has left so many stranded at 

the bottom? Today the ranks of the unemployed are swollen by youths in their early twenties, ill-

equipped for the age in which they live; ill-equipped to meet the challenge of the day. They are defeated 

in life before they have a chance to begin. 

 

Do not such conditions as these warrant the scrutiny of our curricula and a re-assessment of our aims of 

education? We Liberals believe it does, and we have backed up that belief by a resolution at our 

convention calling for a revision of the school curriculum and the return to basic essentials of education. 

What was the Premier’s reaction to this resolution — “the Liberals have turned back the clock”. The 

Premier stated that the procedure used for guiding and selecting content in Saskatchewan has been in 

operation for the past 17 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is precisely why the revision is called for. The content of subject matter in our 

classrooms has been selected in accordance with the aims of education as set out by the Premier 20 years 

ago. What were these aims of education 20 years ago, the Premier brought into Saskatchewan when he 

became the Minister of Education? May we review the old ones? These aims of education, as set out by 

the Premier, were based upon what was then thought to be a new approach to education. This new 

approach can be best understood, I think, by the slogans which it was clothed with. One slogan said, 

“The whole child comes to school, therefore the school is responsible for the whole development of the 

child”. Another slogan said, “Education for social living, education for democracy”. These broad aims 

of education have led to an almost unlimited range of subjects in the classroom, almost any course can 

be introduced into the curriculum, providing its advocates are able to show it is useful to someone. Now 

teachers are being called upon to crowd into the curriculum more and more subject matter because 

someone or some group has been able to convince the powers-that-be that this subject will in some way 

contribute to the child’s development. 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

29 

We have here before us a brief from the “Voice of Women” petitioning the government to add some 

more subjects to our curriculum. They said, we believe the curriculum should make place in order that 

they may teach anthropology and sociology. I notice in a press clipping the other day someone 

addressed the teachers’ convention in Moose Jaw, said that he interviewed departmental officials in a 

determined effort to get in a program to teach psychiatry in our classrooms. 

 

The pressures the teachers are subjected to, I think, is shown by the examination papers in Grade 12 and 

Grade 11, asking a child to assess the medical care crisis. That is the result of this philosophy of the 

whole child comes to the school, therefore the child must bring into the classroom all the pressures and 

the turmoil in the political controversy surrounding him. Such is the aim, as I see it, of education in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The tragedy of it all is that mothers today are complaining of the inability of the child to read. Pressures 

are building up for a return to the phonetic system of teaching the child to spell and to read. University 

professors are deploring the fact that freshmen entering university are lacking a basic grounding in 

English. Now we are busy calling seminars of teachers to devise a special course of remedial reading. 

Far too great a number of our Grade 11 and Grade 12 students fail, not because of their inability to 

master the subject matter, but because of their inability to interpret precisely what the question asks. 

 

I believe that Saskatchewan falls behind many of the other provinces in this whole field of education. 

The other provinces have moved forward. First they set up a royal commission to look into the whole 

field of education, particularly the curriculum, in order that we may do what the minister suggested must 

be done, to revise the curriculum in view of the needs of tomorrow. 

 

They did this firstly by way of setting up a royal commission to re-assess and re-define the aim of 

education and secondly, the setting up of the necessary research facilities to assure continuing study, to 

keep the curriculum in line with the demands of the age in which we live. They are conscious of the fact 

that education is not static. They are conscious of the fact that we can’t put it into a compartment and 

keep it there for twenty years, like the minister said we should do, and which he is still prepared to carry 

on. They do not believe that education merely moved forward in the current of progress; they believe 

that education should actively provide in large measure the source and the direction of progress. When 

we consider that the child who attends school for 12 years will spend only one-fifth of his waking hours 

in the classroom, four-fifths of his time outside the classroom, then we realize how 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

30 

precious little time we have to provide a foundation for this child upon which he may build an 

understanding of the shifting values and of the confusing events that present day society and the world 

in which he will live. To the extent to which we have failed to provide this foundation, I believe to that 

extent we have failed the youth of Saskatchewan. 

 

For this reason, that is why we say as Liberals, we will re-assess and revise the curriculum, not to turn 

back the clock, to design a curriculum to meet the challenge referred to by the Minister of Education the 

other day, to train the child to cope with the world in which he finds himself; a world such as we cannot 

even conceive at present; a world in which skills which we learn today will be outdated tomorrow; that 

is the challenge of education, and the need to meet this challenge is to give our youth that firm 

foundation of values upon which he can stand; a foundation which will equip him to measure and to 

assess the shifting values which he will encounter in his world. 

 

The interesting thing, Mr. Speaker, is that invariably commissions who have looked into this field of 

education have come to one conclusion. They have come to the conclusion that the primary and most 

effectual aim of education today must be the intellectual development of the child. And so they have 

narrowed these broad aims of education to the one specific and precise aim of education — the 

intellectual development of the child. 

 

It is interesting that British Columbia’s royal commission, looking into this field, had this to say: 

 

The demands of the time make it essential that emphasis be placed on fostering intellectual 

development as the major function of the school. To do this more attention must be given to the basic 

subjects of the curriculum. 

 

And they proceeded to spell out what they considered the basic subjects were: reading, spelling, 

arithmetic, grammar, composition, and something of the history of the great nations of the world. And 

they went even further and they said: 

 

A high standard of literacy, accuracy and precise knowledge, coupled with habits of application and 

responsibility, gives those enduring values. 

 

These are values which a disjointed smattering of information cannot give. Such commission were not 

unmindful of the fact that there are other aspects to the development of the child besides the intellectual 

development. They realize 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

31 

that the child must develop physically, morally and socially, and that this development is not unrelated 

to intellectual development. We must, however, keep in mind that there are other agencies that have a 

responsibility and must be given an opportunity to play their full role in the child’s development. Such 

agencies as the home, community and the church. Schools were not designed to be foster homes for 

children. They were designed to promote the intellectual development of the child. If the schools are to 

be successful in the role assigned to them, the curriculum must be so designed as to place emphasis on 

the subject matter most effective in carrying out that specific aid. This may entail, as the B.C. 

commission set out, even the setting out of the subjects, putting in the core of the circle those major 

subjects which must receive the major portion of time of the day. Secondly, those that are of secondary 

importance to the child’s intellectual development, lesser time allotted to them. Those that have little to 

do, but not as much, put them in the third circle, and then draw circle beyond which we will admit 

nothing into the classroom, because it would crowd the time of the curriculum to the degree that we 

can’t proceed in an effective manner of intellectual development. 

 

That is why we believe the study must be first made to define a specific aim of education; to assess the 

subject matter that will promote and develop that end. And, secondly, to review the role of such other 

agencies as the school, the home, the community and the church, and give them the opportunity to play 

the important role that they are intended to play in education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Once this has been done, then we must follow it up by, I believe, a continuing study 

of the aim of education. Money must be allotted for research in education, such research to cover not 

only the curricula, but research in population shifts, research in classroom needs, research that would 

assist the unit boards in their construction program, and to have a continuing research so that we will 

know the number of students that are entering the primary grade, and each of the grades in the classroom 

so this can be projected in the future; then we will know what financial resources we will have to have 

by that particular date. We will co-operate in this research with school boards in order to plan the best 

way to meet this challenge. Such research, I believe, should look into ways in which larger units and 

school districts may be granted greater authority than they have today in the selection of subject matter, 

ways in which teachers can be given a greater flexibility in the supplementals into their text books, and 

so forth. 

 

I believe this complex age, this fast-moving age in which we live today demands that we do all in our 

power to best equip the child to face the demands that will be made upon him. 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

32 

This little dribble of a million odd that the Provincial Treasurer has shown in grants to education will 

help, but it is of no major importance. No, it is not attempting to even make a start to understand and to 

mend the problems that we face in education in Saskatchewan. Because he has not moved in any 

direction to put the finances of education on a firm foundation, nor has he done any study of the best 

methods in the revision of curricula in order that we can obtain the best foundation for the child to stand 

on to meet these challenges, because of the policy of do-nothing but to drift with the times; for that 

reason, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support this budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.L. Stevens (Rosetown): — Mr. Speaker, rising to take part in the budget debate this afternoon, I 

must confess I have found it rather difficult to decide when to speak, because each cabinet minister 

during the last few days has risen in his place and announced big extensions to their programs, or new 

programs, and this is rather tough competition indeed. In fact, just yesterday, the Minister of Highways 

rose in his place and announced a terrific new program of highway extension; anything I might have to 

say after that might be rather anti-climactic. 

 

However, today, after listening to the member from Qu’Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. McFarlane) and the 

member from Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron), I find we indeed have struck much calmer waters. As a 

matter of fact I think they were a little bit swampy in places. 

 

The member from Qu’Appelle-Wolseley spent a great deal of his time criticizing social aid 

expenditures, social welfare expenditures. Now, Mr. Speaker, the main item for social welfare, the main 

items spent are for pensions to the aged and disabled, the care of the neglected and the needy children, 

and for geriatric centres for our older people, and for correctional institutions. Now, which one of these 

does he propose to eliminate? Is this new Liberal policy? Or is this the way they intend to decrease 

expenditures on those least able to take care of themselves? If so, I think the member from Qu’Appelle 

should make a public statement of the details of this great new humanitarian policy of the Thatcherites. 

 

Since last Friday when the budget address was delivered in this house, I have listened to a great many 

addresses made by the members of the opposition. I think it is their duty, of course, to make comments 

on and to constructively criticize the actions of the government and all its fiscal policies. However, the 

only commendation I could make for any of their efforts would be exemplified in that old proverb: 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

33 

The brook would lose its song if it were not for the stones that lie within its path. 

 

We have listened to many hard-headed arguments against this budget; loud sounds have been made in an 

effort to impede or change its course in providing adequate services and opportunities for all the people 

of the province, but they will, in the long run, thanks to an intelligent electorate, have little more success 

than the stones that lie in the bottom of the brook have on the course of the water. The sparkling crystal-

clear waters of good government will wend their way to their greater destiny with but little delay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Stevens: — Previous budgets in this house, Mr. Speaker, have been described as an act of faith in 

this province; this one should be regarded as the one that proves that this faith has been justified. 

 

It would have been normally expected that 1961, being a year that was one of the driest in the history of 

the province, and with our great dependency that we have had on our agriculture, that it would take at 

least one more year to recover from such a setback before significant gains could again be made in our 

economic progress. This has not been the case, as the whole budget records financial gains in almost 

every department. I think the estimates of a $5 million surplus on last year’s budgetary operations 

indicates that the base in this province for development and growth is a sound one, and that given 

normal conditions we can most surely count on the continued advancement for business, agriculture and 

labor in the years ahead. 

 

This budget contains many items that are being employed for the purpose of assisting farmers in their 

struggle for a reasonable standard of living, comparable to other sectors of the economy. In 1961 it was 

a most difficult year and, while 1962 was a much more favorable one for most of the province, there are 

still some areas, like my own, which have not yet returned to the normal yields and incomes that they 

must have under present conditions in order to prosper. 

 

Agriculture has been, and continues to be, the foundation of the basic industries in Saskatchewan. To 

those engaged in it, and to those in the super structure who depend upon it, it is the life-blood and the 

sustaining segment of our entire economy. Without it, or when it is in difficulties, industry and all of its 

supplementary occupations, will surely suffer as well. The shrinking incomes in the face of continually 

rising cost, the cost-price squeeze, continue to be the most pressing problem of the farming industry 

today. It has reached the proportions where it cannot be regarded as a 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

34 

temporary problem, affecting only the small and inefficient farmers, it must be looked on in terms of a 

nation and all its people, because it is affecting all of them and it is becoming more and more acute. 

 

Large farms have solved a part of our difficulty, but have, at the same time, created problems in our 

communities almost as bad as those they have solved. A 45 percent increase in the size of the farms in 

the last two decades has meant the loss of 18,000 farmers in Saskatchewan to the industry, and the effect 

of this loss has become important elsewhere in the economy. It has already swelled the number of 

unemployed by untold numbers, it is nibbling away at the prospect of every employed person in Canada 

as well. If this trend is not soon slowed down or halted, serious further complications in our farm 

communities may soon occur. 

 

Rail line abandonment, ghost villages, suitcase farmers are but a few of the serious complications that 

will appear if nothing is done in this regard. This problem is largely a federal one, as our income and the 

price of the things we purchase are controlled almost exclusively by federal fiscal policy, and as we have 

yet to see in Ottawa a government who has ever given anything but lip service to this problem, and that 

only before a federal election, the outlook looks extremely dim for agriculture, unless something 

constructive is done on April 8, and by that I mean the election of a New Democratic government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Stevens: — Our provincial government, as far as any provincial government can do, is doing more 

to halt this trend than any other in the three prairie province — the trend of larger farms, shrinking rural 

population and increased urban population. 

 

Our budget in 1963 provides the sum of $8.5 million for the various programs to assist the industry, 

which is indeed much larger than our neighboring oil-rich province of Alberta, who last year, out of a 

budget of $375 million, spent only $6.9 million on agriculture. And even our sister province of 

Manitoba expends far less than this. Last year their budget for agriculture was only $5.1 million, just a 

little over half what this government spends for a similar purpose. 

 

Our program for agriculture, of ag. reps., livestock improvement, machinery research, water 

conservation and development, proper land utilization by the lands branch, family farm improvement, 

and pasture development, along with many other services, is unequalled on the prairies. In addition, this 

year we have allocated $2.6 million for the acquisition of pasture lands and $1.2 million for their 

development. This attitude on the part of this government is in direct contrast 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

35 

to that put forward on so many occasions by the opposition, who have on every opportunity voted 

against these expenditures and whose policy is probably more closely exemplified by Dean Otto Lang 

than by any other man. 

 

This fellow is becoming a very well-known figure in Saskatchewan agriculture. I think I should quote 

again the exact words he said when he was speaking to the Saskatchewan Agriculture Graduates’ 

Association at the University Farm and Home Week. He was speaking about farmers and he said: 

 

Should they be subsidized by non-farmers to bring their economic level to that of non-farmers? Clearly 

not. The farmers are receiving non-economic benefits to make up the difference. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the Thatcherites on your left may disclaim this brain trust of theirs on the platforms 

of this province but there can be no doubt that were the Liberals in power, this is the man who would be 

helping to form the farm policy of the government for this province. 

 

The economists, even in the U.S.A., have long since given up this ridiculous argument of no assistance 

for agriculture, while all the rest of the economy receives subsidies. And to illustrate how far they have 

abandoned that archaic policy I would like to quote from an item of the Time Magazine, of December 

15, 1961. This magazine has a reputation for the reliability of its statistics, and I quote: 

 

Net farm income, said the U.S. Department of Agriculture, will increase over 1960’s 12 billion to a 

total of 12.8 billion, making 1961 the most prosperous year since 1953. But there was another side to 

the statistics. 4.7 billion of the farmers’ income will come from government-support programs, a jump 

of 600 million over 1960, and the farmers with heavily-subsidized crops seem to think they are better 

off. Wheat, for example, gets high supports. 

 

Over one-third of their income coming from government sources indicates to me, Mr. Speaker, that the 

importance of agriculture is recognized even in a highly-industrialized country like the United States and 

shows that compensation is being partially made at least to agriculture for the heavy burden of tariffs, 

monopolies causing high prices and protectionism given to the rest of the economy. The Liberal policy, 

as Dean Lang outlined, is give them fresh air. 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

36 

Now, the problem of shrinking farm population due to mechanization and larger farms is familiar in all 

parts of North America. It is interesting to note the findings of a committee set up by the Manitoba 

government to study Manitoba’s economic future which made its report last Wednesday. A Canadian 

Press dispatch in the March 6, 1963 edition of the Leader-Post, which of course is a very reliable source, 

which I have in my hand, shows that their problems in agriculture are very similar to our own, similar to 

what I have described and the solutions they recommend are exactly what our Department of 

Agriculture has been doing for years, and is further emphasized by increased spending in that direction 

this year. In the next 15 years, the report states, 32,000 workers are expected to leave the farms and with 

this will come the decline of small centres of population in rural areas, and the reason given is this, and I 

quote: 

 

Many farmers will leave the farm because farm income has not increased at the same pace as income 

in other lines of endeavor. The net 1960 income in Manitoba for farms was only $1,480, compared to 

the prairie average of $2,100, and its key recommendations were an increase in cattle raising, and 

increase in specialized crops by large-scale irrigation. 

 

It is interesting to note that while Manitoba is just receiving the report, the Saskatchewan Department of 

Agriculture has been aware of this situation for some years, has acted upon and has taken further steps to 

alleviate this situation this year, such as the expenditure of nearly $4 million on pasture improvement 

and large sums in its participation in the South Saskatchewan River Dam. Whenever we have introduced 

measures calculated to improve the farmers’ position, the Thatcherites have been sharply critical and 

have used every possible means to delay their enactment. 

 

The Medical Care Act was the most recent example. This plan will be much cheaper for those farmers 

with a small income and much cheaper for those who have a large farm and are paying a land tax under 

a municipal scheme, or who were. In addition, coverage is much more extensive than the private plans 

who had a rate as high as $130. An additional benefit of the medical care plan has become apparent in 

the province this year. The vast improvement in the quickening pace of the economy is due in part to the 

fact that the sums of money that people normally held in reserve to meet possible medical bills have now 

been made available for other uses. This has stimulated our economy. To prove my point I want to 

illustrate what has been the experience in England where they have had a similar plan for many years. 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

37 

John Gunther, a well-known author of international renown who has published many books, mostly in 

the form of objective reports of other countries — he is certainly not regarded in America as a socialist 

— reports in his latest book, the 1962 edition of Inside Europe Today, as follows, about England: 

 

Nowadays the national health service, despite the ferocious controversies which attended its birth, not 

only works efficiently but is overwhelmingly popular with the rank and file of citizens. About 65 

percent of its cost comes directly from the exchequer. Indeed, the fact that a Briton does not, in the 

normal course of events, ever have to pay more than a nominal sum for doctor, dentist or medicine, 

throughout the whole course of his life, from birth to the grave, has played a role in the current boom 

and the increase in national purchasing power. This is because of the elementary fact that the share of 

the family budget that formerly went to medical care can now be spent otherwise on anything from 

breakfast bacon to hi-fi, and the ghastly financial drain caused by severe prolonged illness is not all but 

eliminated, which is not only a good thing in itself, but releases immense funds for other use. 

 

I think that has proven to be exactly the same result obtained here in Saskatchewan and demonstrated by 

the fact that the economy has recovered faster than anyone, even the government itself, had supposed it 

would. Certainly it is not all the reasons for the increase, but I feel certain that it did have a noticeable 

effect. 

 

In my area, expenditures for the South Saskatchewan River Dam have also had a very beneficial effect 

on business and on the area in general. And again illustrates what a progressive government can do to 

employ capital in such a way as to benefit the present generations by way of power development, 

irrigation and increased park and tourist facilities. 

 

For the Leader of the Opposition to imply, as he did in the special session of 1961, that this project was 

an unnecessary expenditure will be something that people throughout this province will not soon forget. 

It was common knowledge that the Liberals in Ottawa would never have built the dam, but for a native 

of this province and a leader of a political party to be against this type of expenditure, with the federal 

government paying their share, is almost beyond belief and indicates the type of leadership that would 

be given in this province if the reins of the government were to fall into his hands. 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

38 

Irrigation farming which holds great promise for agriculture under certain marketing conditions appears 

at the present time to require changes in our market demands before the great possibilities inherent in 

such a program can be fully realized. When the outlook for markets for cereal grains appears to be as 

shaky as it is at present, with a forecast of a surplus position similar to 1960 if the normal crop is 

harvested this year, and the livestock prices already showing the effects of heavy production, the value 

of the large production potential in irrigation becomes somewhat diminished. The development of the 

South Saskatchewan River Development project must therefore be one that is proceeded with by great 

care and consideration. 

 

And in this regard I want to commend the government for the manner in which the project has been 

investigated and also on the democratic methods used in ascertaining what type of policy for irrigation 

would be most suitable to the farmers involved. The central farm irrigation policy committee, composed 

of two elected farmer representatives from each of the proposed irrigation areas study groups in 

Broderick, Donavon, Conquest, Tessier and the Feudal area, together with two non-voting delegates 

from the Department of Agriculture, have studied several possible plans and made several tours of other 

irrigation areas. They have given serious study to what they call the conversion policy through irrigation 

and which, to my mind, has a great many points in it to commend it to the government. In this policy, it 

seems to me that the interests of the farmers in the area, the government and the business community 

serving the area have been given careful consideration. And when the time comes for an irrigation 

policy to be laid down, possibly in 1965, this plan should be looked at most carefully. 

 

The budget again makes provision for continued improvements in our expanding highways system, a 

system that now is a matter of pride for Saskatchewan’s citizens rather than the butt for crude jokes from 

those in the neighboring provinces as it was prior to 1944. And at the present time citizens in my area 

are reasonably well served by our highway system, with the possible exception of two stretches of road, 

namely no. 4 highway south of Rosetown to Biggar, and another stretch from Outlook east to Kenaston 

on no. 15, leading to the black-top between Saskatoon and Regina. At present these are gravelled roads 

and today’s high speed vehicles demand a better quality of highway when the traffic is heavy. I was very 

pleased to hear the highways minister announce yesterday the oiling of these stretches of road and I am 

sure that the residents of my area will be most grateful about this announcement. And when these 

improvements are made it will mean that Rosetown will be served by dust-free highways from four 

directions. What a contrast this will be from the days of the old Liberal regime when the only road into 

the town was a dirt trail, jokingly called no. 7 highway, which meandered over hill and dale to 

Saskatoon and was only open about eight months of the year. 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

39 

Mr. Speaker, my comments on the budget could cover a great many other areas as the document lists a 

very wide field of government services, but in closing may I mention one that I feel illustrates more than 

any other the difference between the party in the government and the party that sits in opposition at your 

left, and probably illustrates as well why they sit in opposition. They are to my mind just the larger of 

the two Conservative parties in Saskatchewan. Indeed, Mr. Roblin, the Premier of Manitoba and head of 

a Conservative government, believes they are much less progressive than his own, and on one occasion 

in the Manitoba house made this statement, obviously with reference to Saskatchewan’s Mr. Thatcher: 

 

There are some Liberals (he said) in the Liberal party that are being dragged kicking and screaming 

into the second half of the twentieth century. 

 

The area that I think illustrated the great difference between the Thatcherites and ourselves is our 

attitude about the purpose of business and industry. Our policies are for the people and we believe that 

business and industry should be for people. When we see 930,000 people in Saskatchewan, we first 

think of their needs, and move in a direction calculated by us to best serve those needs. 

 

Now, after the introduction of the adequate health plan for all, based on need rather than ability to pay 

for it, and adequate welfare measures, reasonable educational opportunities, proper labor laws, good 

hospital services, low cost insurance, programs to provide the amenities of life for farmers, such as 

electricity, sewer and water systems, and grid roads, we believe the time has come when we have 

provided for the social needs of the people to sufficient degree that we can now afford to use our 

financial resources for the purpose of providing incentives to business and industry to expand or to come 

into the province to further serve the needs of these people. SEDCO and the new industrial advisory 

council have been formed for that purpose because, Mr. Speaker, they will I am sure accomplish that 

purpose because with this help business and industry will prosper while performing that function. 

 

How different is the policy of the Thatcherites as put forth by their leader on many an occasion in this 

house. A ten year tax holiday for big business as he has always advocated indicates their thinking. They 

have, on every occasion, opposed the social policies I have just mentioned. When this type of policy is 

in force, as it was in years of formal Liberal regimes, the social needs of the people are never met 

because they are considered last, and as a consequence, industry never prospers either, because they 

depend upon a happy and prosperous people for their income. 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

40 

Mr. Speaker, I think this budget is a document to be proud of. I think it is a reflection of what careful 

planning for many years by a government who knows where they are going and have the courage to do 

it can do for a province and it is therefore, just one further step on the way towards a happier and a more 

prosperous Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. K.F. Klein (Notukeu-Willowbunch): — Mr. Speaker, in taking part in this budget debate I would 

like to give the usual congratulations to all the speakers who have spoken before, and particularly to the 

financial critic. 

 

This afternoon I also enjoyed the catty remarks of the member from Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron). He 

indicated exactly what the government was trying to do in about as picturesque language as possible. 

 

Now, the procedures and the speakers in this budget debate, particularly the cabinet minister, have 

shaken my faith as to whether democracy is a workable form of government or not. This faith was 

shaken one time before. It was when I first entered politics and I was travelling around the constituency 

visiting various people and I got into this one person’s home and I indicated I was a Liberal candidate, 

and he practically hit the roof and went for a pitch fork, and I said, Just what makes you so hostile 

towards Liberals and liberalism? Well, he said — just exactly the same answer as I would expect from 

you people as I will tell you later — you are a very young man, aren’t you? He said, you don’t 

remember the thirties. I said, Not too clearly. Well, he said, I am going to tell you a little story why I 

cannot support the Liberals. He said there was a carload of apples came for distribution in his area. I 

went to one town and they told me I wasn’t entitled to apples. I went to another town and they told me 

again I wasn’t entitled to apples in that town, so I went to a third place and they said, I can’t give you 

apples here either. So he said, if you think I am going to vote Liberal after that kind of treatment, you 

have another thought coming. I’ll never vote Liberal as long as I live if I can’t get apples. 

 

Now, for an ordinary citizen to say this may be understandable. But from reasonable, or supposedly 

reasonable, ministers of the crown to come into this house and say that because someone ate a chicken 

or somebody couldn’t dispose of a turkey in the thirties, they have dedicated themselves to destroying 

the whole way of life prior to them taking office is unforgivable. 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

41 

Now, I have had to logically draw the conclusion that these turkeys and chickens must have been wry-

necked ones because it has warped and twisted the minds of those who are in government ever since. 

And this is the logical pattern followed by CCF’ers of the past. They came through the thirties with 

perhaps the same amount of bitterness as most of us had. But, instead of trying to go ahead and rectify 

these abuses of our way of life that we have enjoyed for many seasons, they dedicated themselves to 

destroying it. We recognize that there were abuses that could be improved, but we were not dedicated to 

destroying that way of life. 

 

Now, they are apparently coming into the house at this time and saying, well, we tried it for our first 

years in office, we found out better, that you can’t destroy that old way of life, and now they are coming 

into the house, trying to maintain and claim that they are now the defenders of private enterprise and 

they are putting window-dressing into the budget so they can say, look what we are doing for private 

enterprise, after having dedicated themselves to destroying it. I am glad too that you have had a change 

of heart. The only regret I have is that when you took office in 1944, instead of going around this big 

circle to point out to yourselves that what you have dedicated yourselves to doing was wrong, if you had 

proceeded from where you are today, perhaps Saskatchewan would be in a better position now. 

 

Now this budget sets a lot of firsts. First biggest expenditure, firsts in plans for private enterprise and I 

think it also sets a first that it is one budget that is dripping with so much political propaganda that I 

doubt if there is another budget that can compare to it. 

 

And this political propaganda is perhaps the shallowest nature. We find when we look at the budget that 

the Provincial Treasurer decided it was politically expedient to take credit for a few things. He mentions 

for example that in 1948, 40 out of every 1,000 newborn babies died; in 1962 this has been reduced to 

25 out of every 1,000, etc. etc., leaving the implication, of course, that it is because of something the 

CCF’ers have done. And they ought to take credit for it. I am glad to hear them clapping. Now I’ve 

checked the vital statistics and I wish you would too. And I have found in vital statistics that social 

diseases have increased. Would you like credit for that too? I have found too that the number of 

illegitimate births have increased. Would you like credit for that too? 

 

Now, it is utterly ridiculous for the Provincial Treasurer to try and take credit for the decrease in birth 

death rate as it would be for me to try to blame some of the things that I mentioned on CCF 

administration. No credit was given to the improvements made in drugs, new techniques and all other 

advances developed by science. All the CCF credit. This, 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

42 

as I said, is about the shallowest form of political propaganda that I have ever seen incorporated into a 

budget speech. 

 

Now, he also makes a claim in the budget speech, and he quoted one of his predecessors and this 

predecessor indicated that freedom is more than the mere absence of restraint, it is the presence of 

opportunities. This is one statement I would definitely like to challenge. In my work daily, I work with 

young people who are trying to seek a substantial way of life in Saskatchewan. We have parents coming 

to the door of the high schools to plead on behalf of some of their children who cannot make the grade at 

high school and university students, and they are asking us please guide us, what opportunities are there 

for these young people? What should you give them to do? What should we direct them into taking? 

Should they become farmers, should they become electricians, what opportunities are there in this 

province? And we as teachers have to hide our heads and say, I am sorry, we have no list of tremendous 

opportunities supplied by the Department of Education to these schools. If you want to indicate the 

opportunities that are available, and show me in black and white, why I can honestly tell a student to 

become a plumber and that he shall be taken care of ever after if he becomes one, for good living in 

Saskatchewan, I wish you would indicate that to me. So when you are trying to tell me that there are 

opportunities of all descriptions, I fail to see these opportunities, particularly for young people. 

 

This budget is creating in the minds of the people of this province an air of fear and apprehension. It 

calls on the part of the government to expend $187 million. The public realize that the only source of 

wealth any government has, be it local, provincial or federal, is from the pockets of the people. And 

when people look at the resources they have and the families they have to support and provide for and 

clothing, besides expending $187 per capita on each man, woman and child in that family, then they are 

seriously wondering what kind of income they would have to have to support this terrific expenditure. 

Now, granted, some of your grants are coming from Ottawa, from the federal government, but it doesn’t 

matter, any government must rely on the taxpayers to pay that amount of money. You are the ones who 

claimed that you were going to do it differently. You said that after attracting these tremendous 

industries into the province you would be able to lower the taxes and take the huge burdens off the 

shoulders of the people. And for this reason you are causing a tremendous lot of concern, and a rightful 

concern. When a person realizes that on $400 a month you can hardly make ends meet when you are 

supporting a family of five or six children, it is cause for alarm. Because we know it was not always 

possible to get jobs of this nature and may not be in the future. 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

43 

Yesterday some ministers got up and said all the opposition can do is nibble at this and nibble at that in 

the budget and as a result of our nibbling, all we are doing is proving the brilliance of the budget. 

Another minister got up and he bragged about the increase in the urban population, cities are growing 

here, towns are growing all over the place, and somehow again he and other ministers have implied that 

this is a good thing for Saskatchewan, that this has somehow bolstered the economy of the province and 

made it a more secure place in which to live. This, in my mind, Mr. Speaker, will be written as the 

greatest tragedy that has ever befallen this province, because your cities and towns are growing at the 

expense of the rural people, people moving off the land and into the cities. All you have to do to verify 

this is to check your municipal reports. The loss in rural population since 1956 is a total of 800,000; 

since 1956 the growth in cities and towns is 65,000. Therefore, your cities have grown at the expense of 

the family farmers that have moved off the land and into the cities. 

 

Therefore, if there is unemployment, if there is social aid, the blame can be laid directly at the feet of the 

Minister of Agriculture, together with his cohorts who have done more to destroy the family farm than 

any government I know. Now, I intend to prove this point conclusively this afternoon. To do so it will be 

necessary for me to review some of the things that have happened since the war. To do this I want to 

deal with cases that I am familiar with, that I have lived with and gone through. 

 

The member from Rosetown (Mr. Stevens) had something to say about the government helping and 

assisting family farmers, now I will challenge him to show me where. They are also critical of the 

Liberal government rule in agriculture and pooh-poohing the idea that the Liberals would maintain 

family farms. I checked the records, Mr. Speaker, and under the Veterans’ Land Act alone, after the war, 

8,101 farmers were established and settled in Saskatchewan due to the Veterans’ Land Act — settled on 

small holdings, 1,285, and settled on crown lands, 1,605. The total cost of the Veterans’ Land Act 

program has been $47.5 million veterans’ costs for their implements some $14,024,000, and paid to the 

Indians $3,659,000 to establish people on farms. 

 

Now the federal government at that time had the challenging responsibility of providing farms for the 

veterans who wanted them, of educating the veterans that wanted to go to school. They paid the entire 

tuition, paid the veteran $60 a month for as long as he was attending, comparable to his war years, a 

besides that worried about providing sufficient housing and all other post-war problems. And what did 

the provincial government do at that time for the veterans who came back? There were some platitudes 

that apparently the veteran was going to get priority of crown lands. This is one of the greatest hoaxes 

again. 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

44 

I lived alongside a half section of crown land for two years and six different veterans that I knew applied 

for that land, and not one had a smell of it. They took the attitude during the war that now that the dogs 

of war are unleashed, the only concern of the CCF party is the welfare of the party. And they continued 

that attitude after the war; when the veterans came back after the war they attempted to herd them into 

some co-op farms. Yet the power to establish and set up family farms, economic units, was directly in 

the hands of this government. You controlled more grazing leases than there is arable land. There is 

enough sub-marginal land so that you could provide one section of sub-marginal land for each section 

that the veterans bought through V.L.A. to provide them with an economic unit. 

 

Now, I indicated to you that in order to prove that you have destroyed the family farmer it is necessary 

for me . . . 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Would you mind answering a question? 

 

Mr. Klein: — After I’m through. It is necessary to discuss three cases that are typical of what happened 

to some of these veterans that established on land after the war — cases I am personally familiar with. 

Case no. 1 — we had a veteran that came back and with the money that he got from the federal 

government he was able to purchase three-quarter sections of land, besides that three quarter section, he 

was able to get a lease on a section and a quarter of grazing. His land was by no means above average, if 

anything it was below average because he collected the PFAA payments for four years that I know of. 

Now, because he had access to this government lease, he was able to build himself a new home, pay off 

the debt on the land and build a comfortable nice home and establish his family on that farm, and he will 

stay and continue to live on that land because he was able to get some grazing land. 

 

Case no. 2 — and this is an interesting one — a second veteran who was able to buy a half section of 

good land, which was what the federal government allowed him, and he also had a half section of land 

from his parents, which gave him a section of good land. He struggled on this farm since 1948. Last year 

he had his farm up for sale, and I said, Why are you selling out? Surely to goodness you should stay, and 

we hate to see people leaving our community. Finally he said, Maybe I won’t have to sell out. You know 

there is a section of sub-marginal land directly south of me. I can get it for around $10 or $12,000. What 

I would like to do is seed it to grass and wait until I can get some returns off it, and then I would have a 

unit that I could stay and live in this community as a family farmer forever. And he said, There is so 

much talk about ARDA, the provincial government seems very anxious to help us out on converting 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

45 

this sub-marginal land. What assistance can I get to purchase this land, will they buy it for me and let me 

seed it to grass? And I said, No, I’m sorry, there is some assistance, and he said, What’s that? They’ll 

provide you with the grass at cost, to seed it if you buy it. He turned around and he looked at me and he 

said, Big deal! 

 

Now, because this government, together with the Minister of Agriculture, have had no policy 

whatsoever to convert sub-marginal land back to pasture, this family farmer had to leave. We have heard 

a lot of platitudes and talk about how this ought to be done. The minister gets on his high-horse and he 

says, Seed your poor land to grass. That is necessary for an economic unit. But how far is he prepared to 

go to assist in purchasing that land to set up an economic unit? But the minister says, Oh, but I’m doing 

something about providing more pasture. This minister runs around the province looking for some poor 

unsuspecting marsh to drain, and he goes ahead and drains that marsh, so that Ducks Unlimited have to 

come after he is through with it, and they have to build a dam to make a marsh so that the ducks won’t 

by-pass Saskatchewan, as everything else is by-passing it. 

 

Now, I can tell the Minister of Agriculture that if he personally got on a tractor with a drill and took 

some of the grass he is trying to peddle to the farmers, and got on that tractor some morning early and 

seeded sub-marginal land already broken up, in one week he could make more pastures than he will be 

draining marshes for ten years, and at lot less expense. This is the reason why people have had to leave 

their farms. 

 

Case no. 3 — this veteran had a section of land and last year he was in a position to purchase another 

section of land, and with this second section of land there was a quarter on lease went with it. So he 

borrowed the money and he was hoping that this lease would go with the land. However, it was only a 

quarter of a section so when he bought this farm he found out that the lease had to be posted, and the 

lease was given to another farmer. This after he bought the land. It is true that the other farmer needed 

that lease, very true, but both of these fellows are living on the edge of thousands of sections of grazing 

land, and they are not asking for twenty sections or forty sections as was mentioned by the member for 

Weyburn (Mr. Staveley). He said one bachelor might control from this government as high as four 

sections of grazing land. And all these veterans are asking, so that they can stay on the farm, and stay on 

the land, is for enough pasture to pasture 30 or 40 head, so that they can convert their farming operations 

into economic units. 

 

And because of the niggardly treatment and because of the inequality of the distribution of grazing land, 

and because 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

46 

of the lack of planning to convert sub-marginal land into grass lands, these farmers are forced to leave 

their farms. Now when one of these farmers leaves his farm and comes into the city, one of three things 

happen. You might have the odd one that will sell out to retire in the city; others that sell out and move 

to the city, either gets a job and displaces someone else from that job, or he can come to the city, work 

for a year or so, and then if he can’t find work, go on unemployment; or three, he can move into the city, 

sustain himself for a month or so, and then go on social aid. This is the overall effect of the rural people 

migrating into the city, and as I say, it is going to go down in history as the greatest tragedy that has ever 

befallen this province, because when we look at countries in the past, we find that the danger sign of 

decay was when the people moved off the farms and into the city. 

 

Now, if we have a look into the future, this becomes an ever graver problem. The average holdings 

today in farm areas, particularly in my area, are in the neighborhood of some 40, 50, 60,000 and up, so, 

temporarily, we are all right. What is going to happen when a man who has a $60,000 unit disposes of it. 

Will a family farmer buy it? Or are you going to eliminate one more family from that community when 

that sale is made? Who is going to buy that holding? You are playing directly into the hands of 

professional investors or anybody who can afford to pay $60,000 cash for a unit. Not the type of man 

that needs it. 

 

I was down in the United States in 1947 combining, and I thought they were in a dreadful predicament 

because when we went to get a job, on 3,000 acres of seeded land, we found that the land was owned by 

a banker and a lawyer and a doctor, who never ever saw the land and had it sub-let to a tenant. Is that the 

position you want agriculture to get into in Saskatchewan? Is that what you want to stabilize your 

economy? You overlook this agricultural industry, and apparently you are not prepared to do a thing 

about supporting a family farmer, except a few platitudes and tidbits that you are willing to talk about 

and yak about all over the province. 

 

Or are you wanting to become Castros? To wait until the abuse in land-holding is so great that these big 

landholders will be so unpopular that you can socialize them like you did the doctors, or do as Castro 

did. While I’m talking about Castro, you people are great admirers of this man, you people who are 

posing as the champions of free enterprise apparently like this fellow Castro. About a year or so ago one 

of our teachers from Saskatchewan flew the coop . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Speak for yourself. 

 

Mr. Klein: — No, I’m going to speak for you and your party, if you don’t mind. One of our teachers 

flew the coop, and he went down to Cuba. 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

47 

during the Easter recess, and he didn’t return for some ten months. Now, I wondered where this teacher 

would show up on the scene again, and I thought perhaps somebody may raise Cain with him. But lo 

and behold, by going through the papers, I find that this teacher becomes a great hero of the NDP and 

was invited to address an elite group of the NDP. Now, where did this take place? This took place in 

Saskatoon. This teacher, and his only claim to fame — and I have his book if anyone cares to read it, I 

have it here “Cuba Libra” or something like that. His claim to fame is that he is pro-Castro, pro-

Khrushchev, anti-imperialist, anti-capitalist, anti-American. That is the claim he has to fame, and what 

honored position did he get in the NDP? He was asked to address the CCF-NDP business organization. 

Now I think this must have been an elite group because one of the men at the meeting was none other 

than our friend, Dr. Mahood. Dr. Ed. Mahood had invited him over, and who is Dr. Ed. Mahood? I think 

he is a candidate for the NDP in Saskatoon in this next federal election. And what were the 

circumstances under which this man spoke, as reported in the Star-Phoenix. The reporter who stayed to 

hear this speaker found the main doors locked when she left, and had to return to the meeting to have the 

door opened. Ed. Mahood, who managed to find the key, hesitated before opening the door by 

mentioning that there will be a resolution later. 

 

The event was advertised as a public meeting to hear a speaker on Cuba, however before Mr. Matson 

spoke, Harry Like, provincial president of the CCF-NDP discussed plans on the forthcoming national 

meeting to be held next year in Regina. Following his brief business reports, Mr. Link informed the 

audience that the hat will be passed around for donations towards expenses for the evening, to pay this 

teacher who had given a nice talk on Cuba. And then it goes on to say what Mr. Matson spoke on; he 

mentioned these horrible imperialists, these horrible capitalists, as he does in his book, have brought 

about the destruction of Cuba, and you are the same people who are now trying to cloak yourselves in 

some cloak of respectability by saying “we are champions of private enterprise”. 

 

By golly, when you fellows start growing beards, I’m taking off for the hills, because I’m not the martyr 

type at all, and it is quite likely that I am going to expect to see somebody sprouting beards. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Klein: — Now, isn’t this a kind of scary thing? Doesn’t it scare you at all? It does me. To realize 

that this Dr. Ed. Mahood associates himself with a man who is pro-Cuba, pro-Castro, and pro-

Khrushchev and everything else, is also a teacher at the teachers’ college in Saskatoon to influence 

young minds. 



 

March 8, 1963 

 

 

48 

I had a little frightening bit of an experience with that man. When I attended the teachers’ college in 

Moose Jaw, Dr. Mahood had set up a little select group that met two or three evenings a week at the 

normal school. I wasn’t a part of this group but I think Lloyd Matson was. One evening he decided he 

would invite us over to attend a panel discussion on defence. After I listened to the presentation of the 

panel members I thought I was in a real cell meeting because he had these fellows so brain-washed that 

one after the other they would pop up on their feet and say that Canada is spending — I forget what it 

was — 80¢ out of every dollar on defence, and defence against what? Against Russia who only wants 

peace and to get along with the rest of the world, and here in Canada we are spending 80¢ out of every 

dollar to defend ourselves against these freedom, peace-loving people. So by the time they got through I 

was very annoyed and by the time it came to my turn to speak I threw away my notes and took my 

stand. I said that I happened to go through a war for four years and I had the misfortune of serving on a 

destroyer that they took out of mothballs and gave us on loan to the Canadian Navy because we hadn’t 

equipped ourselves with the modern war machines. We were lulled into thinking that Hitler didn’t want 

war. Had we been prepared, this war would only have lasted two years, but, unfortunately, there were a 

few people duped as we have been here at this meeting, who are prepared to sell Canada short and to sell 

the entire free world short. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Klein: — That is this man that is such a great hero now to the NDP. This man is going to give you 

the cloak of respectability, this is the man who is going to give the NDP the position where they are 

going to pose as the champions of free enterprise. You had better do a little renouncing before you do an 

about face on your policies. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Nonsense. 

 

Mr. Klein: — You check the nonsense if you like. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Was McKenzie King hobnobbing with Tim Buck? 

 

Mr. Klein: — There may be other items of business that you would like to attend to and, therefore, until 

Monday, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn this debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:26 o’clock p.m. 


