



















































Hansard: March 20, 1963


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

FIFTH SESSION — FOURTEENTH LEGISLATURE 

25th Day 

 

March 20, 1963. 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mrs. Strum: (Saskatoon City) — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are called I would like to 

draw the attention of the house to a group of 37 students in the west gallery from the Howard Code 

school, Saskatoon, with their teacher, Mr. Hayes. I am sure you will all want to join with me in wishing 

them a very happy and informative visit to this house, and a safe journey home. 

 

LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR BIRTHDAY GREETINGS 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Before the orders of the day I would like to inform the members of the house, that I 

have received a reply from His Honor the Lieutenant Governor, thanking the house for the birthday 

greetings which they sent to him the other day. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Hon. Mr. Kramer moved second reading of Bill No. 46 — An Act to amend the Game Act. 

 

He said: 

 

In moving second reading, Mr. Speaker, I want to inform the members of the house, that the changes in 

this Act, are not anything that change in any way the principle of the Act. There is only one departure 

that is new, and this is in regard to hunter safety training. Questions that hon. members may have, I will 

be pleased to answer them on third reading, therefore, I move that this Bill be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 



March 20, 1963 

 

 

2 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney moved second reading of Bill No. 49 — An Act to amend the Mutual Medical 

and Hospital Benefits Association Act. 

 

He said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is a Bill to amend the Mutual Medical and Hospitalization Benefits Association 

Act. The Bill as members will have noted, is fairly short. It deals with relatively technical matters, 

dealing with the procedure to be followed on the change or alteration of the powers or the constitutions 

of such associations. A clarification of the borrowing powers of the associations and provision with 

respect to who may be qualified to sit on the board of directors of the associations. 

 

I believe that each of the matters would best be considered in committee, and accordingly, Mr. Speaker, 

I would move that the bill be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: (Melville) — If I might just ask the Minister a question on this, whether the 

organizations concerned have requested these changes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Yes, in answer to the hon. member’s question, I would indicate that yes, the 

organizations concerned have requested, I think, each of the changes provided for. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read the second time. 

 

The house adjourned at 5:30 p.m. 


