



















































Hansard: February 15, 1963


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

2nd Day 

 

Friday, February 15, 1963 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

MEDICAL CARE 

 

Mr. W.R. Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Before the orders of the day are called I should 

like to direct a question to the Minister of Public Health. Has the government or the Medical Care 

Commission taken any recent steps to speed up payment of doctors‟ accounts under the provisions of the 

Medical Care Insurance Act? 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, the answer to the hon. member‟s question 

is I think “no” if by any proper interpretation of “recent” he means in recent days or in recent weeks. 

The procedures of the Medical Care Insurance Commission have for some weeks been quite adequate to 

pay doctors‟ accounts in good time. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask another question then? Is the minister aware that some 

doctors in the province have complained that they will be obliged to leave the province if speedier 

payment is not made by the commission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware that any such complaints have come to the 

commission, to the Minister of Public Health or from any doctor or to the Minister of Public Health or 

the commission from any approved health agency. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, may I direct a further question to the Minister of Health? When does the 

government contemplate that arrangements will be completed to bring radiologists and pathologists 

under the provisions of the Medical Care Insurance Act as I think his predecessor promised would be 

done in the last session? 



 

February 15, 1963 

 

 

 

2 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — To answer the member‟s question and not his statement, I would like to advise 

that active negotiations are proceeding at the present time between representatives of the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons and representatives of the Department of Public Health and the Medical Care 

Insurance Commission and I do not believe that a report on those negotiations would assist in reaching a 

speedy conclusion. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask one further question of the minister? Has any special 

invitation been sent recently by the government to the College of Physicians and Surgeons in an effort to 

iron out some of the difficulties and causes of friction which are being experienced in the operation of 

the Medical Care Insurance Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I find myself unable to answer this question since I do not know 

what the hon. member means by „special‟. There are a substantial number of communications, averaging 

one or two a week, between the Department of Public Health and the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons dealing with questions which may arise between them. Some of them are dealing with the 

Medical Care Insurance Commission. Meetings are held from time to time and I am unable to put an 

accurate assessment or meaning on what the hon. member means by „special‟ invitation. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — An ordinary invitation then if you don‟t want to call it „special‟ . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

MOTIONS OF CONDOLENCE 

 

Premier W.S. Lloyd: — Before the orders of the day are proceeded with, members of the legislature 

recall that it is our practice on the first sitting day to take recognition of services of the various members 

of the legislature who may have died since the time of our last meeting. This afternoon it is necessary to 

draw to the attention of the legislature the names of the number of former members and I propose to do 

that and make some comment on their service and to move the usual motion, seconded by the Hon. 

Leader of the Opposition. We are informed that Mr. John Gray Banks who formerly sat in as member 

representing Pelly has passed away. In addition, Mr. William James Cummings who represented the 

constituency of Gravelbourg, Mr. Peter Lawrence Hyde who represented the Maple Creek constituency, 

Dr. George William Sahlmark who was the former member for the Saltcoats constituency have also 

passed on. Of the group that we pay tribute to today, Mr. Banks was the only one with whom it was my 

pleasure to be in the legislature. A number of us will 



 

February 15, 1963 

 

 

 
3 

remember him as he represented the Pelly constituency for a period of some four years. I am sure other 

members of the legislature who have had personal acquaintance with these men will be able to comment 

much more adequately than I can. The one other reference I should like to make is that of Dr. Sahlmark, 

who in addition to being a member of the legislature, served the public as chairman of the local 

government board for a period of some ten years, consequently extended his period of service to the 

public in that way. With those words, Mr. Speaker, I should like to move, seconded by Mr. Thatcher; 

 

Resolved, That this assembly records with sorrow and regret, the passing in recent months of four 

former members of this assembly, and expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions each 

made to his community, his constituency, and to this province: 

 

John Gray Banks, who sat in this assembly as the member for the constituency of Pelly from 1948 to 

1952 died June 24, 1961. He was born and educated in Durham, Ontario, and moved to Saskatoon in 

1910. Upon graduating in law from the University of Saskatchewan, he moved to Kamsack where he 

became an active participant in community affairs, serving for fourteen years on the Kamsack High 

School Board, and as Mayor of Kamsack in 1947. He also served for many years as a member of the 

Session of the United Church at Kamsack. 

 

William James Cummings who died May 25, 1962, was the member for the constituency of 

Gravelbourg from 1921 to 1925. He was born in Belfast, Northern Ireland and came to Canada in 

1904, settling first in the Peterborough district of Ontario. In 1908 he took up a homestead in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Cummings served his community for many years both as councillor and reeve and 

also as secretary treasurer of the St. Boswell‟s Rural Telephone Company. 

 

Peter Lawrence Hyde, who from 1921 to 1927 represented the Maple Creek constituency in this 

assembly, died on March 6, 1962. Mr. Hyde was born at Silverton, Manitoba. He was educated and 

taught school in that province and he served overseas with the Cameron Highlanders of Winnipeg 

during World War I. 



 

February 15, 1963 

 

 

 

4 

Settling in Hatton in 1919, he later moved to Regina where he served as alderman from 1930 to 1932. 

He was an executive member of various community athletic associations and member of the Board of 

Governors of the Regina General Hospital. 

 

George William Sahlmark, former member for the Saltcoats constituency, died August 6, 1962. He 

was born in Morris, Minnesota, and moved to Whitewood where his parents settled in 1887 and where 

he continued his education. After teaching school for several years, he attended the University of 

Manitoba, graduating Arts in 1902 and in Medicine in 1908. Dr. Sahlmark practised in Saltcoats, 

Neudorf and Regina. He sat in this assembly from 1918 until 1929 and he served as member and later 

chairman of local government boards between 1934 and 1944. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement this assembly expresses its most sincere 

sympathies with members of the bereaved families. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It has been moved by the Hon. Mr. Lloyd, seconded by Mr. Thatcher, will the house 

take the motion as read? 

 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — I should just like to say something here in regards to Mr. Peter 

Hyde, the former member for the constituency of Maple Creek. I didn‟t have the good fortune to know 

Mr. Hyde personally but there are still many people in the constituency of Maple Creek who have a 

vivid memory of Mr. Hyde because of his forceful personality. It has been mentioned I think by the 

Premier that Mr. Hyde came into the constituency of Maple Creek and settled in the town of Hatton just 

across the Alberta border in 1919, shortly after his discharge from the Canadian Army after the first 

Great War. Hatton in those days, in 1919, was a thriving western town, many of the homesteads were 

just being opened up in that area. Mr. Hyde was quick to assess the need of a distributing center in 

Hatton for farm machinery in order to serve those farmers needs who came a distance of some 50 to 55 

miles in delivering their grain to Hatton due to the fact that there were no branch lines between the main 

line of the C.P.R. and the one to the north — some 75 miles distance. It is rather remarkable that Mr. 

Hyde came to Hatton in 1919 and very shortly thereafter had become a leading figure in the 



 

February 15, 1963 

 

 

 
5 

community. These people still speak of his friendly personality — he was a very frank person — and he 

was very vocal in that he held strong convictions and he expressed them. Within two years of his arrival 

into the constituency of Maple Creek the people saw fit to elect him to the legislature to represent them 

for the constituency. He sat in the legislature from 1921 to 1926. He resigned his seat in the legislature 

because he was moving from Hatton to the city of Regina. It was no surprise to the people of Maple 

Creek when they learned that Mr. Hyde, following the same pattern that he did up our way, within two 

years after arrival in the city, he was elected to the City Council. He was a man who was interested in 

sports, he was interested in community activity, he was much interested in serving the needs of his 

people. 

 

I would like to join with the Premier and members of this assembly in extending sympathy to the 

bereaved members of the family. 

 

Mr. J.R. Barrie (Pelly): — It was my privilege to know the late Mr. John Gray Banks for a period of 

nearly 40 years, and as the Premier has outlined in his motion, Mr. Banks was one of the many young 

men, who at the turn of the century emigrated from the province of Ontario to our province. He was one 

of the first members in the law class in the University of Saskatchewan. In fact in the first graduating 

class of the University of Saskatchewan, he was one of the graduates. Immediately following 

graduation, he came to the district where I now live and settled in the town of Kamsack in the year 1917. 

He practised law in that particular community for a period of 44 years, until the time of his death. Mr. 

Banks was a man who took a very keen interest in his community in community affairs and particularly 

with respect to civic affairs. As the Premier has mentioned, he served for many years on the Public 

School and Collegiate Boards in the town of Kamsack. Some of the fine school buildings that they have 

today in the town of Kamsack could be credited, a share at least of them could be credited to the efforts 

and planning of Mr. Banks. He also was for many years a member of the Kamsack Town Council and, 

as has been mentioned, he served as Mayor for one term in his town. He was a very active supporter and 

member of the United Church of Canada and was a man that held various positions in his local church as 

well as a member of the session for a number of years. 

 

In addition to this, he was a man who was particularly interested in the youth of his community and 

many of the middle aged people today in the community of Kamsack and other communities have the 

very highest regard and respect for the assistance which Mr. Banks rendered to them and other young 

people in the field of sports. He was particularly identified 



 

February 15, 1963 

 

 

 

6 

in this field and he was always ready and willing to lend his support, financial and otherwise to promote 

that particular activity in his community. 

 

He was a man who was widely known in this province and has a host of friends throughout 

Saskatchewan, particularly in the area where he lived for so many years. He lived in that community 

during times that were very prosperous and times that were most difficult. He was truly one of the 

pioneers. Many people today and for years past and for years to come will pay tribute to Mr. Banks for 

his kindness, sympathy and understanding when they were in particular difficulty. I would just like to 

say that in concluding these brief remarks that no greater tribute could be paid anyone than was paid as a 

tribute to Mr. Banks at his funeral. The United Church in Kamsack which accommodates a great number 

of people was totally inadequate to accommodate the people who attended his funeral, it being the 

largest by far of any funeral ever held in the town. I wish to end my remarks and concur in those of the 

Premier and the motion now before the house. 

 

Mr. J.E. Snedker (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to take this opportunity of joining with other 

members of the house in paying my respects to those former members who have passed on since the last 

regular session of this legislature, and to extend, on behalf of my constituency and for myself, sincere 

sympathy to the bereaved. 

 

Very particularly, at this time, I wish to pay tribute to one of my predecessors, a former representative of 

the Saltcoats constituency, Dr. G.W. Sahlmark, who passed away in the city of Regina on August 8th of 

last year. Dr. Sahlmark was a true pioneer of the province of Saskatchewan. He came with his Swedish 

parents from Minnesota to western Canada at the age of 12 years. They settled on a homestead south of 

the present town of Stockholm in 1887. At that time Dr. Hugh MacKay was in charge of an Indian 

School at the southern extremity of Round Lake. In addition to teaching the Indian Children, Dr. 

MacKay also enrolled some senior students from the surrounding territory. Among those students was 

the young Sahlmark, who received a part of his education there, and then remained to teach in the Indian 

School from 1893 to 1897 in which year he entered the University of Manitoba where he later received 

his Bachelor of Arts followed by 



 

February 15, 1963 

 

 

 
7 

his degree in medicine in 1908. Having graduated in medicine, Dr. Sahlmark settled in the village of 

Shellmouth, Manitoba, a small and very pretty settlement on the banks of the Assiniboine River, located 

midway between the present towns of MacNutt and Langenburg in Saskatchewan. He married the 

former Clara Adelaide Boyle of Edmonton in 1908 and their union was blessed with two children, Mrs. 

Christopher Falkner presently of London, England, and the famous concert pianist Mrs. Rudolph Reti of 

New York. 

 

In 1910 Dr. Sahlmark moved to Saltcoats, Saskatchewan. He practised there for 20 years during part of 

which time he represented the constituency of Saltcoats as a Liberal member in the legislature of the 

province of Saskatchewan. Dr. Sahlmark won the provincial seat at Saltcoats by a large majority in the 

by-election of 1918. In the general provincial election of 1921, the people of our community paid him 

the very great tribute of according him an acclamation. In the general provincial election of 1925, Dr. 

Sahlmark was again returned by a large and sweeping majority, representing the Saltcoats seat until his 

retirement from politics at the dissolution of the legislature in 1929. 

 

In 1929 he disposed of his practice at Saltcoats and then practised in Neudorf, Saskatchewan from 1930 

to 1934. In 1934 he was appointed a member of the local government board of our province, becoming 

chairman of the board in 1943. The following year at the age of 70 Dr. Sahlmark retired from 

government service. However, due to the extreme scarcity of medical personnel, occasioned by the 

Second World War, Dr. Sahlmark was persuaded to resume his medical career, on this occasion as an 

anaesthetist, a sphere of medicine in which he had long been interested. After taking special courses of 

study in New York he served in both the Grey Nuns and Regina General hospitals until his final 

retirement in the year 1952. 

 

His was a great life in a great age in the history of Canada. His lifetime spanned the years from hand and 

horse labor to a highly mechanized agriculture. He saw the introduction of the telephone and wireless 

communications, later followed by television. While in the field of transportation it can truly be said his 

lifetime spanned the era from the ox cart to the astronaut. During all these changes he never ceased to 

keep abreast of the times and maintained a lifelong and keen interest in local, national and world affairs. 

The late Dr. Sahlmark was a kindly, unassuming man with a world of wisdom and experience, a great 

depth of human understanding and a true gentleman in every sense of the world. His practice at Saltcoats 

was one of the most extensive in the province of Saskatchewan. 



 

February 15, 1963 

 

 

 

8 

He was our family doctor, and also attended the family of my wife‟s people. He made a host of deep and 

lasting friendships within our community and though long removed from our midst he never forgot any 

of us. Even at a great age his mind and memory remained clear, his conversation being full of questions 

and discussions concerning old times and old friends in our community. Pioneer, teacher, scholar, 

doctor, legislator, administrator and friend, he was indeed a very great Canadian. I am sure that all 

members of this legislature would wish to join with me in paying tribute to this remarkable man for the 

lifetime of service which he rendered to our people and for the great contribution which he made to our 

province and to Canada. On behalf of the provincial constituency of Saltcoats and for myself I wish to 

extend very deep and sincere sympathy to his family, and to his friends. 

 

Mr. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people of Gravelbourg and this 

Legislature, I too would like to pay tribute to a man from the constituency of Gravelbourg, William 

James Cummings. I knew him only as an acquaintance. William James Cummings was born in Belfast, 

Ireland on July 21st, 1884, was married on June 27th, 1913. He had four children, Katherine, Sadie, 

Hugh and Elizabeth. He was a farmer, a very active leader in the community affairs of the district of St. 

Boswell. From the time that he homesteaded into the community, Mr. Cummings was already to give a 

helping hand to his friends and neighbors. He was elected as a councillor from 1914 to 1917. Having 

shown his ability to serve his community well in that capacity they chose him and elected him as reeve 

from 1918 to 1922. He finished the last year of 1922 while he was a member of the legislature. Having 

served his community then so well and the area surrounding it, he was elected to the legislature in 1921 

and sat in the legislature as an independent member. Upon leaving the government or the legislature of 

the day when the government was changed he continued to serve his community on the telephone board, 

on the school board and as a Wheat Pool delegate. Such qualities of leadership and warmth of friendship 

will be missed by all who knew him. Two of his children are still residing in St. Boswell district, Hugh 

and Elizabeth. He died on May 25th, 1962 and for 78 golden years William James Cummings brought 

warmth and comfort to all who knew him. He will be missed by all his friends. 

 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a few words. I did not know all of 

these members we are honoring here today, but I sat in the house with Mr. Banks. He was only here four 

years, and much has been said by the member for Pelly (Mr. Barrie). I am not going to say much about 

that. 



 

February 15, 1963 

 

 

 
9 

Dr. Sahlmark left this house before 1934 and I never sat in the house with him. I knew him before 1934, 

and after we got into the house and a new government was established he was appointed chairman of the 

local government board. That is where many of us who served as reeves and hospital board chairmen at 

that time, came into contact with him and the chairman of the board at the time, Mr. Grosch. I think this 

province was quite fortunate in having gentlemen of the calibre of Mr. Grosch and Mr. Sahlmark at this 

time. 

 

We should not forget these were trying days in this province. Those were the times of adjustment. These 

two men had the responsibility of carrying the burden and exercising good judgment in adjusting 

millions of debts in this province between hospital boards, municipalities, investment and debenture 

companies, etc. In 1944 Mr. Grosch relinquished his position as chairman and Mr. Sahlmark was 

appointed chairman of the board. 

 

I think all those things that have been said about these four members is tribute well earned. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by Mr. Thatcher: 

 

That the resolution just passed, together with transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of deceased 

former members, be communicated to the bereaved families, on behalf of this assembly, by Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

SOUND REINFORCEMENT SYSTEM 

 

Before the orders of the day I would like to make brief reference to the sound reinforcement system, so 

that the members will know what has been done and what is to be done. First, I would like to say that the 

greater part of the new sound system in the chamber has now been installed. This has involved a 

complete re-wiring system of some magnitude and the placement of the control board and the 

operational unit concerned with the Tannoy Company sound reinforcement system. Just in passing I 

would advise the members that this system, or a very similar system, is in use in the Canadian and the 

British House of Commons. 

 

Now all of the system has been installed in the chamber, except the desk microphones and the desk 

speakers. Owing to storms, rather violent storms, in the Atlantic, the 



 

February 15, 1963 

 

 

 

10 

microphone and loudspeaker units only arrived by ship in Canada yesterday. We hope that they can be 

flown to Regina some time this evening and that a complete installation will be possible by Monday 

morning. The result, I hope, Mr. Speaker, will be agreeable to all members of the house. 

 

I would like to ask the co-operation of members in securing this complete job of installation by leaving 

their desks open over the weekend. This is necessary because of certain wiring that will be made at the 

rear of each desk and requires that the drawers be left open, and naturally if you have any materials in 

your desk of a private nature, it might be best if you would temporarily remove them. I will provide you 

with further information on the system as of Monday or Tuesday, so that you will have complete facts 

on how the system operates and I think you will find this much more satisfactory than the previous one. 

 

The assembly then adjourned at 3:10 o‟clock p.m. 


