




















































Hansard: February 14, 1963


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

1st Day 

 

Thursday, February 14, 1963 

 

3 o’clock p.m. 

 

This being the day appointed by Proclamation of His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor, dated the Eighth 

day of January, 1963, for the meeting of the Fifth Session of the Fourteenth Legislative Assembly of the 

Province of Saskatchewan, and the Assembly having met: 

 

Mr. Speaker informed the Assembly that he had received a communication from the Private Secretary to 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor stating that His Honour would open the Session at three o’clock 

p.m. today, Thursday, the Fourteenth day of February, 1963. 

 

3:05 o’clock p.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor entered the Chamber and, having taken his seat upon the Throne, 

was pleased to open the Session with the following Speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, 

 

Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my privilege to welcome you to the Fifth Session of the Fourteenth Legislature of Saskatchewan. 

 

In 1962 the Canadian economy weathered a succession of strains and crises to produce its first year of 

significant growth since 1956. This past year has been one of sound economic growth for our province 

of Saskatchewan. Most gratifying was the impressive recovery of the agricultural sector from a near 

crop failure in 1961. Cattle production was above average and good prices prevailed. Further gains in 

the non-agricultural industries increased the tempo of economic growth. Public and private investment 

reached record levels while manufacturing and mineral production climbed to new peaks. Personal per 

capita income also reached a record peak and retail trade benefited accordingly. We look with 

confidence to a future of sustained growth and broader employment opportunities. 



 

February 14, 1963 

 

 

2 

The legislative and budgetary programs which will be presented to you during this session are designed 

to contribute further to this economic growth and to make broader opportunities for better living 

available to all our citizens. 

 

Good progress has been made in the construction and development of the South Saskatchewan River 

Development Project. 

 

The further development of community pastures and fodder projects has made a valuable contribution to 

agricultural stability. Five new community pastures will be opened during the coming year. You will be 

asked to approve requests for additional funds to greatly expand existing agricultural development 

programs. Legislation will be introduced to facilitate the development and administration of water 

resources on a watershed basis. 

 

The Family Farm Improvement Program has assisted more than 6,000 farmers to modernize their 

homes. The Municipal Water Assistance Program has enabled 56 towns and villages to install water and 

sewerage systems. Funds to continue these programs will be requested. 

 

The non-agricultural labor force in Saskatchewan has continued to increase and now exceeds 200,000. 

Of this number 74,000 are employed in establishments with more than fifteen employees. 

 

The largest and most significant single development in the industrial history of our province occurred 

last year with the opening of the International Minerals and Chemical Corporation potash mine and mill 

at Esterhazy. This industry is rapidly approaching full production and announcement has been made that 

another shaft will be sunk at this site and additional plant facilities constructed. Sixteen other companies 

are actively exploring and developing our potash resources. 

 

The helium gas reserves of the province are creating wide interest. One company has announced its 

intention to produce and market this rare product before the end of the year. 

 

Saskatchewan’s first steel mill continues to expand its volume and variety of products. Recently it 

obtained a large contract to supply pipe for a new gas transmission line that will be built through our 

province. The protective plastic coating for this entire line will also be supplied by a plant established in 

Regina three years ago. 

 

The generation of electric power has increased to serve the needs of our growing industrial economy. 

The commencement of hydro-electric generation at the new Squaw Rapids plant of the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation this spring brings under active development another natural resource of our province. 



 

February 14, 1963 

 

 

3 

During the coming year the provincial power and gas utility will further extend services. The total 

number of its electrical customers will reach 200,000; the total number of natural gas customers will 

approach 100,000. 

 

Interprovincial Co-operatives Limited has started construction of its chemical plant in Saskatoon. This 

industry will produce the basic materials for farm chemicals and provision is being made for the 

production of other products in the future. 

 

A considerable upswing in exploratory interest in the sedimentary area of the province has been noted 

since a full market for the productive capacity of Saskatchewan’s oil and gas fields was achieved in 

1962. In order to foster greater exploratory activity consultation with the petroleum producers of 

Saskatchewan has taken place and certain changes in regulations governing disposition of petroleum 

rights will be announced. 

 

My government will continue to supply information and services to companies engaged in the 

exploration for minerals in the Pre-Cambrian areas. Aeromagnetic surveys will be continued. A drill 

core and sample storage building for metallic mineral specimens will be constructed at La Ronge. 

Additional incentives will be offered to mineral exploration companies. 

 

The Saskatchewan Research Council has continued its valuable work of obtaining information on the 

utilization of our resources and providing services to our industries. In order to increase these activities 

approval has been given for the expansion of the research laboratory on the Saskatoon campus of the 

University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Since the end of the war our province has witnessed the steady emergence of a broader and more 

diversified economic base. Greater stability and diversity in agriculture, the discovery and extended use 

of both new and old resources, new and improved facilities for electric power, natural gas, water, 

transportation and research, the establishment and development of key industries, and the rapid 

population growth in major cities and towns have all strengthened the foundations of the provincial 

economy. These achievements have now laid a suitable basis for further expansion of manufacturing 

industry. 

 

Legislation will be introduced to consolidate and extend several long-standing programs of government 

encouragement and assistance in the location of industry in Saskatchewan. You will be asked also to 

approve measures establishing a formal means for representatives of the private sector of the provincial 

economy to participate more fully in a program designed to encourage industrial development. 



 

February 14, 1963 

 

 

4 

Technical and vocational education has been developed and extended in order to provide training, 

encourage industry and increase employment. New technical and vocational school facilities in Moose 

Jaw, Saskatoon and Prince Albert, valued at $7 million will be completed during the coming year. My 

government expresses the hope that the government of Canada which has contributed a substantial 

amount of the cost of these facilities, will extend its policy of financial support for education. Of 

particular need is assistance for the rapidly growing university program. 

 

The Apprenticeship Training Program has expanded and during the current training period over 1,000 

apprentices will receive instructions. Unemployed persons took advantage of the education upgrading 

program in order to qualify for vocational training in approved schools. 

 

It is gratifying to note that the number of unemployed workers in Saskatchewan has declined from the 

level of one year ago. Some of this improvement is undoubtedly due to the Municipal Winter Works 

Incentive Program in which the province takes an active part. During the current fiscal year, 520 

municipalities have participated in more than 1,000 winter works projects, valued at $14.5 million. As a 

consequence more than 300,000 man-days of work were provided. 

 

During 1962, minimum wages were increased and the provisions of The Hours of Work Act were 

extended to 17 additional communities. 

 

More than 3,000 miles of our extensive highway system now have a dust-free surface. Year around 

reliability of our provincial highway system along with other improvements have permitted the 

operation of larger and more efficient trucks, with resultant major economies in the movement of goods. 

Nearly 9,000 miles of high standard all-weather municipal, oil-field and resort access roads have been 

constructed since the Grid Road program was introduced. The 1963 highway and municipal road 

assistance program will continue to improve these important services. 

 

More than 200,000 telephones are now in service in Saskatchewan. This represents a 100 percent 

increase over the last ten years. During 1962, telephone exchanges in 21 communities were converted to 

automatic operation and 5,000 additional rural subscribers were connected to these exchanges. One-third 

of all rural telephones are now dial operated. This program of modernization will continue. An increased 

number of rural telephone companies took advantage of the assistance program which has provided 

grants for pole replacement and higher standards of maintenance. 



 

February 14, 1963 

 

 

5 

The Otosquen road, connecting Hudson Bay and The Pas, Manitoba, will be completed in the coming 

year. Work on the Lake Hanson road to Creighton and Flin Flon is proceeding. The provision of these 

and other northern roads has opened the way to untouched resources and provides access to new 

recreation and holiday areas. 

 

The extent to which our citizens and visitors from outside Saskatchewan use established provincial parks 

requires the expansion of this program. Accordingly, new provincial parks will be established at three 

sites adjacent to the South Saskatchewan Reservoir. 

 

Mental health facilities continue to improve. Construction of the Psychiatric Centre at Yorkton is 

proceeding satisfactorily. The facilities and programs of the newly established training school at Prince 

Albert are being further improved to meet the needs of the mentally retarded, and more patients will be 

admitted during the year. 

 

Last year Sabin poliomyelitis vaccine was made available to all persons in the province. It is gratifying 

to note that only three cases of the disease, and no deaths from it, occurred in 1962. Another dose of this 

vaccine will be provided in 1963 for all children over one year of age. 

 

Amendments will be introduced to The Health Services Act in order to enlarge the membership of the 

Health Services Advisory Commission with a view to increasing the scope of its activities. 

 

Recipients of old age assistance and their dependents, totalling more than 8,000 persons, now receive 

medical care at the expense of the province. This new measure should also be of benefit to 

municipalities which formerly were responsible for much of the cost of medical care for this group. 

 

The program of housing for senior citizens continues to obtain the support of communities and 

organizations. More than 5,000 aged persons will be accommodated in homes and in the provincial 

geriatric centres by mid-summer. 

 

Negotiations have been completed for federal-provincial-municipal subsidized housing projects at 

Saskatoon and Weyburn, and construction of these is expected at an early date. Similar projects for other 

Saskatchewan cities are under discussion. 

 

Amendments to The Child Welfare Act will be introduced to relieve municipalities of any part of the 

cost of maintaining neglected children in the future. 



 

February 14, 1963 

 

 

6 

My government has continued to consult with municipal people on a number of matters. As a result 

some changes in statutes under which local government exercise authority will be proposed. Legislation 

relating to local improvements will be introduced. 

 

The proposed piece-meal abandonment of railway lines in western Canada has caused widespread 

concern. Because of potential serious economic and social dislocations in a number of communities, my 

government considered it necessary to oppose the procedure which was being followed. Consequently, it 

convened a conference in December last year to discuss action that might be taken by the governments 

of the three prairie provinces, by farm organizations, by organizations representing local governments, 

and by representatives of commercial interests. Following this conference my government participated 

in the representations made to the government of Canada. 

 

The decision to temporarily suspend further abandonment of railway lines was welcomed throughout 

western Canada. However, my government will continue to concern itself with this problem until a 

policy is devised which will provide for a proper rationalization of transportation services. 

 

Further attention has been given to special problems of our Metis and Treaty Indian citizens. Annual 

grants are being made to the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians to assist in defraying the costs of 

operating this association. New experiments in assisting northern residents to construct homes have 

proven successful. The eagerness with which a group of young Metis men have participated in special 

educational upgrading classes and technical and vocational instruction encourages the expansion of this 

program. A policy providing for the extension of the rural electrification program to Indian reservations 

has been adopted. The provision of power to remote northern communities such as Beauval has 

produced encouraging results. After attending a school offering training in electrical installations in this 

community, 17 homes were wired by their owners. 

 

Progress has been made in the integration of Treaty Indian students into the provincial school systems in 

many parts of the province. In order to encourage this desirable trend, amendments to The School Act to 

facilitate agreements between school boards and the federal authority will be proposed. 

 

Further recognition will be given to the problems school authorities have in providing adequate 

education opportunities. In this regard amendments to The Teachers’ Superannuation Act will be 

proposed. Also, provision for increased school grants will again be made. 



 

February 14, 1963 

 

 

7 

Legislation will be introduced consolidating and amending The Automobile Accident Insurance Act and 

extending the benefits it provides. Legislation will also be introduced consolidating and amending The 

Municipal Hail Insurance Act and The Administrator of Estates of the Mentally Incompetent Act. You 

will be asked to consider amendments to legislation which will strengthen the position of magistrates’ 

courts and give greater security of tenure to magistrates. 

 

The matter of adequate publication and subsequent review of regulations passed pursuant to the statutes 

of the province has been under active review. It is now proposed to introduce legislation dealing with the 

registration, the publication, and the tabling in the legislature of regulations requiring observance by 

sections of the public. 

 

My government has reviewed with interest the three reports of the federal Royal Commission on 

Government Organization. The need for ensuring efficiency and effectiveness in the discharge of public 

business has long been recognized by the government of Saskatchewan. It was, in fact, the first 

provincial government in Canada to establish a special agency to conduct continuing studies in 

organization and management of governmental affairs. It can be noted also that a number of the 

recommendations of this commission have been government policy in Saskatchewan for many years. 

 

In the interests of contributing further toward this purpose, legislation will be brought before this 

assembly to establish a Saskatchewan Public Administration Foundation devoted to research studies and 

special training projects in fields relating to all levels of the public service. 

 

The Public Accounts for the last fiscal year, together with estimates for the year beginning April 1, 1963 

will be submitted. 

 

I leave you now to the business of the Session with full confidence that you will favorably discharge 

your duties and responsibilities. May Divine Providence continue to bless our province and guide the 

legislature in all its deliberations. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor then retired from the Chamber. 

 


