




















































Hansard: March 01, 1963


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

12th Day 

 

Friday, March 1, 1963. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

TELEPHONE AND TELETYPE SERVICE FOR URANIUM CITY 

 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are proceeded 

with, I would like to make a brief statement of public interest and to the interest of every member of this 

legislature. 

 

Direct telephone and teletype communication with one of Saskatchewan‟s most northerly communities 

became a reality Wednesday afternoon following the successful completion of a microwave scatter 

system to Uranium City. The residents of the northern mining community will for the first time have 

access by telephone to any phone in Canada, the United States or overseas. The long-distance network 

was the culmination of many months of work and planning by Saskatchewan Government Telephones in 

co-operation with the Alberta system. The microwave scatter system connects Uranium City to the 

Alberta system at Hay River. It will provide seven voice channels for telephone, three teletype circuits 

for commercial traffic and Department of Transport use, and a broadcast channel for the relay of CBC‟s 

McKenzie radio network to the low-power relay transmitter at Uranium City. Further circuits will be 

provided if the need arises. On the first day the system was in operation 57 calls were completed by 

Uranium City residents to outside phones. There are 455 subscribers in the community. 

 

MUNICIPAL WORK INCENTIVE PROGRAM 

 

Hon. E.I. Wood (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Before the orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to make an announcement with regard to the municipal winter work incentive program. 

Yesterday our Premier received a telegram from Mr. Starr, Minister of Labour at Ottawa, to the effect 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
2 

that extension has been approved of the final date of the program from April 30 to May 31 of this year. 

Our Premier telegraphed back acceptance and our continued co-operation. I may say that detailed 

information with regard to this will be sent out to municipalities immediately. 

 

WELCOME TO PILOT BUTTE 4H CLUB 

 

Mr. C.H. Thurston (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are proceeded with, I 

would like to draw the members attention to a fine group of young people in the west gallery. They are 

members of the newly-formed Pilot Butte 4H Community Club. They are attended by their leader, Mrs. 

Langon. I am sure that all members welcome this young group here this afternoon and hope that their 

stay is an enjoyable one and a profitable one. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I would like to draw your 

attention to the fine group of students from Weldon High School. They are Grade 12 students and they 

are led by their principal, Mr. Paine, and bus drivers Mr. Robertson and Mr. Hogan. I hope that their 

stay here this afternoon will be both a pleasant and a profitable one. 

 

TELEPHONE SERVICE TO LA RONGE 

 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabaska): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I would like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Telephones. I wonder if he could tell this house whether there is a completion 

date set for similar service to La Ronge as he has announced today was completed to Uranium City. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — The completion of this particular service to the town of La Ronge will be 

completed, as I understand it, sometime late this fall — no definite date as yet. 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
3 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The Hon. Mr. Brockelbank moved: 

 

That Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — On the 14th of next month it will be 25 years since I was nominated as the 

CCF candidate in Tisdale constituency. The convention was at Crooked River. At that time there was 

not one mile of properly built up and gravelled highway in the whole constituency. Snow removal was 

barely a dream for the future. The roads, like the government of that day, were not up to much. They — 

the roads — were a mixture of mud, water, snow and ice. 

 

Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, the delegates attended that convention from all parts of the constituency. 

Some came in horse drawn vehicles, some in old jalopies, some on freight trains, and some walked, but 

they got there. I shall never forget the trip from Steen to Crooked River in a Model A Ford, driven by 

the present Minister of Social Welfare. We pushed it, we pulled it, and sometimes we rode in it, but we 

got there. 

 

That constituency was a neglected area. Now those people are proud of their roads, their electric power, 

their schools and their hospitals. Those people have been faithful to me, I could not forget them, nor 

could I abandon them. 

 

Now it is 24 years — almost to a day — since I first listened to a budget speech as a member of this 

house. I realized then the importance of that event and through the years I have increasingly recognized 

its importance. Today, as I deliver my first budget speech, I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that I fully 

appreciate the honor of assuming this responsibility. 

 

I would like also to pay my respects to my predecessors in this office. I am glad two of them are here 

occupying very important positions and I appreciate their counsel and advice. From 1905 to this time 

there have been a great number of provincial treasurers. Their problems varied from those of poverty 

and contraction of government services to those of boom and expansion. One problem was no doubt 

common to all — that of matching expenditures with revenues and maintaining a fiscal policy in the best 

interests of the people of this province. I think we can truthfully say that all provincial treasurers have 

met their problems with the desire to arrive at what they consider to be the best solutions. 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
4 

It has been the tradition in presenting the budget to begin with a review of economic conditions both in 

Canada and in our own province. This is necessary because budgets and the programs they provide for 

are shaped by the state of the economy. The budget cannot be fully understood except against the 

background of current economic conditions. I want, therefore, to begin by turning to a review of the 

economic events of the past year and to outline what we might expect in the year to come. 

 

Looking at the economic scene in Canada, there are at least two main areas of interest and relevance to 

this budget. One is the change that has taken place or is now underway in Canada‟s economy. These are 

the things that will immediately and directly affect our revenues and expenditures. 

 

The other is the change that is taking place in our traditional ways of thinking about economic policy. I 

sense that more and more people are becoming aware of what we have long argued — that the automatic 

operations of the market will not achieve the economic goals we would like to reach, and that some 

positive direction and guidance of our economic activity is necessary. This thinking itself is now new; 

what strikes me as being new is the greater explicit acceptance of the need throughout the country. 

Present day orthodoxy will not yet permit us to call this direction and guidance “economic planning” 

which it strongly resembles, but that does not matter too much. The important thing is that the need is 

recognized and that our obsolete habits do not prevent us from taking necessary action. Before exploring 

this further, I would like to turn to a review of recent economic events. 

 

The recovery that began early in 1961 continued throughout 1962 and economic activity was sustained 

at a relatively high level during this period. The Gross National Production for 1962 is estimated to 

show an increase of about eight percent over 1961. In per capita, constant dollar terms, the G.N.P. 

expanded about four percent last year. This has been the best performance of our economy since 1956. 

 

The level of output, however, is only part of the story. We should look at the sources of these gains, to 

determine whether we can expect them to sustain economic growth in the years to come. Unfortunately 

this part of the picture is not so encouraging. Although all sectors of the economy showed gains, the 

major increases appear to have resulted from the improved crop output in the prairie region and certain 

increases in production of durable consumer goods. The former, we know, is not due to any inherent 

strength in the economy. The latter, federal government economists tell us, was largely a result of the 

recovery of some industries from the 1960-61 cycle. Neither can be looked to for continuing strength. 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
5 

Other sectors of the economy that contributed to last year‟s gains behaved somewhat erratically. For 

example while exports will probably show a substantial increase for the year, by fall they were 

beginning to decline. It looks like the whole of the increase in exports was in our trade with the United 

States. We must remember that last year the United States economy experienced very substantial gains, 

but the expectation is for a decline in the rate of growth in that country in the year ahead. 

 

Another and even darker aspect to the current economic situation is the steadily rising level of 

unemployment. This is all the more ominous for taking place during the peak of a recovery period and at 

a time when our Gross National Product rose by eight percent. Since last summer, unemployment has 

increased continuously and by December the national figure stood at six percent of the labor force, after 

adjusting the data to eliminate the seasonal variations. For the year as a whole — and I remind the house 

that this has been our best year since 1956 — unemployment has averaged close to six percent. 

 

This is a continuing problem, not a temporary condition. Yet there is little evidence that much is being 

done to meet it. Last September a United States committee knows as President Kennedy‟s Committee to 

Appraise Employment and Unemployment Statistics reported that of the major industrial nations, 

excluding those in the sphere of influence of the U.S.S.R., Canada had the highest level of 

unemployment. The sobering results of the committee‟s study, with the data reduced to a common base 

for purposes of comparison, show the following percentages of the labor force unemployed: West 

Germany, 1.0 percent; France, 1.9 percent; Great Britain, 2.4 percent; Canada, 7.0 percent. Although the 

data shown are for the year 1960, the same results would certainly apply to the last two years. 

 

The countries with the best record are those that have the most highly developed social security systems 

and economic planning procedures. The national productivity council‟s Mission to Europe reported this. 

It is not, as we are so often told, these foundations of the welfare state that threaten moral fibre of a 

nation. Rather it is the lagging growth in the economy and chronic unemployment which present the real 

danger. 

 

The failure to provide full employment lies at the root of a growing anxiety about Canada‟s economic 

performance, and national preoccupation with how it can be improved. Everyone is talking about 

economic planning these days — businessmen bank presidents, even the national Liberal party and the 

Prime Minister. Pretty soon we might even see the anti-planning diehards here at home recognize that 

careful study and thoughtful action by government is essential to cope with the economic problems we 

face today. 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
6 

This recognition is coming slowly but inevitably as the advantages we enjoyed in the first decade 

following the war disappear and the hard facts of economic life continue to unfold. We now realize that 

economic growth will not come automatically, or as easily as it did when Europe was dependent on our 

resources and output and when the huge backlog of consumer demand at home and abroad provided 

ready markets. Even in a year as good as 1962, the undercurrents of uncertainty and pessimism could be 

felt. The foreign exchange crisis resulted from a basic lack of confidence in the Canadian economy as 

well as from short-run factors. Some of the austerity measures that were taken to restore feelings of 

confidence also had the effect of creating some unemployment. Canada was not, and is not, properly 

prepared to meet economic crises or to guide long-run economic development. At best we are only 

beginning to acknowledge the need to prepare ourselves. 

 

This government and our party have long advocated the establishment of effective planning machinery 

— including machinery which will integrate the actions of the federal and provincial governments in the 

interests of common economic objectives. We are convinced this is the only way we will ever come to 

grips with the fundamental economic issues of slow growth, unemployment and uncertainty. To do this 

Canadians must fully free themselves from old prejudices against the positive role government must 

play in guiding the economy of the nation. 

 

Turning to the provincial scene, it is gratifying to note the new record levels of activity our economy 

achieved in 1962. The total net value of commodity output reached close to $1,200 million, about 65 

percent higher than last year. This is the highest level ever reached in Saskatchewan. We estimate that 

personal income, the total of all income received by Saskatchewan residents, totalled over $1,500 

million in 1962. This, too, is the highest level we have yet achieved. Last year wages and salaries alone 

reached an estimated $670 million, the highest on record and almost twice the total paid out only ten 

years ago. 

 

The very marked improvement in our economic performance last year is mainly due to the near bumper 

crop harvested by our farmers last fall. We began the growing season with dangerously low moisture 

reserves which we feared might seriously affect the 1962 crop. Fortunately, good rains over most of the 

province resulted in wheat yields averaging 20 bushels to the acre. This, together with record high level 

of income from livestock brought the net value of agricultural production to $615 million, over three 

times that reached in the 1961 drought year. 

 

Farm cash income, which measures the gross income received by farmers from the sale of farm 

commodities and from other sources such as PFAA payments and cash advances, reached 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
7 

$706 million as compared to $622 million in 1961. A significant part of this total, over $140 million, 

represented higher wheat board payments for wheat and barley and larger PFAA payments, most of 

which were received in the first six months of the year. Farm net income, which takes into account the 

actual results of production and expenses incurred, shows a much sharper increase. We estimate that 

farm net income reached $500 million, over four times the figure for 1961. 

 

The substantial improvement in the farm income picture, together with record non-farm incomes, 

brought retail sales in 1962 up to an estimated $958 million. This is five and one half percent better than 

the previous year. Nor is this result confined only to Saskatchewan. The Montreal Financial Times, in 

writing about the rise in consumer spending on the prairies, says “this may develop into a key prop to 

the whole business recovery in Canada”. 

 

Looking over the history of the retail trade in Saskatchewan in recent years, it is interesting to note the 

high degree of stability in the value of sales. This is largely due to the high level of total wages and 

salaries paid in the province and their steady increase over the years. It can be attributed in part to 

government transfer payments of all kinds. These so-called “built in” economic stabilizers of purchasing 

power have also been increasing. Last year they reached over $200 million, most of which was spent on 

essential goods and services. 

 

The continuing economic growth and development of the province was also reflected in the 

manufacturing industry. The value of factory shipments which had remained at just under $350 million 

during the preceding recession rose to close to $370 million in 1962. 

 

New highs for the province were also established in capital investment which reached a level of $698 

per capita. This is well above the Canadian average of $628 and the third highest among the provinces. 

 

The mineral industries also achieved new records. Apart from the very substantial gains of over 20 

percent in petroleum and natural gas production during the year, 1962 saw the first producer of potash 

come into full scale production at Esterhazy. This plant, which represents an investment of $40 million, 

will produce over $25 million worth of potash annually working at capacity. In addition to potash, 

helium gas has been developed into a major economic asset. It will shortly be produced in commercial 

quantities. Economically, helium is like potash, in that Saskatchewan at the present time has the only 

known deposits in Canada suitable for commercial production. However, it has an added significance in 

being the only natural source of supply, outside the United States, in the nations of the western alliance. 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
8 

Both these minerals represent important new foundations for our economic growth and industrial 

expansion. Both the short-run and long-run market prospects for these commodities are excellent; 

sources of supply are adequate for the foreseeable future. We are fortunate to be able to look to these 

two resources to provide a more solid and certain base not only for Saskatchewan but for Canada as 

well. 

 

The prospect for 1963 is for a significant slowing down of the national economy. The continuing 

uncertainty about where Canada is headed offers little hope for a new dynamic for economic growth. 

 

In retrospect, the gains achieved in 1961-62 appear to have been mainly a recovery from the low levels 

of the preceding recession. The increase in output resulted in the building up of inventories, while the 

improved import-export balance was achieved only by drastic emergency measures. None of these 

represent any basic sources of continuing strength that can be expected to sustain expansion this year. 

For these reasons a majority of business economists are forecasting a light recession or, at best, a 

levelling off of activity in 1963. There is a widespread consensus that the economy will move ahead 

only slightly and the Gross National Product will not rise by more than three to four percent. In per 

capita constant dollar terms this means a rate of growth of only one percent. Across Canada generally, 

the expectation is that consumer demand will not show the strength it did last year. 

 

Neither business nor government spending is expected to add any significant impetus to the economy. 

Forecasts of business spending and investment vary from a modest increase to no increase at all in real 

terms. With respect to government spending, the continuing efforts of the federal government to curtail 

its expenditures will tend to dampen economic activity in 1963; any increases in this sector will be due 

largely to expenditures by provincial and municipal government. 

 

In foreign markets the demand for Canadian products is not expected to grow as strongly as it did last 

year. The pace of economic activity in the United States, which takes well over half of our total exports, 

is expected to decline. This will naturally affect the demand for Canadian goods. Similarly, Europe is 

experiencing some slackening in its rate of growth and will take less of our output. The actual decline in 

exports to European and Japanese markets was very marked last year. This year European crop 

production is expected to be high and this may result in lower Canadian wheat shipments abroad. 

 

These are the major demand sectors we depend on for higher levels of production, fuller employment 

and expanding incomes both for individuals and for governments. This outlook 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
9 

for 1963 holds out little promise for significant improvements in the year ahead. It is a sad reflection that 

in none of these areas has the national government taken the planned purposeful action the situation 

requires. 

 

In Saskatchewan, our resource based industries will again dominate the economic picture in 1963. In 

agriculture, moisture conditions are much better than they were at this time last year and we are hoping 

for at least an average crop. With an average crop, farm net income should be about $300 million. 

Lower off-farm movements of grain and reduced wheat board and supplementary payments are expected 

to reduce cash income by about $100 million. Livestock production is expected to maintain its record 

levels and give substantial support to the whole agricultural industry. 

 

This year we anticipate a significant increase in mineral production. The value of output is expected to 

increase by about ten percent. Part of this will be due to greater oil production. Part will be due to a full 

year of production in the potash industry. This is one of the most auspicious and gratifying prospects we 

can look forward to. 

 

In the other sectors of the economy, and in the overall view, we can look forward to good progress on all 

fronts. Industrial expansion and the diversification of the economy which we have witnessed over the 

years will continue and should raise the net value of output of all the non-agricultural commodity-

producing industries to a new record high of close to $600 million. We also expect the level of private 

and public investment to be maintained at close to the record figures achieved in the year just past. 

Personal income from sources other than farm operations, such as wages and salaries, unincorporated 

business income and investment income, will also continue to increase and will again reach new peaks. 

If this year‟s crop is as good as last year‟s, total personal income will reach the highest levels in our 

history. It would, of course, be foolhardy to count upon good fortune to this degree. We have to base our 

calculations on a return to average levels of farm production and consequently we forecast some decline 

in personal income. Nevertheless, higher cash flows seem likely to be reflected in a higher value of retail 

sales. We estimated last year‟s retail trade at about $958 million. This year, with a good crop and higher 

labor income, retail trade might well reach, for the first time, the $1,000 million mark. 

 

The economic conditions of the province are reflected in the government‟s financial accounts. During 

1962-62, when the Canadian economy was less buoyant and Saskatchewan suffered a crop failure, the 

government sustained a small deficit of $3.3 million. The public accounts, which were tabled earlier 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
10 

in the session, reveal expenditures of $152.3 million, up $4.9 million from the previous year. This 

increase was largely due to the extra costs incurred as a result of the drought year. Revenues were $149 

million, up $4 million from the year before. The net debt of the province rose that year by $3.1 million, 

to $22.6 million. 

 

In contrast, the buoyant economy of 1962 has contributed to a substantial rise in revenues during the 

current year, and to a corresponding improvement in the province‟s financial position. I expect, indeed, 

that by the end of the fiscal year I will be reporting a budgetary surplus of more than $5 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Revenues have risen as my predecessor, the Hon. A.E. Blakeney, predicted 

they might if we were to have a “really good year” instead of the “moderate levels of economic activity” 

which were indicated by last spring‟s poor moisture conditions. Consumption taxes this year will exceed 

our estimates by over $5 million — the education and health tax by over $2 million, the gasoline tax by 

some $2 million, and liquor profits by $1 million. Mineral resources revenues also are expected to 

exceed the estimate by $5 million due to capacity oil production and increased bonus bids for crown 

lands. 

 

The revenues which depend upon the rate of growth of the national economy will also exceed 

expectation. As I have said, the nation‟s production now is expected to have risen by some eight percent 

in 1962, instead of the six to seven percent which was generally predicted a year ago. The result is that 

revenues from the federal-provincial tax sharing arrangements will reach $49.3 million instead of the 

original estimate of $46.6 million. 

 

In addition to these revenue increases, we have received a further $4 million from the federal treasury. 

This came about largely because the tax sharing payments in the period 1957-62 were based upon 

population estimates. The 1961 census figures revealed that the populations of British Columbia and 

Ontario had been overestimated while Saskatchewan‟s population had been underestimated. The result 

was that Saskatchewan was due for a substantially increased payment. 

 

This is the picture as far as revenues are concerned. On the expenditure side, the province fortunately 

was not faced with the costly drought measures which we had to meet the year before. The result is that 

our ordinary expenditures have conformed pretty well to the budgetary plan. Capital expenditures, on 

the other hand, and grants to support municipal capital projects, are up by about $4 million. This is 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
11 

largely the result of one of the longest construction seasons in history. The government could have 

suspended construction activity when expenditure targets had been reached, but we chose instead to 

permit all projects to proceed. 

 

There is a second reason that expenditures for the current year will exceed the estimates. We have 

embarked upon a new economic development programme and a new programme for improving the 

public services of Saskatchewan. Both of these will require initial injections of capital. I will speak of 

these in more detail later, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As for the public business enterprises, their 1962 results generally reflect the favorable economic trends 

experienced in the province last year. Total business volume of the eleven operations rose by eight 

percent, passing the $100 million mark for the first time. At year-end there were over 6,000 workers 

employed, and the wage and salary bill for the year amounted to almost $29 million. Grants in lieu of 

taxes paid to the municipalities also increased to $1,415,000. 

 

Net surpluses for all the corporations totalled $8,446,000, with both the power corporation and 

government telephones reporting significantly higher earnings. As for the government finance office 

group of enterprises, despite losses incurred by Estevan Clay Products and Saskair, the net position was 

better than in 1961. Net earnings for this group totalled $888,000. The finance office has drawn upon its 

reserve and continued to pay its regular dividend of $1 million to the Provincial Treasurer this year. 

 

A summary of these financial results is shown in the printed copy of the budget speech. 

 

Before presenting the budget for next year, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a word about capital 

financing during 1962, and about the province‟s net debt. 

 

In the calendar year 1962 we borrowed $72.5 million. These funds were obtained from the following 

markets: $45 million from the Canadian long-term bond market, $11.6 million from the Saskatchewan 

savings bonds market, $1 million from the sale of short-term bonds, $13 million from treasury bills in 

the money market, and $1.9 million from the sale of a treasury bill to the government of Canada — to 

finance one-eighth of this year‟s expenditure on the South Saskatchewan River Dam. 

 

With your permission, Mr. Speaker, I should like to include a list of the 1962 debenture issues. Mr. 

Speaker, I hope we can take them as read. 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
12 

I am happy to remind hon. members that the third issue of Saskatchewan savings bonds will go on sale 

Monday, March 4. These are ten year bonds carrying an interest rate of five percent from March 15, 

1963 to March 15, 1969 and five and one-half percent from March 15, 1969 to March 15 1973. The 

bonds will remain on sale until approximately $10 million have been sold. 

 

At the end of the current year I expect that our gross debt will equal some $560 million. Some hon. 

members have suggested that we should not borrow, but that the power and telephone corporations 

should grow on the basis of the profit on their operations. Let me quote to them the words of a Liberal 

Premier and Minister of Finance, the Hon. Jean Lesage of Quebec: 

 

As a result of a primitive concept of public finance, the former administration ended up by believing, 

or by pretending to believe, that public loans were a method of financing to be avoided because it was 

evil in itself. One thus made of the public debt, or rather the payment of the public debt, and of the 

absence of borrowing, a myth that it would be regrettable to perpetuate. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the justification for our debt lies not along in the services which our 

corporations provide, but also in the fact that our taxpayers own financial assets which now exceed the 

total debt of the province. 

 

I might remind hon. members of the events which led to the elimination of Saskatchewan‟s net debt. 

First, the net debt of the province was reduced, by this government from $145 million in 1944 to $22 

million in 1962. Then, when the government of Canada relinquished its control over the old school lands 

fund in 1962, the fund was converted into a special investment account — which holds Saskatchewan 

local government and provincial bonds — and it became an asset of the consolidated fund. Finally, the 

surplus which we expect at the end of the current fiscal year will further contribute to the accumulation 

of financial assets which exceed our direct liabilities. 

 

So, on April 1st, for the first time in many decades, the government of Saskatchewan will begin the 

fiscal year with no net debt. 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
13 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — It is true, of course, that the province still has outstanding some debt which 

was incurred for constructing highways and public buildings. On this debt we are continuing to pay 

interest — some $1.9 million in 1963-64. However, our various financial assets earn interest which next 

year will amount to $2 million — $100,000 more than the interest we will be paying. 

 

Hon. Members may confirm this picture by reference to the Dominion Bureau of Statistics publication, 

“Financial Statistics of Provincial Governments, Summary of Estimates 1962”. Page 14 shows that even 

in 1961-62 our interest income exceeded our interest payments. 

 

May I quote from one of my predecessors. 

 

It is a common practice with many people when discussing the amount of interest paid by the province 

to refer only to the gross amount paid without taking into account the interest revenue. This is unfair 

and is not calculated to give the public a true picture of the actual situation. 

 

This statement was made by the Hon. W.J. Patterson in his budget speech 24 years ago. 

 

I suggest that the Hon. Leader of the Opposition is the only political leader in Canada who refuses to 

accept net debt as the proper measure of a government‟s financial position. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I turn now to the budget for the next fiscal year. Revenues are estimated at $184.3 million, 

and expenditures at $187.8 million, leaving a small deficit of $3.5 million. Of the $187.8 million of 

expenditures, $164.4 million are classified as ordinary and $23.4 million as capital. 

 

This budget has been developed to conform with the government‟s fiscal policy: “a balanced budget in 

the long-run, with moderate deficits when the economy is performing sluggishly and surpluses when it is 

restored to a desirable rate of growth”. Thus in 1962 when the rate of economic growth was very 

satisfactory we enjoyed a handsome surplus, and in 1963, when we expect the Canadian economy to 

perform less satisfactorily, we are planning for a small deficit. If 1963 turns out to be better than we 

have predicted, I would expect our budget to be in balance. 

 

On the revenue side, I anticipate that the consumption taxes will yield roughly the same in 1963-64 as in 

the current year; the education and health tax is estimated at 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
14 

$37.5 million, the gasoline tax at $27.5 million, and liquor profits at $14.25 million. The federal-

provincial tax sharing arrangements are expected to yield approximately the same amount as we will 

receive this year — $49½ million. Resource revenues, swollen as they were this year by large receipts 

from the sale of oil lands, are expected to fall from about $28 million in 1962-63 to $25.5 million next 

year. 

 

On the expenditure side, the principal increases are to be found in education — up $4.3 million; social 

welfare — up $2.4 million; public health — up $1.9 million; public works — up $1.2 million, and 

highways — up nearly $1 million. Gross expenditure on agriculture will be up almost $4 million. 

 

I want now to speak in more personal terms about the job this budget will do. I do this partly because I 

find myself thinking of the enormous changes that have been wrought in this province since I went into 

politics 25 years ago, and partly because I sometimes think we lose sight of the effect on the individual 

of the government measures which are contained in budgets. 

 

There is a lot of talk these days about the welfare state, and about its effect on the individual. The charge 

is frequently made — hon. members opposite have learned the formula well — that those who advocate 

a positive role for governments are hostile to the notion of the free and independent individual in 

society. If you believe that certain services should be made universally available to all citizens — be it 

hospitalization or medical care, rural electrification or sewer and water services on the farm — you are 

told that you are interfering with the rights of the individual. It is never quite clear just how the rights of 

the citizen are being impaired. Perhaps it is because some citizens are required to contribute not only to 

their own welfare but to their neighbor‟s as well. The argument of the Liberal party is clear enough; 

more government means less freedom. The CCF, because it believes that basic human needs should be 

met by government action, is charged with being indifferent to the rights of the individual. It is precisely 

because we in the CCF government are concerned with the individual, his independence and his self-

development, that we advocate a positive role for government. Indeed it is precisely because there have 

been people who are poor and insecure, and because freedom from fear and freedom from want have 

been denied to people, that the CCF was formed in the first place. 

 

Let me quote to you some of the things we said years ago when CCF policies were first being 

formulated. One leader described the basic objective of the CCF this way: he said we must guarantee for 

everyone “a dignified, and a rich and varied life”. That was David Lewis, deputy leader of the New 

Democratic Party in the last parliament of Canada. Another CCF leader said this: 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
15 

The function of any well-organized society should not be primarily „to provide employment‟ but 

should be to develop its resources and industries co-operatively in such a manner as will provide full 

personal development and expression for all. 

 

The man who said this was C.M. Fines, our provincial treasurer for sixteen years. Another leader put it 

this way: 

 

Freedom is more than the mere absence of restraint; it is the presence of opportunity . . . It is not 

enough that Canadians shall be „free‟ to do the things they want to do; there must also be the 

opportunity for them to develop a whole and abundant life. 

 
This was said in 1944 by our former premier, T.C. Douglas. 

 

Our point is a simple one. Individualism, independence, self-expression, personal development — none 

of these is possible so long as a man is insecure in his job, unable to provide adequately for his family, 

threatened by poor health, or ill equipped to take his place in a technologically complex society. It is 

easy enough to preach about the free enterprise system and rugged individualism when you are 

prosperous and privileged; but it is pretty difficult to be an individual when you are beset with financial 

difficulties, with uncertain employment, or with health problems. If governments can help the individual 

to meet these problems — and they are still common problems — they make it possible for men to stand 

up as individuals, and to be free in the fullest sense of the word. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is the real objective of this budget, and all budgets that have gone before it. Let us 

look at some of the differences which government measures have made over the past fifteen years to life 

for the individual in Saskatchewan. 

 

First, the budgets for education have greatly increased the opportunity for a good education. Where in 

1948 only 2,740 students graduated from high school, in 1962 there were 6,370. The proportion of grade 

eight students who completed their high school education was only 43.5 percent in 1948, while in 1962 

it had risen to 60 percent. Today the educational opportunities available to the young people living on 

farms or in small communities are practically equivalent to those in urban areas. Most of this is due to 

the larger school units. Larger and better schools have been constructed and some 56,000 students 

annually are being conveyed to these schools. The quality of teaching has improved. In 1948 only 16 

percent of our teachers had two years or more of teacher training, now nearly 60 percent have such 

training. 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
16 

In addition to equal opportunity for public and high school education, our budgets have made available 

greatly improved facilities for vocational and university training. University enrolment has nearly 

doubled in 15 years — from just over 4,000 in 1948 to nearly 7,500 in 1962. Over 1,500 students have 

been trained under the apprenticeship program since it was started in 1947. In 1963 there will be room 

for 3,200 students in technical and vocational schools in the province. There were virtually no such 

facilities 15 years ago. To enable students to use these institutions of higher learning, the student loan 

fund has assisted over 7,500 students since it was started in 1949, and some 400 scholarships are 

awarded each year. 

 

Next year will see still further improvements in our educational system. School grants are to be 

increased by $2.7 million, from $33.9 to $36.6 million. The extension to the Moose Jaw technical 

institute and the new Saskatoon and Prince Albert institutes will be completed. Construction will begin 

on the first two buildings of the new Regina campus of the university, a project estimated to cost over $7 

million. The government‟s operating grant to the university will be increased by $1 million. 

 

Would my hon. friends opposite say these expenditures destroy the rights of the individual? 

 

What about health programs? In 1948 40 out of every 1,000 newborn babies dies; in 1962 this had been 

reduced to 25 per thousand. In 1948 one out of every thousand mothers died in childbirth; this number is 

now down to one out of every 5,000. In 1948 only some 15 percent of the patients in mental hospitals 

were being discharged each year; now the percentage has risen to nearly 48. In 1948 the number of 

hospital beds available was under 4,700; now there are over 7,000. In 1948 there was accommodation 

for 655 mentally retarded people; now we have room for over double that number. Today it now costs a 

family of four, with an income of $3,500 a year, about $48 for medical care, compared with the $84 it 

would have cost them under private schemes. 

 

I could go on and talk about other measures which reveal how greatly improved is the health of our 

people in Saskatchewan, and how this is due in very substantial measure to the expenditures on health 

regions, mental health, cancer treatment, hospitalization and medical care. The plain fact is, Mr. 

Speaker, that when health care, like education, is made equally available to all, the health of the 

province improves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
17 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Next year the government proposes to extend the availability of health care. 

The cities of Regina and Saskatoon, which have not been established as health regions, will receive a 

grant of 50¢ per capita to assist them in their public health programs. The Yorkton psychiatric centre, 

which will accommodate 148 patients, will be opened this year. To reduce the cost of medical education, 

three quarters of which is now borne by government grants, a medical scholarship and bursary program 

is being proposed. Forty scholarships, ranging from $250 to $750 will be awarded annually to 

University of Saskatchewan medical students, and 95 medical bursaries will also be given each year. In 

addition we propose to make available 35 dental bursaries to increase the number of dentists in the 

province. 

 

Would my hon. friends opposite say these expenditures destroy the rights of the individual? 

 

These provisions for equal access to education and to good health are fundamental to the development of 

the individual. I believe that the uncertainty of employment and the uncertainty of income, more than 

anything else, destroy that assurance and dignity which are the marks of free men. We who remember 

the 1930‟s can testify to this. 

 

It was one of the prime objectives of this government when it was elected in 1944 to give the farmers 

and the workmen some voice in the conditions under which they worked. One of the first things we did 

was to provide at least some security for the farmer; to require that under crop failure conditions the 

payments on debt must be deferred. We recognized, of course, that the real problem was adequate farm 

income. 

 

During the past 15 years the picture has been changed substantially. Farm management practices have 

improved to the point that in 1961, when moisture conditions were similar to those of 1937, the average 

wheat crop was eight bushels to the acre, instead of the two bushels of 1937. Moreover agricultural 

production has become more diversified. Income from livestock has increased from about $80 million in 

the mid 1940‟s to over $137 million in 1962. 

 

There is no doubt that the extension program of the government, the research at the university, which is 

supported by the province, the 4H Clubs, the agricultural earned-assistance grants, all have contributed 

to this greater stability and diversification in agricultural production. In particular the 375,000 acres of 

community pastures which we have established, the drainage work which has benefited, directly or 

indirectly, some 3.5 million acres, and the clearing and breaking of some 570,000 acres, all have had a 

direct bearing upon the higher productivity of Saskatchewan agriculture. 

 

For the individual farmer there have been other substantial changes. The agricultural machinery 

administration, through its machinery testing program, will save farmers many 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
18 

millions of dollars in repair costs. The crop insurance plan, which serves to complement the PFAA 

scheme, is being used by more and more farmers. The farmers‟ vulnerability to the vagaries of nature 

has been further reduced by the assistance under the insect control and emergency fodder programs. 

 

I am not suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that all of agriculture‟s problems have been solved. We all know that 

we have a long way to go before the farmers of this province enjoy the income and the security of 

income that they should; but I want to ask my hon. friends, do these expenditures destroy the rights of 

the individual? 

 

Now what about the industrial worker: The provinces cannot ensure full employment any more than 

they can sell wheat or embark upon a parity-price plan; but they can do something to provide 

employment opportunities and to ensure adequate income for the worker. All of us are familiar with the 

expansion and the diversification of the Saskatchewan economy. We cite the fact that non-agricultural 

commodity production now equals about 60 percent of what we produce, compared with about 30 

percent 15 years ago. What we are less aware of is what this has meant to the individual worker. Where 

in 1946 there were 146,000 non-agricultural jobs, now there are over 200,000. The income being earned 

by the individual worker has risen substantially; from $35 a week in 1947 to $77 in 1962. The minimum 

wage, which puts a floor on wage payments in urban areas, has been raised so that it now provides 40 

percent more purchasing power than it did in 1948. 

 

Conditions of work have been improved too. Employees are now assured of reasonable working hours, 

of vacations with pay, of equal pay for equal work and of overtime pay. Such assurances did not exist 20 

years ago. Who will say that these measures have reduced freedom? Can anyone honestly argue that 

employees who now have the right to bargain collectively with their employer have lost their freedom? 

 

No, Mr. Speaker, these government measures mean more individual freedom, not less. They mean more 

individual freedom for more people — even if they also mean that those of us who are more privileged 

must pay a little more to help to achieve it. 

 

Consider, for example, the family that needed social aid 20 years ago. Under the system of that time, the 

family would have to come cap in hand and virtually beg for help. Their most intimate personal 

problems would be dragged into the open before friends and neighbors. As often as not there were long 

delays in dealing with applications — some intentional and some the inevitable result of the system — 

while families went hungry. If they were lucky they got some help that was a fraction of what they 

needed. This they had to promise to repay, 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
19 

and liens were taken against the little they owned. This kind of experience did little but degrade, 

humiliate and discourage these unfortunate enough to have to seek help. 

 

Today we have radically changed the social aid program. We say anyone who needs help is entitled to it 

because he is a human being. So does not have to sign away his future earning power to get it. There are 

some who still argue that we should force these people to work by cutting them off social aid. Most 

can‟t work. Jobs aren‟t always available. You can‟t create a job for a breadwinner nor rehabilitate him, if 

that is necessary, by starving his family. Families are getting more help now but only the heartless 

would say that a family of four, getting a weekly income of less than $30 for food and clothing, is living 

too well. 

 

Here are some of the things our welfare programs have done. During the three most recent years of our 

vocational rehabilitation program, people who have been receiving public assistance to the extent of 

nearly $200,000 are now earning over $500,000 a year. For the aged there is now modern 

accommodation for 5,000 people compared with less than 800 15 years ago. Children who come into 

government care now are rarely institutionalized; they are placed promptly into adoption or foster 

homes. Our correctional institutions are no longer simply punitive; instead we seek to rehabilitate 

prisoners through trade shops, work camps and other training programs. 

 

The truth is, Mr. Speaker, that there now is far more likelihood of people who receive welfare services 

emerging as men and women with dignity and confidence than ever was the case 20 or 30 years ago. 

This continues to be our goal. We will extend the social aid program by making available special 

benefits, such as tuition fees for rehabilitation training. We will complete the Swift Current Geriatric 

Centre, making 120 more beds available for old people who need nursing care. Next year we will 

continue with the addition to the Regina Correctional Institution, so as to make possible improvements 

in its rehabilitation program. 

 

The welfare state does not, of course, concern itself solely with the unfortunate; it has as its goal a better 

life for all people. As this is achieved, through more employment and higher incomes, the state must 

begin to make available some of the amenities of life which people are unable to provide for themselves. 

The unavoidable hard life of the pioneer was not in itself a virtue, even though some who live in luxury 

try to make a virtue of this necessity for the other fellow. 

 

We have embarked upon programs which will relive the hardships of life in rural areas. The power 

corporation has brought power to 60,000 farms compared with 1,500 15 years ago. 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
20 

It has brought low-cost electricity to 1,000 communities compared with 145 15 years ago. There are now 

140 communities being served with natural gas, compared with two ten years ago. 

 

About 6,000 farms have installed sewer and water systems assisted by the family farm improvement 

program. Fifty-six communities have been helped to install water and sewer systems under the 

municipal water assistance program. Very important to rural Saskatchewan is the construction, since 

1956, of 8,300 miles of the proposed 12,000 mile grid road system. For both rural and urban citizens the 

whole highway system has been immensely improved; in 1962 there were over 3,000 miles of dust-free 

highways compared with 131 miles 15 years ago. 

 

All of these conveniences cost money; all of them are being paid for through service charges or taxation. 

But who would say that they interfere with the rights of the individual? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think anyone wants to return to the hardships of life in the earlier days — except 

perhaps in his memories. Nor do I think that the people of Saskatchewan are any longer satisfied to do 

without the social and cultural opportunities which are possible in older societies. As our standard of 

living rises, as hours of work are reduced, we have time for a better and fuller life. 

 

But we can‟t always buy these opportunities in the market place — even if each of us were equally able 

to afford them. Cultural and recreational services can best be provided — often can only be provided — 

by the community. So it is that broader opportunities are being made available to the individual citizen 

by community action. 

 

The Saskatchewan arts board, for example, has assisted communities, through grants, to bring music, 

painting and handicrafts to their citizens. The government‟s adult education program has made available 

instruction in a wide range of subjects to thousands of people in the province. 

 

Libraries too are being assisted by government aid. The north central regional library, which serves 

some 68,000 people, receives substantial operating grants from the province. Hon. members will be 

asked to vote funds for a demonstration library which will be used to stimulate interest in the formation 

of more library regions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — This year the province will make a substantial grant toward the Saskatoon 

Art Centre, as it did toward the Norman MacKenzie Art 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
21 

Gallery in Regina. We will continue to support the Natural History Museum in Regina and the Western 

Development Museum in Saskatoon. 

 

In addition to these cultural opportunities I have mentioned, we have embarked upon a program to 

greatly enlarge our recreation facilities. There are now 13 well-developed provincial parks, with more in 

the planning state, compared with eight 15 years ago. There are now 22 regional parks established by 

local communities with government aid, where three years ago there were none. They are now 230 camp 

and picnic sites on Saskatchewan‟s highways, where none existed a decade ago. Within a few years, no 

one in the province will be much more than an hour‟s drive from an adequate resort area. 

 

Another achievement has been the establishment of Wascana Centre — a provincial centre for 

education, recreation, the arts, and government. This extends the original plan for the capital city 

developed by a far-sighted government over 50 years ago. Wascana Centre has received national, indeed 

international, acclaim. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have heard it said that the first function of society and of government should be to make 

man feel magnificent. We can only achieve this objective if we are prepared to broaden the opportunities 

available to our neighbors, and to guarantee to them the rights we want for ourselves. This is the reason 

the CCF party was formed in the first place and it is the reason for our existence today. 

 

It is obvious to me and I think it is obvious to the people of this province, that positive government is 

achieving what the CCF said it would — a dignified, a better and more varied life for the individual. I 

know that every effort is being made to mislead people into believing that the opposite is the case; that 

we could eliminate many government programs without reducing the opportunities that are now 

available to the less privileged and the less prosperous. But the plain truth is that you can‟t go back 

without destroying the individual rights that have been achieved. I remind hon. members of what the 

great political philosopher, de Tocqueville, said: 

 

Individualism is of democratic origin, and it threatens to spread in the same ratio as the equality of 

conditions. 

 

What of the future? Mr. Speaker, we intend, as I think this budget testifies, to continue to do everything 

in our power to make available to the people of Saskatchewan greater opportunities — opportunities for 

employment and 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
22 

security of employment, opportunities for adequate and assured income, opportunities for access to the 

basic needs of life, opportunities to enjoy the amenities of life, and opportunities to use leisure time in a 

pleasant and useful way. 

 

To do all of these things, Mr. Speaker, we need a continually expanding economy. I am sure that 

everyone in Saskatchewan feels a real sense of satisfaction at the economic progress we have made, but 

that doesn‟t mean we can now relax. We must always seek new ways of stimulating our growth. It is for 

this reason that we are proposing in this budget a new plan for economic development in Saskatchewan 

— a plan which embraces both agricultural and industrial development. 

 

Despite the progress which has been made in the agricultural economy, the farmers of Saskatchewan are 

still facing serious problems. These include the high costs of technological change, the failure of farm 

prices to keep up to farm costs, and uncertain grain markets. In an effort to cope with these problems a 

great many farmers are working toward greater diversification. Budgets of past years have included 

many measures, such as those I have already described, to assist in achieving this objective. 

 

To assist further in meeting these problems the government is proposing a gross expenditure on farm 

programs, ordinary and capital, of $11.2 million in 1963-64. This is an increase of $3.8 million over the 

current fiscal year. Federal sharing to the extent of $2.75 million is expected. 

 

The principal emphasis of this program will be to expand our pasture and forage resources to meet the 

needs of a growing livestock industry. It will enable many smaller farms to become economic units. This 

budget includes $2,666,000 for the acquisition of lands to be developed as community pastures and 

forage-producing areas. A further $1,224,000 is included to make a substantial start on developing these 

areas. 

 

In addition, $795,000 is being provided to increase the number of drainage, flood control and irrigation 

projects, thereby reducing the amount of land which is kept out of production by too much or too little 

water. The budget also provides $400,000 for a continuation of the clearing and breaking program. 

Funds will be made available again for shelter-belt planting and roadside grassing projects. We also plan 

to continue to encourage co-operative community pastures through earned assistance grants. 

Development projects like these will contribute greatly to diversifying and stabilizing production in the 

agriculture industry in Saskatchewan. 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
23 

To serve the expanding livestock industry, a veterinary college is essential in western Canada. On 

account of central location and the veterinary research laboratory in Saskatoon, we believe that 

Saskatchewan is the appropriate place for such a college. However, this is not a decision which the 

government should make alone. It is a matter which must first be decided by the universities of western 

Canada and also by the governments concerned. We hope it will be built here. 

 

Therefore, we in the government of Saskatchewan want to make clear our willingness to contribute 

toward the construction of a veterinary college as a part of our university. For that reason hon. members 

will be asked to vote a special grant of $1 million to the university to be used for this purpose if and 

when the following conditions are met. 

 

First, the university senate and board of governors would have to decide that they want a veterinary 

college in the university. Second, the other western universities should agree that Saskatchewan is the 

appropriate place for the college, and the participating governments should agree to contribute their fair 

share towards its operations. Third, the government of Canada will be expected to confirm its offer to 

contribute towards the cost of constructing and operating the college. 

 

We hope that this project does proceed. The growth of the livestock industry demands it, Mr. Speaker, 

and we believe that there exists among the western provinces the kind of goodwill which will lead to an 

early decision. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — This program for agriculture is one part of the government‟s economic 

development plan. The other is a program of incentives for industrial and resource development. 

 

We are proposing, Mr. Speaker, to establish a Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation, 

which will make available three types of assistance to new industries in the province — grants, loans 

and the provision of sites and buildings. 

 

The industrial assistance grants will fall into three categories. First, the corporation will make grants to 

assist manufacturing industry in establishing new plants, producing new products or expanding their 

productive capacity. The grants will equal ten percent of the cost of eligible machinery and equipment 

which is purchased for these purposes. The eligible items will have to be defined by regulations, but I 

can tell hon. members now that we propose to use the same list as the federal government uses in its 

exemptions under the Federal Excise 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
24 

Tax Act. All manufacturing operations which undertake new capital investment between $10,000 and $1 

million in eligible machinery and equipment will qualify for these new incentive grants. 

 

The second category of incentive grants provides for the sharing of the costs of industrial research. The 

economic development corporation will pay one-third of the costs of approved market and economic 

feasibility studies for new and expanding industries. It will pay one-third of the costs of technical 

research leading to the development of new manufactured products. These grants will supplement the 

government assistance being made available to the Saskatchewan research council. Hon. members will 

note that the government proposes to increase its grant to the research council by $100,000. 

 

Third, grants will be made to assist in the training of the labor force for new or expanded manufacturing 

operations. This is one of the “start-up” costs which new ventures encounter in new areas like 

Saskatchewan. We believe this is a cost which government should share. 

 

The industrial assistance grants will be paid by the Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation, 

with the approval of the Minister of Industry and Information. To finance this program in its initial 

stages hon. members will be asked to grant $2 million to the new corporation. 

 

The second main function of SEDCO, the new corporation, will be to make loans to industry — a 

function which is presently being performed by the industrial development fund. The establishment of 

an economic development corporation, which will have power to issue its own securities and which will 

be directed by both business and government representatives, will make it possible for us to extend the 

work of the industrial development fund which has operated successfully for the past 15 years. 

 

The third function of SEDCO will be to assist in the provision of industrial sites and industrial buildings. 

We propose to authorize the corporation to acquire and to construct buildings which will be available to 

industries on a lease-purchase basis. It will also undertake land assembly and development programs 

which will assist industry in locating on favorable sites. It is expected that the corporation will work 

closely with municipalities in the development of this program. 

 

To finance the loans and the industrial facilities which SEDCO will provide, the government proposes to 

make available the capital required, through the purchase of the corporation‟s securities. 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
25 

In addition to these programs which will be administered by the new economic development 

corporation, we are also proposing certain incentives to encourage further growth of oil and mineral 

production. These will be administered by the Department of Mineral Resources. The incentives will 

take two main forms. 

 

First, the government is proposing to provide additional incentives to the oil industry by amending the 

regulations governing the disposition of crown oil lands. These amendments have been discussed with 

the oil industry. The details will be announced by my colleague, the Minister of Mineral Resources. In 

broad outline they will provide for an extension of the term of exploratory permits, the introduction of 

more flexibility in the conditions of exploration, the granting of lease rights to deeper horizons on 

drilling reservations, and more generous drilling credits on leases. 

 

Second, to further encourage prospecting and mineral exploration in the north, we propose to pay a part 

of the costs of approved air travel for this purpose. This assistance will be accompanied by grants equal 

to 25 percent of approved airborne geophysical surveys, and by the payment of 25 percent of the costs of 

approved access roads to exploration sites. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, to complement the SEDCO and mineral resources incentives, the government has 

an additional proposal. We intend to establish upon a rather more formal basis the advice and assistance 

which the Minister of Industry and Information has been receiving from businessmen within the 

province. To do this the government plans to establish an industrial advisory council which will advise 

both the minister and the corporation on the industrial development program. 

 

My colleagues and I are enthusiastic about these measures. Over time we have, I think, built up a good 

program for economic development in Saskatchewan. The consolidation and extension of what we have 

done, in a new Economic Development Act, should provide a strong stimulus to the further development 

of the economy. 

 

Having talked about the government‟s expenditure programs for next year, I want to turn to the question 

of the revenue sources which are being used to finance them. 

 

We have heard a great deal about the tax levels in Saskatchewan. I am not going to repeat arguments we 

have heard many times in this house. We all know that tax levels in Saskatchewan are not the highest in 

Canada. 

 

As long as government programs serve the needs of the people — and clearly they have been fashioned 

for this purpose — the really important thing is to levy the right taxes to finance them and to administer 

the programs effectively. 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
26 

As to Saskatchewan‟s tax measures, our studies indicate that during the past 15 years there has been a 

moderate but a desirable shift in the overall impact of taxation in the province. Consumption taxes — 

the education and health tax, the gasoline tax and liquor profits — now are bearing a slightly larger 

proportion of total government expenses than they were 15 years ago. Since last year the same has 

become true of income taxes. It is, of course, truer still of resources revenues. Property taxes, on the 

other hand, are bearing a somewhat smaller percentage of provincial and municipal expenditures than 

they were. 

 

Although the government maintains a constant review of its taxes, there is merit in the periodic 

examination of our whole tax structure — federal, provincial and municipal — to determine whether we 

have got the right kind of balance. For that reason we welcomed the appointment of the federal royal 

commission on taxation and we intend to co-operate with them fully. However, it is obvious that we 

cannot expect a federal royal commission to study provincial and municipal taxes without provincial 

participation; yet we can scarcely expect the commissioners to include provincial governments in their 

deliberations. To overcome this difficulty, the government has decided to appoint a Saskatchewan royal 

commission on taxation. Its purpose will be to co-operate with the Carter commission in making a 

comprehensive study of taxation by all levels of government in Saskatchewan. This can best be done by 

a commission which is created for the sole purpose of participating in and supplementing the work of 

the federal commission. We have been assured by the chairman of the Canadian commission that he 

would be prepared to work freely and openly with such a provincial commission. We plan, therefore, to 

appoint such a royal commission in the near future. 

 

The second question with which governments must be concerned is whether their programs are being 

administered efficiently. We recognized this when we were elected, Mr. Speaker, and in 1946 we 

established a special agency to study the organization and management in the civil service. This agency, 

the budget bureau, has since that time been conducting regular studies to improve the efficiency of the 

public service. It has reviewed the organization of virtually every department at least once, and is 

currently re-examining the organization of some of them. It has also worked with departments in the 

establishment of more efficient operating procedures. These studies have led to the saving of many 

hundreds of thousands of dollars. 

 

Hon. members will note my emphasis on continuing efficiency studies. Royal commissions may make a 

splash in this area, but they are no substitute for continuing surveys. 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
27 

There are, however, some projects which can be conducted more effectively outside of government and 

these we would like to encourage. Studies in the field of public finance, of particular public policies, or 

of trends in government administration are greatly needed, and would likely be undertaken by specialists 

in public administration if monies were available to assist them. 

 

To meet this need hon. members will be asked to vote $1 million to establish a Saskatchewan public 

administration foundation. This foundation will be administered by a board of five to seven, including 

one representative nominated by the University of Saskatchewan and one by The Institute of Public 

Administration of Canada. The earnings of the foundation will be used by the board to give grants to 

people who submit worthy research projects. They will also be used to support special educational 

programs at the university. The projects must, of course, be relevant to the Saskatchewan scene. 

 

One of the important results of this venture will be the development of greater interest in public 

administration on the part of Saskatchewan students. The really important prerequisite to efficiency in 

administration is good people in the public service. We expect this foundation will encourage more of 

our best students to enter the public service. This and the research sponsored by the foundation will help 

to insure efficiency and effectiveness in government administration. 

 

This then, Mr. Speaker, is the budget for the next fiscal year. It is a budget that expresses the pioneer 

spirit of Saskatchewan. It is a budget that provides for new horizons in the economic development of our 

province. It provides new opportunities for our young people, help for the unfortunate, care for the sick, 

comfort for the aged and increased opportunity for good living for all. It is a budget, not of cold dollars 

only, but also of friendship, warmth and life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move that you do now leave the chair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, at the beginning of the Provincial Treasurer‟s 

address, he referred to the fact that it is only some 30 days away from his 25th birthday, or at least 30 

days until his anniversary of being nominated as a candidate in the 1938 provincial election, and I would 

like to — yes, you do, you still look young — extend my congratulations and I‟m sure I speak for all 

members of the house when I extend our congratulations to the present Provincial Treasurer. Any person 

who can survive 25 years of public life must have some good qualities, but I would like to draw the 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
28 

attention of the house to the fact that the senior member of this legislature sits on this side of the house, 

and I refer to my good friend, the member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson). 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I was a little disappointed in the Provincial Treasurer when he left the inference that 

he was nominated in 1938, and up until that time nothing had happened in Saskatchewan. The roads 

were bad in his area of the province, and he left the inference that conditions throughout Saskatchewan 

were bad. But let us think back to a period 25 years prior to the Provincial Treasurer being nominated. 

That would bring us back to the year 1913, and I would imagine that conditions in Saskatchewan in 

1913 were much worse as far as services were concerned, throughout the whole of the province, than 

they were in 1938. But if we want to go back even another 25 years, which would only be 50 years ago, 

go back to 1888, I wonder what conditions existed, what services existed, and what conditions were in 

Saskatchewan 50 years before the Provincial Treasurer was nominated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a young province and I want to give credit to people who sat in this legislature, long 

before the Provincial Treasurer — to those people who took part in the public life in Saskatchewan from 

that period of 1888 to 1913. I think they made a tremendous contribution to the public life of this 

province. They supplied many of the services that are in existence in this province today. As a matter of 

fact, most of the services that are available to the people of Saskatchewan today were given to us by 

those people who served this province from 1888 to 1913, and I want to say that I think that those 

people who served in that 25-year period from 1913 to 1938 also made a great contribution to the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — The Provincial Treasurer in the early part of his remarks referred at some length to 

planning, and I couldn‟t help but think of the amount of planning that must have gone into the address 

that he delivered this afternoon. I can imagine that it has taken probably months to prepare this address; 

I would imagine that he has had help from his colleagues in every department of the government; that he 

probably had some help from several boards and commissions that exist; and I‟m not complaining about 

that — I think a Provincial Treasurer ought to have a lot of help in preparing a budget to be presented to 

this house — but it is rather difficult for one lonely individual to take the budget address that was 

delivered today and adequately reply to it on Monday next, without any help. This is a tremendous 

problem. This is one of the problems that this province, other provinces in Canada, and our own 

dominion government must deal with. If you expect oppositions to do the job that they ought to do, then 

more facilities must be made available to the opposition. We ought to have some professional and some 

expert help in replying to an address such as the one delivered here this afternoon. 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
29 

I am sure that my colleagues on the other side of the house will agree with this statement. If we are 

going to provide all of these services that the minister has outlined this afternoon, then surely to 

goodness we should have another million some place that can be made available to the official 

opposition in this house, no matter who it may be. My hon. friend who laughs shows his stupidity and 

his ignorance, or he wouldn‟t laugh. He underestimates the tremendous problem that confronts people in 

our position today. The business of government is growing every year and the facilities that are made 

available to the opposition ought to grow with it, and I make that appeal to this house at this time. 

 

Later in the minister‟s address he referred to some of the statements that had been made by his 

colleagues and his predecessors with regard to the CCF party and their philosophy. I note throughout 

this whole address, he referred to his party as the CCF party; well, I thought we had buried the CCF a 

year or so ago. 

 

Hon. R.A. Walker (Attorney General): — You bet that 12 years ago. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I never heard the word NDP mentioned. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They are ashamed of it. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I never heard the word NDP or the letters NDP mentioned, and I would have 

thought that the minister would have refrained from reading some of the old diatribe that emanated from 

these people a few years ago because I have a book in my office, and I shall present it to this house on 

Monday next, containing some of the statements that came from the people, and their predecessors, who 

sit opposite us. I only wish that the people who now support this party had made similar statements five, 

ten, fifteen, yes, as much as twenty-five years ago, as the Provincial Treasurer made this afternoon, 

rather than the statements that they did make. Some of the statements that emanated ten and fifteen years 

ago from the people who sit opposite us have been more responsible for the lack of development, 

stagnation, in Saskatchewan than any other movement, and I want to refer to some of the statements. 

Here is one of them, and I quote: 

 

The CCF believes that everyone should have a fair and just return for this work but anything over that 

was profit and the CCF does not believe that that belongs to the individual 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
30 

Mr. Speaker, how on earth can you expect the people to come into the province of Saskatchewan and 

invest their money when the government that sits in office was telling the people that they were opposed 

to profit. Well, it is ridiculous. 

 

Let us turn to some of the other statements that were made: “No CCF government would rest content 

until profiteers had been eradicated.” This was a great invitation to capitalists from Saskatchewan, or 

from other parts of the world, to place their confidence and their money in Saskatchewan. I only wish 

that the Provincial Treasurer had been making the type of statements years ago that he made today, and 

providing the facilities to attract industry to our province. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Dear federal tax. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I think it is a dead federal tax. I think the government should have finally realized 

that if they are going to develop Saskatchewan at the same pace that our neighboring provinces are 

being developed, then they must change their attitude, and I give them credit for having changed their 

attitude. I‟m not complaining about it, I‟m happy and I‟m glad to see that this government have had this 

change of heart. 

 

I was also very pleased to learn that this year we will have $100,000 income from our investments, more 

than we are going to have to pay out in interest. When the minister made that statement I couldn‟t help 

but turn to page 52 of the Estimates that were tabled, and I notice we are voting again this year, $27 

million to pay the interest on the public debt. Then we have certain reimbursements that will come from 

some of our investments, but Mr. Speaker, what the Provincial Treasurer and his colleagues fail to 

realize is that this so-called reimbursements are profits from corporations that are extracting money at a 

high rate for their services from the people of this province. You either take it in this hand or this one, 

but it comes from exactly the same place — the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I had hoped that when we had a good year, as the minister indicated, the best year in Saskatchewan since 

1952, that this would mean that we could have some decrease in taxation. Whether the minister wants to 

admit it in his statement or not, any individual in Saskatchewan who wants to be honest with himself 

knows full well that Saskatchewan people are among the highest taxed on the North American continent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Premier): — That is different from what you said last year. 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
31 

Mr. McDonald: — That is different than what I said last year? That is exactly what I said last year and 

what I will say next year. The difference in tax rates in Saskatchewan and tax rates in Ontario, if you 

want to be honest. The most of the head offices, some of those companies who are represented by people 

who sat in this chamber this afternoon are not in the province of Saskatchewan. Those head offices, to a 

large part, are located in three provinces of Canada — British Columbia, Ontario and Quebec. We have 

no way of extracting any tax revenues out of these large companies, but the provinces of Ontario, British 

Columbia and Quebec have. This means, Mr. Speaker, that the tax burden on the average individual in 

Saskatchewan is as high or higher than any other jurisdiction, not only in Canada, but on the North 

American continent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald: — I note, from the estimates that were tabled at the beginning of the minister‟s 

remarks, that it has been anticipated that revenues from education and hospitalization tax will be some 

$2 million higher than last year; from the gasoline tax some $2.1 million; and you can go down the line 

and find that most of these revenues are estimated higher than last years; I think the reason for this is 

that last year‟s estimates were considerably below the actual return from them. 

 

I am one of those who believes much as the Provincial Treasurer indicated this afternoon, that there is 

quite a possibility we could have a slackening off in our economy, especially in the fourth quarter of 

1963. But I only wish that the Provincial Treasurer could have seen fit to present some tax cuts to relieve 

the burden of our people at this time. The Provincial Treasurer ended his remarks by saying that this 

budget was designed to endeavor to provide a better life for the people of Saskatchewan. And he said 

that in order to provide this better life then our economy must be greater diversified, so that new 

revenues will be available. 

 

I want to tell the Provincial Treasurer that it is not only his party who have a desire to provide a better 

life for the people of Saskatchewan. I think that all political parties have that desire. I believe that 

Conservatives and Social Creditors believe that and this is their intention, this is what they would like to 

do. Sometimes it annoys me very much when those ladies and gentlemen opposite endeavor to leave the 

impression that Liberals are opposed to trying to lift the burden off some peoples‟ shoulders and to 

provide a better life for all of our citizens. 

 

The only quarrel we have is the way in which you go about endeavoring to do this. We believe that our 

philosophy is better suited to providing a better way of life than yours 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
32 

is, but we have equal desire with any person on that side of the house, or any person in Saskatchewan or 

in Canada, to see that these services are made available and at a price which we can afford, but the only 

thing I want to say is that the way we would like to see this brought about differs considerably from the 

manner in which you believe it can be brought about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 6 — An Act to amend the Jury Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker moved second reading of Bill No. 6 — An Act to amend the Jury Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, the Jury Act requires only a very minor amendment and it doesn‟t 

really change the law. The judges have in the past excused jurors who have become ill and accepted 

verdicts from 11 men instead of 12, but in order that there be no doubt about it we are proposing to 

provide expressly in the act for this eventuality, and that is what the present bill does. 

 

With that word of explanation, Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 6 be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

Bill No. 7 — An Act to amend the Provincial Mediation Board Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker moved second reading of Bill No. 7 — An Act to amend the Provincial Mediation 

Board Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, the amendments to the Provincial Mediation Board Act are 

necessary mainly by reason of certain changes in the assessment legislation of the province, and there 

are no amendments which involve any important principle and which couldn‟t be just as adequately 

discussed in committee. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move that the said bill be now read a second 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

Bill No. 8 — An Act respecting Hail Insurance by Certain Municipalities 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker moved second reading of Bill No. 8 — An Act respecting Hail Insurance by Certain 

Municipalities. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, the Municipal Hail Insurance Act represents a consolidation of the 

Hail Insurance Act plus all amendments. 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
33 

At the present time the act only comes into operation in those municipalities which have, with the 

approval of the electors, enacted bylaws, which bring them within the operation of the act. The existing 

act also provides a means whereby any municipality may apply to withdraw from the act with the 

consent of the electors. That means, of course, that the insurance is not available to farmers in the 

municipalities that are excluded from the act. It is now proposed to dispense with the procedures 

mentioned, that is the provision for a bylaw to come under the act or a bylaw to exclude it from the act 

and to provide that all municipalities, except those listed in the schedule, will be subject to the act, and it 

will provide that individual owners of land in those municipalities that are not presently covered may 

apply to have their lands brought under the act, whether or not the municipality passes a bylaw. The 

proposed act also provides for the right of the individual owner, in the so-called bylaw municipalities, to 

withdraw their land from the operation of the act. 

 

In other words, it puts the choice of coming under the act or being excluded from the act on an 

individual basis, without the necessity of the municipality itself taking any action. The act also provides 

that all municipalities of the province will be represented at the annual meetings of the association; at 

the present time it is only those who have bylaws in effect that are represented at the annual meeting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are the principal changes in the act, and I may say that they have been asked for by 

the Municipal Hail Insurance Association and that these proposals have been submitted to the 

Association of Rural Municipalities and approved by that association. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that introduction, I may say that all of these principles lend themselves very well 

to being discussed, I think, in committee of the whole. They are part of a whole plan, but nevertheless it 

seems to me that the members of the house can go more fully into them to better advantage when the bill 

is in committee of the whole. 

 

With that introduction, Mr. Speaker, I would move that the bill be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend the Bills of Sale Act, 1957. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker moved second reading of Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend the Bills of Sale Act, 1957. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, this is an amendment to the Bills of Sale Act. It is really consequent 

on another amendment which is proposed to the Court Officials Act. It is proposed to provide a little 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
34 

more flexibility in the closing of court houses to conform to public holidays, instead of prescribing the 

day in which they shall be closed in the act. It is proposed to prescribe that they may be closed by the 

Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council, and thus conform with the practice in other government offices. This is 

only the really important principle involved here, and I would move that the bill be now read a second 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

Bill No. 10 — An Act to amend the Rural Electrification Act 

 

Hon. R. Brown (Minister of Industry and Information) moved second reading of Bill No. 10 — An Act 

to amend the Rural Electrification Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — Mr. Speaker, this is a bill to amend the Rural Electrification Act, and the 

amendment is required in order to deal with the program of electrification of Indian reservations which 

the corporation started last fall. Section 4 of the act reads as follows: 

 

Farm means a grain farm, a dairy farm, a fur farm, a market garden, or horse, cattle, sheep or poultry 

ranch, or any land not within a city, town, or village, used for any purpose of a like nature. 

 

In other words it describes a farm, and what we are asking here is to include also a reserve within the 

meaning of the Indian Act of Canada, as amended from time to time, and Section 5 deals with the 

definition of owners. 

 

This is in order to authorize the corporation to provide service on the reservation on credit terms, the 

same as we do to farms, and we are, therefore, including reserves within the definition of a farm and we 

are including a council of a Band of Indians in order that the Band can sign for the loans which will be 

provided for the services which will be provided on the various reservations. That is the only change, 

Mr. Speaker, and I would therefore, move that Bill No. 10 now be read a second time. 

 

Mr. W.R. Thatcher (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, I think we on this side of the house would certainly 

support the principle of this bill. I was just wondering, and maybe I could get the information later in 

committee, but I would like to know whether or not there have been conversations with the federal 

government in connection with this and whether  



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
35 

they are going to pay any portion of the cost involved in bringing electricity to the reserves, or will the 

Bands themselves have to pay the various charges involved. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — May I answer that as a question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You can answer it, but if you do answer it right now you would be closing the debate, 

so I would suggest that if there is any further question, you just make a note of it, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — There could possibly be some other questions to be answered if it 

is going to be debated. There is one question that comes to mind: when the Band signs, as you say sign 

for those on the reserves, does that mean that they are collectively responsible as such, or is the council 

itself responsible. This is something that probably could be dealt with in committee, but as there is a 

question of principle involved there, I was just wondering. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Pardon me, I do want to rise on what seems to me a point of order, a point of 

procedure. We are getting dangerously close, to although we haven‟t actually arrived at, what should 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — May I answer that as a question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You can answer it, but if you do answer it right now you would be closing the debate, 

so I would suggest that if there is any further question, you just make a note of it, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — There could possibly be some other questions to be answered if it 

is going to be debated. There is one question that comes to mind: when the Band signs, as you say sign 

for those on the reserves, does that mean that they are collectively responsible as such, or is the council 

itself responsible. This is something that probably could be dealt with in committee, but as there is a 

question of principle involved there, I was just wondering. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Pardon me, I do want to rise on what seems to me a point of order, a point of 

procedure. We are getting dangerously close, to although we haven‟t actually arrived at, what should 

happen in committee, and I am afraid that the Leader of the Opposition or the member from 

Gravelbourg (Mr. Coderre) may get up later and say they haven‟t taken part in the debate; they just 

meant to ask questions. This is how we get into this sort of thing, and I really think we are getting into 

committee work rather than the debate on the principle on second reading. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I agree with you, Mr. Premier, that is why I tried to warn the members that the 

minister is answering these would be closing the debate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brown: — Mr. Speaker, in connection with the question of the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition, the answer is, yes we have had a considerable number of discussions with the federal 

authorities, requesting them to participate in this program and to provide some financial assistance 

towards making this service available on the reservations but we have not been successful. The last 

communication we had from them was only a very short time ago and, in brief, it simply said that while 

they are in sympathy they do feel there are other things required on the reservation as well as 

electrification and due to the monetary limitation they feel that they cannot agree to participate at this 

time. 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
36 

Regarding the question of the hon. member from Gravelbourg (Mr. Coderre), I believe he asked in 

connection about the Band signing rather than the individual — that was the gist of the question, I 

believe, and the answer is yes the Band has to authorize and approve of loans to the individual members 

of the Band and the council of the Band sign on their behalf. 

 

I think that answers the two questions which were raised. If there are any other questions, they can be 

dealt with in committee and I will likely, if it would be of interest to the members, have copies of the 

policy with respect to power on reservations available at that time. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

Bill No. 11 — An Act to amend the Lunacy Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker moved second reading of Bill No. 11 — An Act to amend the Lunacy Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, here there are some minor changes involving the practice of private 

committees of the estate of people who are not competent to manage their affairs. The government has 

been trying to encourage, as much as possible, private individuals who have an interest in the affairs of 

such persons to manage their affairs under a court order, without reference to the office of the 

administrator of estates, where that is possible. Consequently we are anxious that the procedures for 

protecting these estated be roughly similar to the proceedings under the administration of estates for the 

mentally incompetent. 

 

Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon City): — What bill are we dealing with? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Bill No. 11. 

 

Hon. Mr. Walker: — It is, therefore, proposed that the administrator of estates be formally and 

officially notified of any person for whose estate a private committee is appointed so that there can be no 

interference between the administrator of estates and private committees. It is also proposed that the 

private committee will be responsible for filing a notice of his appointment against lands belonging to 

the estate. Formerly this duty rested on the registrar or clerk of the court. It was a duty which was 

practically impossible of fulfilment and can much better be done by the private committee himself. 

 

The other changes are really procedural changes and are dependent upon the amendment to the 

Administration of Estates Act which are more substantial and will be coming along later. 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
37 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move that the bill be now read for the second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

Bill No. 13 — An Act to amend the Credit Union Act, 1962 

 

Hon. F. Meakes (Minister of Co-operation and Co-operative Development) moved second reading of 

Bill No. 13 — An Act to amend the Credit Union Act, 1962. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meakes: — Mr. Speaker, these amendments have been asked for by the Saskatchewan Co-

operative Credit Society and the Credit Union League. I think they are minor. One amendment will 

enable the directors of a credit union to borrow up to 100 percent of the value of the fixed term deposits 

which the credit union has with the co-operative credit society in the same way that a credit union now 

borrows against its shares in the society. 

 

Another amendment would place such fixed term deposits in the category as shares in the credit society 

insofar as the maintenance of the credit union‟s reserves are concerned. This reserve has been 

maintained to meet withdrawals from credit union current account and may also, of course, include cash, 

government bonds and redeemable guaranteed investments certificates through the co-operative trust 

society. 

 

The credit society has recently embarked on a policy of encouraging its member credit unions to invest 

in fixed term deposits rather than shares. The same interest rate will be paid on these deposits as on 

shares. One reason for this policy is that fixed term deposits may be withdrawn from the society by 

credit unions by giving an order some 30 days; while shares in the society can also be withdrawn, the 

total of such withdrawals by all members of the society shall not anyway near exceed ten percent of the 

paid-up capital in the society. It follows that fixed term deposits will ordinarily be more readily 

withdrawable. The amendments, therefore, Mr. Speaker, are of a technical nature but we feel are 

necessary in order to enable credit unions to exercise their full borrowing powers against their 

investments in the society. I might say that the procedures of credit unions will in no way be affected. 

 

With these few remarks I will move the second reading. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I am just going to ask a question, Mr. Speaker. I would like to know if the minister 

would say whether or not some credit union body asked for this particular legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think you had better hold the question to get them all as you will be closing 

the debate. If no further questions, the minister may proceed to answer them. It is my duty to warn you 

that the minister will be closing the debate. 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
38 

Hon. Mr. Meakes: — I think I said, Mr. Speaker, at the beginning that this was a request of the 

Saskatchewan Co-operative Credit Society and of the Credit Union League. They both requested it. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

Bill No. 14 — An Act to amend the Co-operative Guarantee Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Meakes moved second reading of Bill No. 14 — An Act to amend the Co-operative Guarantee 

Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meakes: — Mr. Speaker, the intent of the amendment to this act is actually to make the act a 

little more flexible. These amendments were requested as a result of the Saskatchewan Co-operative 

Credit Society having asked for this and I might say they were also requested, reviewed and okayed by 

the Co-operative Guarantee Board. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I could go into them clause by clause but I do think it would be better done in 

committee. But I would say that there is no change in the maximum liability of the province for 

guarantees given to the society or to the trust company, the maximum peak being $1 million. I do think 

it is better answering the questions in committee. 

 

With those remarks I will move second reading. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

Bill No. 15 — An Act to amend the Fire Prevention Act, 1954 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams moved second reading of Bill No. 15 — An Act to amend the Fire Prevention Act, 

1954. 

 

Hon. Mr. Williams: — Mr. Speaker, the amendment to the Fire Prevention Act and the first three 

sections are more or less self-explanatory, but section 4, where section 17 in the act is repealed, refers to 

where the fire commissioner can authorize a town council or any municipal council to take necessary 

steps to do work required by the order — it might have something to do with removing explosives, 

combustible material from any building; it could be the installation of a fire-escape, or fire 

extinguishers, or fire alarms, or things of that kind. Now, we did in 1959 pass an amendment which was 

29A in the act, giving the court exactly the same power as what the fire corporation has at the present 

time, and it is felt that that is perhaps the proper place for them so all that section 17, by virtue of this 

repeal, does is take that responsibility away from the fire commissioner. In fact section 17 has never 

been used. 



 

March 1, 1963 

 

 
39 

The next is contained in subsection 3 of section 6. The only new part there is this, and it refers to oil 

burners, conversion burners, oil-burning stoves, that are used in connection with special heating — 

industrial or manufacturing installations that are not approved. Now, some of these large pieces of 

equipment — I am thinking for the moment of one that was installed in the mine down at Esterhazy — 

obviously they can‟t be, an enormous piece of machinery can‟t be put in the offices of the Canadian 

Standards Association and tried out and approved, and this gives the fire commissioner authority to have 

it installed after he inspects it. At the present time there is no authority for anything like that to take 

place. 

 

Now the last section, section 7, is new. It gives prosecution for offences shall be instituted within two 

years after the date of the commission of the alleged offence. At the present time it is only six months. 

We find that our inspectors can‟t possibly get around to every place in six months and this gives them a 

period of two years. I might say that in the Electrical Inspection Act it is six years but we feel that two 

years should be enough in this case. 

 

With that explanation, Mr. Speaker, I would move that Bill No. 15 — An Act to amend the Fire 

Prevention Act be read a second time. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Mr. Speaker, there are some sections of the act which I find are rather disagreeable 

because you will find that this will authorize someone to go on someone‟s personal property to do some 

repairs, at least if my interpretation is correct, and with just these few words I would like to adjourn this 

debate to further look into this matter because it does seem that it does give the authority when there are 

repairs to be made for a municipal council to go ahead, or someone else to enter that property and to 

repair it. It seems to be an infringement of some rights. And I think with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:50 o‟clock p.m. 


