




















































Hansard: April 05, 1963


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

37th Day 

 

Friday, April 5, 1963. 

 

The House met at 10:00 a.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

Hon C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — Before the orders of the day are proceeded with, I wish to 

indicate that I now have information concerning certain matters brought up last evening by the member 

for Prince Albert (Mr. Steuart) and supposedly confidential information used by the Leader of the 

Opposition. I realize that I can’t make a statement now in the Orders of the Day but will make these 

statements to the press later. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN JUNIOR HOCKEY LEAGUE WINNERS 

 

Mr. I.H. MacDougall (Souris Estevan): — Before the orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I should like to 

draw to the attention of this house that Estevan has at last won the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League 

by defeating Melville. It wasn’t too hard a task, they won it in four out of five games, and now they will 

be going on to try and defeat my former home town of Edmonton. 

 

SALE OF OIL LANDS 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are 

proceeded with, on behalf of the Minister of Natural Resources, in this period of stagnation I would like 

to say that a small sale of oil land brought $863,000 to the province. 



 

April 5, 1963 

 

 

2 

CONGRATULATIONS TO ESTEVAN HOCKEY TEAM 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to join in the congratulations to the 

member for Estevan (Mr. MacDougall) for the win his team had the other night, and the fact that they 

won the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League Championship. I think Melville this year may have to 

settle for a win by Sid Abel in Detroit in their undertaking of the winning of the National Hockey League 

after last night, and he will have to do the honors for Melville this year. 

 

I would like to point out that it is two of the smaller centres in the province that this year have brought 

the honors as far as Junior Hockey is concerned which I think is a great tribute to both the centres of 

Melville and Estevan, that they have put up the show that they have in Junior Hockey in the province 

here this past season. 

 

Hon Mr. Williams: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of one of the larger centres in the province, I would like 

to congratulate the representatives of the two smaller centres. 

 

At 7:50 o’clock p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor entered the Chamber, took his seat on the 

Throne, and gave Royal Assent to the bills presented to him. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor then said: Mr. Speaker, and Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my duty to relieve you of further attendance at the legislative assembly. In doing so I wish to thank 

you and congratulate you upon the results of your deliberations. 

 

The additional funds you have appropriated will permit the expansion of programs designed to serve the 

farmer and to develop and diversify the agricultural resources of our province. 

 

The provision of additional scholarships will be welcomed throughout the province. These will enable 

many more young people to obtain higher education. 

 

The extent to which Saskatchewan has been able to develop its industrial potential in recent years has 

been the result of the combined efforts of many individuals, organizations, corporations, co-operatives 

and governments, both local and provincial. 



 

April 5, 1963 

 

 

3 

The Industrial Development Act passed at this session will provide a more formal means for all sectors 

of the provincial economy to give further attention to our industrial growth. 

 

The growing complexity of governments continues to make more difficult the responsibility of 

legislators to review the expenditures of public funds. it is earnestly hoped that your action to establish a 

Special Committee of the legislature to consider matters relating to the review of Public Accounts will 

provide even better means for the protection of the public interest. 

 

Public and private authorities have always been vested with the right to acquire land for public purposes 

by expropriation proceedings if necessary. While it is essential that this right be preserved it is 

incumbent upon legislators to ensure that expropriation proceedings adequately meet changing 

conditions and continue to pay full regard to the rights of the citizen. Your action in establishing a 

Special Committee of the legislature to examine into matters relating to the expropriation of land by 

public and private authorities is commendable. 

 

Legislation which you have passed will provide for the formal filing, publication and review of 

government regulations which are of a legislative nature. This innovation will provide an additional 

means of safeguarding the rights of citizens. 

 

I am pleased to note that you voted funds for the Saskatchewan Diamond Jubilee and Canada Centenary 

Committee. Public recognition is again given to the members of this committee and their willingness to 

serve Saskatchewan in this capacity. All citizens are urged to assist in the work of this committee to 

ensure the success of celebrations on the sixtieth anniversary of the establishment of Saskatchewan and 

the one hundredth anniversary of Canadian Confederation. 

 

Never has Saskatchewan been better represented in the world of sports beyond our borders than by the 

1963 winners of the Dominion curling Championship and the World Curling Championship. It was most 

appropriate that you again extended suitable honors to these sportsmen. 

 

I thank you for the provision you have made to meet the further requirements of the public service and 

assure you that the sum of money voted will be used economically, prudently and in the public interest. 

 

In taking leave of you, I desire to thank you for the manner in which you have devoted your energies to 

the activities of the Session, and wish you the full blessing of Providence on your return to your 

respective homes. 



 

April 5, 1963 

 

 

4 

The Hon. Mr. Walker, Provincial Secretary, then said: 

 

Mr. Speaker and Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is the will and pleasure of His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor that this Legislative Assembly be 

prorogued until it pleases His Honour to summon the same for the dispatch of business, and the 

Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 


