



















































Hansard: March 22, 1963


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

FIFTH SESSION — FOURTEENTH LEGISLATURE 

27th Day 

 

March 22, 1963. 
 

The House met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

GOVERNMENT BOND SALES 
 

Hon. J. H. Brockelbank: (Provincial Treasurer) — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are 

proceeded with I would like to ask the press to make a correction. I said yesterday that the sales of the 

Saskatchewan Savings Bonds would be cut off Tuesday night, and it appeared in the paper Tuesday 

noon. That is a mistake and the sales will be open until Tuesday night. I hope that correction will be 

made. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Coderre: — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are proceeded with I should like to draw the 

attention of the house to a fine group of students from the Bateman High School, 17 in number, in the 

lower right-hand corner and above the clock. They have come to have a visit to our fair city and the 

proceedings of the house. They are accompanied by Mr. Llewellyn, their principal, Mr. and Mrs. Forey, 

Mr. Costley, Mr. Omen and Mr. Brown who drove them down here. I am sure that their stay in this 

legislature this afternoon and their visit to some of the spots of the city will be most enlightening and 

educational, and I wish to convey to them our welcome to the legislature. I hope that the members of 

this legislature will welcome them with me. 



 

March 22, 1963 

 

 

2 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

 

Mr. I. H. MacDougall: (Souris-Estevan) — Before the orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

welcome the Grade 8 class from the far southeast of the province, the town of Gainsborough. They are 

accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Wall and Mrs. Bevan. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. D. T. McFarlane: (Qu‟Appelle-Wolseley) — Mr. Speaker, not to be outdone, I wish to draw the 

attention of members of this house to a very fine group of young students from one of the most historic 

parts of Saskatchewan, that of course is the Invercall School District in the most beautiful part of the 

province along the historic and very beautiful Qu‟Appelle Valley. They are here this afternoon 

accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Mattiford, and by their parents and I am sure you all join with me in 

wishing them a most successful afternoon. 

 

SUBSTITUTE FOR DEILDRIN 
 

Mr. F. E. Foley: (Turtleford) — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are proceeded with, I 

understand that Deildrin will no longer be able to be used for agricultural purposes in the province. I 

would like to ask the Premier what action the government is taking to find a substitute which will be 

suitable to replace this product. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, as I recall it the Minister of Agriculture dealt with this in his remarks 

in one of the debates just a few days ago in which he announced that there would be a restricted use 

insofar as Deildrin is concerned and that the government was making provision and providing a subsidy 

with regard to the use of two other chemicals which would be available for use in the province. 

 

Mr. Foley: — The names of the chemicals, Mr. Premier? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 



 

March 22, 1963 

 

 

3 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Brockelbank for second 

reading of Bill No. 26 — An Act to provide for the establishment of the Saskatchewan Public 

Administration Foundation. 

 

Mr. W. R. Thatcher: (Morse) — Mr. Speaker, last week on behalf of the opposition I expressed our 

opposition to the principle involved by Bill No. 26. This afternoon I would like to reiterate that 

opposition. 

 

This particular motion or bill proposes to set aside $1 million of the taxpayers money into a special fund. 

The fund may use the interest on that million dollars, I suppose it would amount to about $50,000 

annually, for a number of purposes. First of all the money may be used to provide bursaries for 

University of Saskatchewan students to undertake studies of public administration; secondly, to enable 

the university to conduct special courses in public administration. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know who dreamed up this impractical piece of legislation. I know it wasn‟t 

the Provincial Treasurer because I give him credit for being more realistic, and more hard-headed. No 

doubt this bill is the result of the thinking of some planner or some theorist either in the department or in 

the budget bureau. Certainly it is the product of fuzzy thinking on the part of someone. Why do we take 

exception to this particular bill. 

 

I think there are three main reasons. The first reason has to do with the cost involved. The government is 

asking the hard pressed taxpayer of Saskatchewan to dig into his pocket for yet another million dollars. 

We ask the minister and the Premier today, when is this savage taxation going to stop in Saskatchewan? 

The socialists have no mercy whatsoever for the little man in this province. Surely if they have to spend 

a million dollars, it could have been invested in something to promote the productivity of this province. 

Or better still, it might have been used simply for tax relief. Can‟t this government realize just for once 

the taxpayer might like to spend his own money instead of having it spent as it is being in this bill. He 

doesn‟t need big government to spend every dollar that he earns. And so our first objection to this 

legislation then is the cost involved. 

 

Now, in the second place, we think that if this bill is proceeded with the board which is set up will be 

just one more sink-hole in which to place a few more party heelers, a few more party workers, a few 

more defeated candidates. 



 

March 22, 1963 

 

 

4 

The board would lack any independence. Its members undoubtedly would be friends of the 

administration and all it would do would be to present whitewash reports on the various matters it 

looked into. Once this fund is functioning, it likely will be only a short time until the government makes 

it into a paid and permanent board. My socialist friends across the way love to set up boards and bureaus 

and agencies. They seem to feel if they get enough boards they can impose a planned economy on this 

province. We say that many of these boards are virtually useless and this so-called public administration 

fund in my opinion would fall into that category. 

 

The minister, when he was speaking, claimed that the foundation will pursue a policy of research and 

education. Such objectives may be quite laudable but they would reveal little or nothing of the 

entrenched shortcomings or the entrenched evils which are prevalent in the present governmental set-up. 

For the purpose of investigating the whole administration, for the purpose of revealing fundamental 

weaknesses in the governmental set-up, for the purposes of recommending real reforms, surely an 

independent commission would be infinitely more effective than this fund which my hon. friend the 

minister is proposing today. 

 

I think the Minister himself pin-pointed the main weakness of this bill — I quote from his remarks, I 

think it was last Friday. The minister said: 

 

The Public Administration Foundation is not a new look, it is a continuation of work which has been 

carried on for a good many years. 

 

He went on to indicate that the foundation in effect would merely supplement and complement work 

which for many years has been done by the budget bureau. 

 

I can tell him that that assurance doesn‟t give the opposition any feeling of reassurance. We think in the 

last 15 years the budget bureau has failed completely to control overall governmental expenditures. Year 

after year, government spending under this administration has gone up by millions of dollars. The 

minister claims that the budget bureau has been effective. If that is so, how is it that the public finances 

of this province have arrived at the point today where they are in such an unhealthy position? How is it 

that we have such fantastic and constantly increasing administrative costs? How is it that our public 

debt, our gross public debt, has grown from $135 million to $560 million? How is it, if the budget 

bureau was working, interest charges gone from $5 million to $27 ½  million? How is it that we have, if 

not the highest, certainly practically the highest taxation of any province in the dominion of Canada? 

How is it that we have had budgetary deficits up until this past year? 



 

March 22, 1963 

 

 

5 

Has this budget bureau of experts planned these spendthrift policies? Did they make recommendations 

to the cabinet of ways that those expenses could have been reduced? If they have made those 

recommendations, why hasn‟t the cabinet done something about it? 

 

In short, Mr. Speaker, this bill has all the appearances of setting up just one more board adding to the 

dozens which already exist. For this reason, Mr. Speaker, the opposition will oppose this bill and I 

should like to propose at this time the following amendment, seconded by the hon. member for 

Moosomin: 

 

That the word „now‟ be deleted and the words „six months hence‟ be added to the motion. 

 

Needless to say, Mr. Speaker, if the house passes this it will kill the bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It was moved by Mr. Thatcher, seconded by Mr. MacDonald that the word „now‟ be 

deleted and the words „six months hence‟ be added to the motion. I think it is clear what is intended but 

the amendment doesn‟t say which motion. 

 

Mr. W. R. Thatcher: — The motion before the house, Sir. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I will have the clerk insert that on the motion for Bill 26, if that is agreed, in order to 

make it perfectly clear on the records. Is the house ready for the question? 

 

Hon. Mr. W. S. Lloyd:(Premier) — Mr. Speaker, may I say to begin with that I welcome the opposition 

of the opposition to this particular bill because it seems to me that nothing, even if they had tried, could 

be more calculated to show their shortcomings, their lack of understanding of good public 

administration principles than the opposition to this bill and the reasons which the Leader of the 

Opposition stated the other day and stated today for opposing it. 

 

May I say to begin with, Mr. Speaker, that in order to put this in the proper context of government 

policy, 



 

March 22, 1963 

 

 

6 

this bill is one of a package of proposals which the government has submitted this session or will be 

submitting. A package of several items which combined with one rather specific and important purpose 

in mind, and that purpose is to improve the effectiveness of ways and means by which we as a 

legislature and we as a government can handle the public business of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. There are a number of items which I shall refer to in a moment which we find as being 

those which will improve the efficiency of the legislature and the government generally, which will 

make it possible for members of the legislature to participate more fully in the work of the legislature, 

and which will make it possible for the opposition to pay a more meaningful role, if this is indeed what 

they wish to do, in the whole business of the public in the province of Saskatchewan. I would add that I 

would hope that this package could be added to in following years. 

 

Now whether we like it or not, Mr. Speaker, it is a fact that government and public administration are 

getting increasingly more complex. This is true because there are increasing opportunities and increasing 

needs for government to interest itself in the life of individuals and the life of communities. It is 

important since it is getting more complicated and more important to all of us that we do everything we 

can to have the best possible preparation for making decisions that have to be made. The searching for 

evidence, the sifting out of evidence, the arranging of this evidence and putting it before those who are 

responsible in the end for making the necessary decisions. Because there is this importance, one might 

have hoped that the opposition would have supported a bill of this kind, rather than opposing it. They 

have, however, chosen to oppose it. I submit that their opposition is mostly because of their hope to gain 

something because of the political kind of criticism, because of the improper ascribing of motives which 

the Leader of the Opposition has just indulged in. 

 

Now, as I said a minute ago, Mr. Speaker, this is one of a parcel or one of a package of proposals which 

the government has made this session or will be making this session. The bill which is before us and 

which I will discuss in a bit more detail in a minute or two, to establish a Public Administration 

Foundation. This is not entirely a new idea as the Provincial Treasurer mentioned when he was speaking 

earlier. It is a means whereby we can strengthen the structure of public administration in the province. It 

is something that has been discussed by the government at various times over a period of years. The 

second bill, which I simply tie in here, if I may, Mr. Speaker, as being one of the ways in which the 

government is giving the legislature and itself a better opportunity to do its job, is The Registration of 

Regulations Act which will make it possible for the legislature to participate more fully in the business 

of the public in the province of Saskatchewan. 



 

March 22, 1963 

 

 

7 

There is on the order paper a resolution which I must not discuss dealing with a change in the procedure 

of public accounts. I do recall, however, and I may discuss, a similar situation some two years ago when 

the opportunity was given to the opposition to take part in the study of a more meaningful public 

accounts procedure and it was turned down, you may recall, by the members of the opposition. They 

take the position they like to have a mythical bone to growl about but when they are given some real 

meat to digest, then this they refuse to accept as being worthwhile. 

 

Now, I want to make just a little bit of reference and draw the attention of the house to the extreme 

language which the Leader of the Opposition used in discussing this particular bill. You will recall that 

the other evening he spoke as he did today of the budget bureau as having failed, being almost 

completely useless, if I recall his words. He likes on other occasions to talk about the Glassco 

Commission and what it recommends. He overlooks of course in this kind of language the fact that the 

Glassco Commission has recommended procedures and personnel such as those which have been 

involved in the budget bureau work in this province for a great many years. 

 

He had reference when he spoke the other day, as he did today, to such procedures as are proposed here 

as being impractical, as being the ideas of eggheads. Mr. Speaker, if I have to depend on somebody for 

advice I would rather depend on eggheads than pudding heads I must say. He again this afternoon, as he 

did the other evening, alleged that this was simply for political purposes, that the board would be made 

up of government employees mostly; he added today the words party heelers, party workers, and 

language of that particular type. And he pointed out the other afternoon that all that it would do would 

be to apply what he called the biggest bucket of whitewash ever seen in this province — or words to that 

effect. 

 

Well, against that and his words this afternoon when he spoke of it being impractical and not realistic, 

the results of fuzzy thinking, I think we ought to take a look at the bill itself, what it proposes, who is 

going to make up the board — none of these items incidentally which entered into the discussion of the 

Leader of the Opposition on this particular bill. 

 

The bill does propose that there will be $1 million set aside, the interest on which can be used for studies 

of public administration in the province of Saskatchewan, and as has been intimated it will be the 

interest on this fund which will be used. It provides therefore the basis for continuing study and 

continuing evaluation. This, I think, is important in itself, that there be a means whereby problems can 

be regularly referred to groups of people who have a competence in this field, that we do not need to 



 

March 22, 1963 

 

 

8 

wait for the big, one-shot kind of investigation which the opposition seems to be favoring. It is probably 

true, Mr. Speaker, that a constant study of this kind doesn‟t make the kind of big splash that the 

committee which is being talked about might make. It doesn‟t get the same kind of headlines. I submit, 

however, that this kind of continuing and constant consideration of problems as they arise do a better 

service to public administration in the long run. So it is, therefore, a means of continuing evaluations and 

continuing study. 

 

Secondly, who is going to constitute this board? This board, you will recall, according to the Leader of 

the Opposition, will be made up of party heelers, of party workers, who will apply the biggest bucket of 

whitewash that this province has ever seen. One could hope of course that there would come a time 

when members of the opposition would refrain and desist from this kind of language about people who 

are really ready to give of their time to help with public problems. 

 

Almost every public body that has been established to study any problems has been castigated in this 

way by the Leader of the Opposition and some who sit over there. All a man has to do to bring himself 

into disrepute as far as some of those people are concerned is to accept a responsibility on behalf of the 

public of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, this board will be made up to begin with of one person nominated by the board of governors of the 

University of Saskatchewan. This presumably is one of the party heelers and party workers who is going 

to be prepared to apply a bucket of whitewash to every problem that is being referred to them. Secondly, 

it is going to have on it a member who will be appointed and nominated by the Institute of Public 

Administration of Canada, leading figures in public administration from one end of this country to the 

other. This is another one of those persons to whom the Leader of the Opposition is prepared to apply 

such language as party heelers and party workers. I say again, nothing is designed to show better the 

irresponsibility of the Leader of the Opposition than the kind of language he uses in describing these 

people. Anyone who suggests that people of this kind, the kind I have mentioned, would be prepared to 

place their names as a part of a group governing a board of this kind to accept responsibility for the 

study. Well, Mr. Speaker, it needs nothing more than that I think to find the true level of thinking and 

the reasons behind the Leader of the Opposition‟s attack on this particular bill. 

 

The other members, it is quite true, will be appointed by the government of Saskatchewan but who . . . 



 

March 22, 1963 

 

 

9 

Mr. W. R. Thatcher: — Five out of seven. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Now, look, Mr. Speaker, on this point does he think that any respectable person 

appointed by the board of governors of the university or by the Institute of Public Administration of 

Canada is going to be willing to take part in an operation in which they are entirely over-ruled by any 

other group of people for the purpose of applying whitewash? And I say again, this is the kind of 

insulting, derogatory remark which should not be made before this legislature. 

 

With regard to the other members who will be appointed by the government, and this will be a group of 

an additional three or an additional five. 

 

It is the hope of the government, the intention of the government, that one of these at least will be drawn 

from persons who have been active and interested in the field of local government. I am sure as has been 

said by some of the representatives in the field of local government that they are interested also in 

building up a group which will be available for them to carry out some studies which will be of value to 

the institutions of local government in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the Leader of the Opposition objected to this on several bases, perhaps most of them I have already 

commented on. He objected on the basis of the cost involved; the cost involved over the years will be as 

we have intimated the interest on this particular amount of money. This may or may not be more than 

the cost of one big commission such as is being suggested as the best way to proceed. 

 

He objected to it secondly on the basis of the fact that the board would be, he called it, another one of his 

polite phrases, a sink-hole. I think we have commented on that adequately. 

 

Thirdly he objected to it because it would be, as he said, as useless as the budget bureau in terms of 

providing efficiency in government. Well now, of course, the purpose of the budget bureau is not to 

control the overall expenditures of the government; that is the function of the government itself and the 

legislature which agrees to those proposals. But let there be no doubt about it that the budget bureau has 

made an immense and I suggest immeasurable contribution in terms of providing greater efficiency in 

public administration in the province of Saskatchewan. Let there be no doubt about it that that is 

recognized not only in the province of Saskatchewan but again from one end of Canada to the other, the 

contribution that has been made. 



 

March 22, 1963 

 

 

10 

Well, Mr. Speaker, good public administration depends upon a variety of factors. It depends first of all 

upon an informed public opinion. This I think is as important as any other and I submit that the studies 

that will be carried out by this board or under the direction of this board will be useful in better 

informing public opinion about the problems of public administration and about some of the solutions to 

those problems. 

 

Secondly, it depends to a very considerable extent upon the quality of staff which it is possible to find 

for public administration purposes. And this has been one of the big problems, not only a problem in this 

province, it is a problem in every province in Canada I dare say, and it is a problem for the federal 

government, to find people who are interested in making a career out of public administration and to 

find people who have had the opportunity to study specifically some of the theories and some of the 

experiences of public administration here and elsewhere. 

 

The hon. Leader of the Opposition can speak all the scornful terms he likes about theory and theorists; 

there is a very considerable advantage in having people who do have some appreciation of the theory 

and practices of public administration which have been found advantageous in many parts of the world. 

 

And one of the ways in which we are going to get more people interested in public administration at the 

level of the university is to provide opportunities whereby practical research training jobs can be carried 

out. This bill I submit is going to serve two very important functions in this regard. 

 

It is first of all going to interest a number of students in serious study of public administration. It is 

going to result further in a number of those people making a conscious decision that public 

administration is a good career in which to engage, and thirdly, it is going to interest a number of the 

professors at the university in the problems of administration. And, again, I think one of our 

shortcomings has been that there hasn‟t been enough interest at the teaching level, at the research level 

in universities with regard to the problems of public administration, and these services will be served 

and well-served as a result of this particular bill. 

 

Those are some of the reasons why the amendment is particularly bad, Mr. Speaker, because the bill 

does lay the basis for a continuing study of problems of public administration in this province, because it 

will serve to interest students in public administration as a career, and give them some assistance in their 

preparation for that career. Because it will provide additional information for 



 

March 22, 1963 

 

 

11 

the public of the province about public administration, because it will serve to interest the universities, in 

studies of problems of public administration and because moreover it will be administered by a board 

which is practical and which is made up of men and women of integrity, I want to oppose in the 

strongest terms possible the amendment which is before us and to support the motion of the Provincial 

Treasurer. 

 

Hon. A. E. Blakeney: (Minister of Public Health) — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to add a word or 

two to the comments of the Premier and the other speakers in this debate. I think that one of the reasons, 

most of the reasons why I feel that this bill would be one worthy of support and the amendment not one 

worthy of support, have been set out very ably by the Premier. However, I did want to add a small 

amount of elaboration to one or two of the points that he made. 

 

It seems to me that one of the most difficult problems facing this government, and any government, in 

the years ahead is going to be to recruit, and to retain the highest possible calibre of public servants. The 

importance of this, I think, is acknowledged by all. It doesn‟t matter really what complexion, what 

political complexion the members on your right, Mr. Speaker, bear, it doesn‟t matter what abilities the 

members of the cabinet or the members of the legislature may have, they will have only have indifferent 

success in introducing their policies which they believe to be of benefit to the people whom they serve, 

if they are not backed up by an able and diligent public service. 

 

I just was noting the last issue of the Royal Bank of Canada Monthly letter for March of 1963, and it is 

entitled something about “government”. It is a rather interesting little survey of how our governmental 

system works, and it lays particular stress on the civil service and goes on to say that without well-

trained and honest civil servants, efficient government is impossible. It is upon this service that we 

depend to see that the government‟s policies are realized in action. 

 

Now, how can a government go about recruiting first class public servants and retaining those first class 

public servants? Well, in the public service as in other areas of employment it is not always the amount 

of money that is paid to the person, which decides on whether he comes to you and whether he stays. A 

good deal depends on the climate in which he works, and I think this is particularly true of public 

service. Many of them are genuinely interested in the processes of government and are genuinely 

anxious to continue to improve their knowledge of the processes of government as they earn their daily 

bread. 



 

March 22, 1963 

 

 

12 

I believe that we can recruit better staff if we can offer them a climate in which they may work in an 

efficient manner, but also in which they may see developing, in an academic sense, some of the ideas 

which they may hold, or which they may find attractive in the field of public administration. Now this I 

think is important for recruiting staff and I think it is more important for retaining staff. Many of our top 

public servants are people who can equally easily find employment with the government, with private 

industry, or in university circles. The distinction between public administration and private business 

administration is becoming more and more blurred and less definite every day. There was a time when 

people used to talk about business principles and that these ought to be the principles upon which 

business ought to operate, and on which government ought to operate, and it was somehow thought that 

all the decisions that are faced in administration could be measured in terms of balance sheets. 

 

Now this was not widely thought to be the case with respect to government, it was widely thought to be 

the case with respect to business. It is now found to be not as universal a principle as was once thought. 

Any number of business people are finding that they had to take into consideration not only their 

stockholders and not only the balance sheet, but also their public image in the community, and their 

public image with their customers. And it is quite within the realm of possibility for a company to be 

faced with the decision wherein to close a plant would be the best business decision in terms of profit ad 

loss, but to close a plant would create so much ill-will in the community towards the company, or create 

so much ill-will in the minds of their customers that this decision, notwithstanding that it is the best 

business decision, is the wrong decision for that company to make. And they have found, as 

governments find, that they have a public, and that they have to develop a sensitivity to public reception 

of their programs. 

 

My point here, Mr. Speaker, is simply that the distinction between public administration and private 

administration is much less definite. This means that private industry is constantly seeking to recruit 

from government some of the most highly trained and most able of governmental staff. Now 

governments are going to face the same sort of competition in retaining staff from universities in the 

years ahead. I don‟t want to bore the house with figures as to how the university population is going to 

expand in the next ten or twenty years, but the figures are quite staggering, and one of the distinct 

limiting factors in the increase in university enrolments in the next 10 or 20 years, is going to be the 

shortage of academical staff. And I know, and I think you know, Mr. Speaker, that when the universities 

are looking around to get academic staff, one of the first places they will look to get instructors, lecturers 



 

March 22, 1963 

 

 

13 

professors, and deans, in the fields of public administration, in the fields of political science and the 

fields of economics is going to be governmental staff. And if we are going to hang on to our top staff, 

we are going to have to offer them some of the attractions, some of the attractions of the university 

environment. 

 

Now most public servants are not wedded to the full university environment. They like the cut and thrust 

of day to day administration, otherwise they wouldn‟t be in the public service. But many of them still 

have some inclination to the academics. Some of them still want to pursue some of their ideas on a part 

time basis; or have some association with people who are pursuing ideas, intellectual ideas, in the field 

of public administration, and I believe that we will be able to satisfy some of these desires on the part of 

our top public servants, and thereby be able to retain those people for the service of the government and 

the people, if we can offer employment in an atmosphere which has some of these other aspects I 

mentioned. 

 

I believe that this public administration foundation will assist in doing this, and, therefore, I think that it 

will make a very substantial contribution to assisting this government and future governments in the 

recruitment and the retention of first class staff. 

 

Just before I take my seat I want to make one or two comments about some of the comments made by 

members opposite. The suggestion has been made that because the board of this foundation is going to 

be appointed by the government, this somehow makes the board a matter to be despised, that the whole 

project is immediately cast into disrepute because this is so. And I pick up the revised statutes and look 

through some of the other acts that have gone through this legislature and have noted some of the other 

boards which have been appointed by the government and which I take it members opposite would 

equally like to heap abuse upon. I think of the Saskatchewan Arts Board, which will spend about as 

much money as this Public Administration Foundation. I‟m not sure that I agree with every decision 

taken by the Saskatchewan Arts Board, but I am sure that this board has given able and distinguished 

service to the people of Saskatchewan. I think of the Saskatchewan Research Council, all of whose 

members, as I recollect,  are appointed by the government and I suppose in its work, in the physical 

science research field, it can be castigated as being just white-wash. And I think of the University 

Hospital Board, the majority of whose members are appointed by the government, and I think of the 

Archives Board; there are many others. But all of these are boards whereon people who have the public 

welfare at heart, have served, and have served well, ably and impartially, in the service of the people of 

the province. 



 

March 22, 1963 

 

 

14 

I think that the members on the board of the Public Administration Foundation will do the same thing. I 

think that the results which they will achieve will be results which will redound to the very substantial 

benefit of this house and of the administrative machinery of this government and of all of the people of 

Saskatchewan. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will oppose the amendment and will support the motion. 

 

Mr. J. E. Snedker: (Saltcoats) — Mr. Speaker, I listened to the eloquent defence of the Premier of the 

province on this piece of legislation. If he pursues his present course, and follows his present methods, I 

think that he will shortly achieve the ability of his predecessor in compressing in very few words the 

greatest possible concentration of hate. 

 

I don‟t think that he effectively answered any of the arguments put forth by this side of the house, 

particularly in regard to who was going to control this particular board. There isn‟t any doubt in my 

mind as to who is going to control it. If there are seven members on the board, and five are going to be 

appointed by the government, one from the university, one from the Institute of Public Administration, 

then obviously the board is going to be controlled by the government in the ratio of five to two. There 

just isn‟t any argument about it, and no amount of white-washing is going to cover up that. As far as the 

university representative on this board is concerned, he is going to be nominated by the board of 

governors of the University of Saskatchewan, and I suggest that the government has dragged our 

university in as a means of window-dressing, and the same thing applies to the member from the 

Institute of Public Administration. When the board makes a decision that is unpalatable to the people of 

the province, they will say “Oh, that was recommended by someone from the Institute of Public 

Administration, or that was recommended by the member from the university.” 

 

And when, of course, something is done with which the public agree and some popular decision is made, 

the government will take all the credit for themselves, and in that they will only be doing what they have 

always done ever since they came into office. As far as using this board to white-wash the short comings 

and the inequities and the destruction of self-government in the field of public administration and 

particularly in the realm of government patronage, quite obviously this board will white-wash it, at the 

rate of five to two. Because five government members sit on the board and control it. There isn‟t any 

argument about it at all, as far as political patronage is concerned, there isn‟t a doubt in the world that 

the five members who are going to be appointed to this board, will be 



 

March 22, 1963 

 

 

15 

appointed on a basis of political patronage, if the government follows the line that they have always 

followed ever since they were elected to office for this is a government which stinks and reeks of 

patronage from Halifax to Vancouver and you cannot tell me that an Ethiopian will change the color of 

his skin or a leopard his spots. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Give em heck, Jim. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — It is my personal opinion that this little particular piece of legislation is being enacted 

at this time in order to take $1 million from the hard pressed taxpayers of our province in order to 

provide five nice well padded seats for five defeated NDP. candidates after this federal election. And 

also to secure a staff of people who will be in a position to write the next NDP platform for the next 

provincial election all at the expense of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

It is quite significant that if a vacancy occurs on this board, regardless of where the vacancy comes from, 

if it is someone who was appointed by the university, or someone who was appointed from the Institute 

of Public Administration, the government is going to fill that vacancy; it says so, right here in Clause 4 

— I quote: 

 

Upon a vacancy occurring in the board the Lieutenant Governor in Council may appoint a person to fill 

that vacancy for the balance of the unexpired term. 

 

Here is more government control and another government friend slipped in if someone unfortunately 

happens to get sick, die, or move on, or resign. 

 

In addition it says the chairman shall sign all contracts and that the chairman is going to be appointed by 

the government. Now in connection with some of the arguments that were put forth by the Minister of 

Health — he said that this would help to recruit and retain the highest calibre of public servant. Well if 

you want to recruit and retain the highest calibre of public servant, then I would suggest that the public 

servants of this province should be appointed on a basis of ability to do a job, not for their service to a 

political party, if you want to get good civil servants, that is the way to get them, and if you give them 

their freedom, they will do a good job. But as long as you persist in hiring them on a basis of political 

patronage then they will be concerned more in the existence of the party and the hand that fed them, than 

giving service to the people in the province of Saskatchewan. 



 

March 22, 1963 

 

 

16 

The Minister of Health went on further and he said that without a well trained civil service, good 

government is impossible, and so on and so forth. Now, apparently this board is going to have 

something to do with training the civil servants. I think that idea can be connected with the resolution 

that was submitted in the CCF convention last summer, where I understand certain CCF members got up 

and said the government was not keeping the civil servants in line politically and incidentally you 

haven‟t been. What you are creating here is more jobs for defeated CCF candidates — would be MPs. 

relatives, friends, defeated CCF MLAs, and would be MLAs and in addition you are also creating a 

black snake whip with which to whip your civil servants into line by having a pack of doggone 

snoopers, breathing down the necks of good, honest, sincere servants who are trying to do the best they 

can for the people of Saskatchewan. You are going to spend another million dollars for that — you 

should be ashamed of yourselves. 

 

A million dollars — you will be amending this bill next year and asking for another million for the 

Premier of the province when he was speaking said this is only part of the package, well, I would like to 

know how big this package is going to be. It‟s will be quite a package after 10 years. How well I 

remember the high-flown phrases of some of the gentlemen opposite, particularly the former leader of 

the party, when they were talking about the people they were going to hire to assist them, the civil 

servants — they said there would be no patronage. Mr. Douglas and a few more of them said they would 

resign if there was such a thing as patronage. Now, you are setting up a commission at the cost of a 

million dollars to the people of the province of Saskatchewan, to make sure that there is nothing but 

patronage in government and all the way through. 

 

I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if the government is honest and sincere, if it is really their desire to 

investigate and review some of the forms of government and some of the things the government does, 

then they should set up a commission which is absolutely and completely independent. If they want a 

continuing commission, not a flash in the pan affair, that is all very well. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — We have a motion on the order paper dealing with that topic. I hope the hon. member 

won‟t press that on the motion we saw on the order paper. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — But not by the widest stretch of imagination can this be construed as being an 

independent or a 



 

March 22, 1963 

 

 

17 

non-partisan commission and for that reason I am going to oppose it and I am going to support the 

amendment. 

 

Mr. A. C. Cameron: (Maple Creek) — Mr. Speaker, if I may, I‟m not in very good shape to take part in 

the debate, but I have a few things I would like to say and then if I have the consent of the house to 

adjourn the debate for a while. First I think I should answer the Premier in regards to his statement on 

the motion in the house that the opposition opposed that motion two years ago. Now he should know 

that, of course, is not true. The motion was withdrawn. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. The motion was withdrawn because the 

opposition refused to have any part in it. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Of course, Mr. Speaker, the Premier wouldn‟t know what part the opposition had to 

do with it until the vote was put . . . 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Oh, come now . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I can recall the Premier that day rising and saying that he would like to have had 

unanimity on this vote, and it would appear that there are some members in the house opposed to this, 

and rather than have a division he would move to withdraw the motion. So it is most unfair to say that 

the opposition opposed it at that time. There were no speeches on the motion, there was no vote taken on 

the motion, so that disposes of that accusation. 

 

Now this is setting aside a million dollar fund to do research, to give bursaries, in a program of research 

in the field of public administration. It is true public administration is a vital field today, both 

provincially and federally, and down during the years this government has taken great pride in the fact, 

so they tell us, that it has always streamlined its civil service. I can recall a few years back, bringing in a 

gentleman, a defeated CCF candidate, giving him an official position, I forget what it is called today, but 

his purpose was to teach the civil servants how to be polite. In other words to increase the 



 

March 22, 1963 

 

 

18 

efficiency of the civil servants, to increase their public relations. I was surprised that the Minister of 

Health today, should use that same worn out theme, that one thing this would do is to increase the public 

acceptance of the program instituted by the government; because one thing in business and government 

today is good public relations. 

 

I would think back to all that we have been told during the years that this administration had a public 

relation second to none in Canada, but apparently they feel today otherwise. 

 

We are to set aside one million dollars of Saskatchewan‟s funds, not merely give a bursary, but to take 

one million dollars, I presume of this $20 million surplus I spoke about, and since we have this $20 

million surplus, it is now a good time to set aside $1 million and let the interest on that money provide 

these bursaries. Well, if we are going to set aside $1 million today, I can suggest many avenues where 

that $1 million could better serve, than in the field of public administration, vital as that may be. 

 

We have today in the field of dentistry, many constituencies who haven‟t a dentist within the 

constituency. If there is anything that needs additional money today, it is some enlarged bursary or 

setting aside a million dollars to deal with the terrific shortage of dentists in this province, and to see that 

those young boys and girls have the dental facilities that are so important. I think the dental health of our 

boys and girls is far more important than further research into public administration. We have had for 

two or three years, and I understand we will have it this year again, a restriction or ceiling on the extent 

to which hospitals may increase their budget. 

 

They are asked to keep their budget down, even though it leads to lesser efficiency, and in some cases to 

inefficiency, because the government tells them that the funds are not available. Surely in the field of 

hospitalization and in the field of health, if we have a million dollars left over somewhere to establish, 

we could look into that field. 

 

If you look at the bursaries and the grants in education, Saskatchewan is lagging far behind many of our 

sister provinces in regards to bursaries in that field. There is a need there. There are so many vital needs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — On a point of order. This is an amendment to a motion for second reading 

of a bill. This is not the budget debate or the throne speech debate, my hon. friend 



 

March 22, 1963 

 

 

19 

if he is to be in order should stick to this subject, for or against the amendment or the motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think the debate, while I have been allowing a great deal of latitude, because I realize 

it isn‟t implicated by reference, but I do feel that the hon. member is a little wide of the mark, and I 

would ask him to stick a little closer to the bill before him. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I think the Provincial Treasurer is well aware of it. How else can I justify how I am 

going to vote . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Can‟t even do it this way . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I can‟t eh! Well I have no qualms about opposing this at this time, because certainly 

good a thing as it is, there are other services in far greater need of a million dollars than public 

administration. And I have been pointing out many of those dire needs in the province of Saskatchewan. 

And if we have a million dollars to throw around put it into something that needs vital attention today. 

Not in something that in five years time we will graduate one or two experts in the field of public 

administration. Put it where it will do the most good when we are so short of so many of these vital 

services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with those few words I would ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to get this bill off, I‟ve been trying for several 

days now. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Speaker, the reason I would like to adjourn the debate, there are several other 

members who are sick with the flu like I was, and they would like an opportunity to deal with this topic. 

Surely it is not unreasonable to ask to adjourn the debate at this early stage. There has been only one 

person speaking on it. 



 

March 22, 1963 

 

 

20 

Mr. Speaker: — I don‟t think the motion to adjourn the debate is debatable, but it is a motion which can 

be decided by the house, so I have no alternative but to put the question on the adjournment motion. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Recorded vote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, having collected the voices, declared the motion lost. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Will the hon. member please sometime read the rule and find out that I must 

declare whether it is lost or carried before you can ask for a recorded vote and you must also rise to ask 

for a vote. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Three of us rose . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Not when you first rose there wasn‟t . . . 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Well, there were three of us rose on our feet, and I was on my feet before you were on 

yours . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well, is the hon. member not aware of the fact that when the Speaker is on his feet he 

must remain seated . . . 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Well, I‟m seated now . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well, then, that is fine. I declare the motion lost. 



 

March 22, 1963 

 

 

21 

Mr. Snedker: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. I asked for a recorded vote, and we are entitled to 

have one. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Will the hon. member sit down . . . 

 

Mr. Snedker: — On a point of order . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member has no point of order. I have declared the result of the voice vote 

that the motion lost, and now you are in order you can ask for a recorded vote if you wish to. 

 

Mr. Snedker: — Record the vote, please, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That is fine, call in the members. The vote about to be taken is on a motion by the hon. 

member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron), asking leave to adjourn the debate on Bill no. 26, and the 

amendment thereto. 

 

Those in favor of the motion that the debate be now adjourned will please rise. 

 

YEAS — 16 

Messieurs 

 

Thatcher McFarlane Coderre 

McCarthy Gardiner MacDougall 

Barrie Foley Snedker 

McDonald Guy Gallagher 

Danielson Boldt Steuart 

Cameron   

 



 

March 22, 1963 

 

 

22 

NAYS — 25 

Messieurs 

 

Lloyd Thurston Michayluk 

Johnson Davies Semchuk 

Williams Nicholson Perkins 

Brown Turnbull Snyder 

Blakeney Stone Stevens 

Brockelbank Whelan Dahlman 

Kramer Thibault Kluzak 

Willis Berezowsky Peterson 

Meakes   

 

I declare the motion lost. The debate will continue on the motion and on the amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It is my duty to inform the house that the mover of the motion is about to close the 

debate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I can‟t close the debate on the amendment, only on the main motion . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I have been allowing this discussion on both at once, because it was pretty hard to 

discuss just one word at a time. So while I have allowed the discussion on both, it will be necessary to 

take the two separate votes on this, one on the amendment and one on the motion. And the mover of the 

original motion, if he speaks now, it will not be necessarily closing the debate, but if he speaks after this 

vote is taken it will be closing the debate. Is the house ready for the question? 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 16 

Messieurs 

 

Thatcher McFarlane Coderre 

McCarthy Gardiner MacDougall 

Barrie Foley Snedker 

McDonald Guy Gallagher 

Danielson Boldt Steuart 

Cameron   

 



 

March 22, 1963 

 

 

23 

NAYS — 25 

Messieurs 

 

Lloyd Thurston Michayluk 

Johnson Davies Semchuk 

Williams Nicholson Perkins 

Brown Turnbull Stevens 

Brockelbank Stone Dahlman 

Kramer Whelan Kluzak 

Willis Thibault Peterson 

Meakes Berezowsky Snyder 

Blakeney   

 

Mr. Speaker: — The debate is on the main motion. Is the house ready for the question? It is my duty to 

inform the house that the mover of the debate is about to exercise his right to close the debate. If anyone 

wishes to speak they must do so now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I won‟t take up much of the time of the house but it did occur 

to me when I was listening to the hon. member from Saltcoats (Mr. Snedker), it doesn‟t appear that he 

has a great deal of confidence in the government. I gathered that from his remarks. That is if he actually 

believes in those remarks and I have no right to insinuate otherwise. 

 

This Bill is certainly not a bit of window dressing at all, and we have been arguing about the board. The 

board is an administrative board. It is not the board that will do any studies in regard to public 

administration or the practice of public administration in Saskatchewan but there will be students, 

graduate students from our own university and otherwise, or there might be civil servants from other 

jurisdictions get a bursary or some financial help to carry out a study of some specific part of public 

administration in the province of Saskatchewan or relative to this province. 

 

A good deal has been made about the million dollars which is going into this public fund. The province 

of Saskatchewan as all the members know has many millions of dollars in funds of various kinds and I 

think I mentioned — if I didn‟t I should have mentioned — that one of the uses of this fund will be to 

purchase securities of local governments. We are always being pressed to loan money to help with 

capital projects in local jurisdictions, so that should not be looked upon as a million dollars that 



 

March 22, 1963 

 

 

24 

is standing idle but it will be doing good work. 

 

When we talk about the cost, we should be talking about $50,000 or so of interest which this will earn. 

This may be put into . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — The taxpayer still has to put up bullion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, belonging to the people of Saskatchewan and put to good use for the 

people of Saskatchewan, to give to these young people who are well-educated and trained and have a 

free and open mind, young people who are a walking question mark — these are good people to have 

look at the whole question of administration and I am very pleased to take all the credit I can, and if 

there is any blame in it I will take it too. But I am sure if there were any civil servants‟ ideas in this, they 

are just as proud of this project as I am, in spite of what the Leader of the Opposition said. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS 

Messieurs 

 

Lloyd Thurston Michayluk 

Johnson Davies Semchuk 

Williams Nicholson Perkins 

Brown Turnbull Snyder 

Blakeney Stone Stevens 

Brockelbank Whelan Dahlman 

Kramer Thibault Kluzak 

Willis Berezowsky Peterson 

Meakes   

 

NAYS 

Messieurs 

 

Thatcher McFarlane Coderre 

McCarthy Gardiner MacDougall 

Barrie Foley Snedker 

McDonald Guy Gallagher 

Danielson Boldt Steuart 

Cameron   

 

Bill read the second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:32 o‟clock p.m. 


