



















































Hansard: February 21, 1963


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Fourteenth Legislature 

6th Day 

 

Thursday, February 21, 1963 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

SALE OF SAVINGS BONDS 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of day are 

proceeded with I would like to announce that the third series of Saskatchewan Savings Bonds will go on 

sale March 4th, 1963. The bonds are to be dated March 15, 1963 and will carry an interest rate of five 

percent from March 15, 1963 to March 15, 1969, and five and one-half percent from March 15, 1969 to 

the end of the term, March 15, 1973, with interest payments being made annually by cheque. And, of 

course, they can be redeemed at par any time after September 15, 1963. Only Saskatchewan residents 

will be eligible to purchase these bonds. This will include corporations and societies with head offices in 

Saskatchewan. The bonds will be available in denominations $100, $500, $1,000 and $5,000. The 

maximum purchase by any one person will be limited to $10,000. They are, of course, non-transferable, 

non-assignable except by inheritance. 

 

Because Saskatchewan savings bonds are redeemable at par at any time, there is a limit to the amount 

that should be outstanding at any time. Consequently, it will be necessary to limit the total sales to $10 

million. When the sales have approached this figure we will close off the sales campaign. The sale of 

these bonds will be handled by agents appointed by the Provincial Treasurer and these agents will 

include all branches of chartered banks in the province, major investment firms, Saskatchewan Co-

operative Credit Society Limited, and a number of trust companies. These bonds will again be a gilt 

edged investment for the people of Saskatchewan and will help to provide for further development in 

our province. 

 

WELCOME TO GUESTS 

 

Mr. D.G. Steuart (Prince Albert): — I would just like to call the attention of the house, Mr. Speaker, 

to the fact that we have in the Speakers‟ gallery a group of young men representing the Columbian 

Squires, led 



 

February 21, 1963 

 
2 

by Mr. Lefroy, and I am sure I speak for the entire legislature when I bid them welcome and say that I 

hope their stay in Regina and in this legislative assembly is both pleasant and informative. 

 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

The assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Semchuk for an Address-in-

Reply. 

 

Mrs. J.E. Cooper (Regina City): — Mr. Speaker, before I continue with my address I would like to 

call the attention of the members of the legislature to two very important young people in the west 

gallery — my young grandson, Grant, and my young granddaughter, Norma. 

 

I would like to congratulate the mover and seconder of the address-in-reply to the speech from the 

throne for the splendid addresses they gave and the excellent reviews of the accomplishments of this 

government that have greatly increased the opportunities for every section of the people of 

Saskatchewan. For young people, greatly increased educational opportunities, better school facilities; for 

the people of the north, more jobs, more chance for an education and more chance to improve their 

skills; for our senior citizens, more security, the removal of fear of hospital and medical bills, and for so 

many of them, some 5,000, more comfortable and safe homes and nursing homes at rents and charges 

that they can afford to pay; and for the farmers of this province, more of the comforts and the amenities 

of life; for labor, more protection and better working conditions; a much better deal for teachers, and 

again in the speech from the throne there is forecast further improvements in the teachers; 

superannuation. More varied opportunities for the business section of the communities. In fact, every 

section of the community has benefitted by the actions of this government. And these, Mr. Speaker, are 

things that I believe we on this side of the house have every reason to be proud of. The facts that were 

presented by the mover and the seconder of the speech from the throne and also the Hon. Premier I think 

should convince even the greatest doubters in the Liberal opposition of the energy and the ability and the 

competence of the CCF government of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I was thinking also as I listened, Mr. Speaker, that the newest member of the legislature, the 

member from Prince Albert (Mr. Steuart), whom we welcome here today, after listening to those 

speeches must already be beginning to realize how badly he has been misled over the years by Liberal 

propaganda. And I would like to congratulate the Hon. Premier on the masterpiece of an address that he 

gave here yesterday afternoon. By the time he had finished, Mr. Speaker, there wasn‟t one shred of 

evidence left anywhere to support the criticism of the Liberal opposition. 



 

February 21, 1963 

 

 
3 

I also listened with a great deal of interest to the Leader of the Opposition and I can assure you, Mr. 

Speaker, I had no difficulty whatsoever in hearing him — as far as he is concerned we didn‟t need a new 

sound system, but there were times when I think we did need ear-muffs. His speech, as usual, was full of 

sound and fury, and as usual it was sound and fury signifying nothing. Now, in the light of the veritable 

barrage of facts that the Hon. Premier presented yesterday, I never cease to wonder how the Leader of 

the Opposition and his followers can go around this province and in this legislature and make the kind of 

statements they do, that have absolutely no foundation in fact. But I have long since ceased to be very 

much surprised at anything the Leader of the Opposition says or does, even, as mentioned by the Hon. 

Premier here yesterday, when he tried to play king of the castle and start a legislative session all by 

himself. Now, in his speech, the Leader of the Opposition tried to leave the impression that this 

government was breaking faith with the Saskatoon agreement on medical care. And I would like to say 

this, Mr. Speaker, that if anybody is failing to keep their promises, if anyone is breaking faith with this 

agreement, it is not the government or the commission. I would like to remind you that there are two 

parties to this agreement. 

 

It is amazing that the Leader of the Opposition who claims to be in favor of medical care should use up 

so much energy, take so much trouble to try to stir up all the trouble he can. He referred to one clause 

and part of a clause in the Saskatoon agreement and I would like to refer to some other clauses — if he 

is going to refer to one, then there are one or two others that I think are quite important in the Saskatoon 

agreement. And I am going to read to you clause 9 and then clause 11. Clause 9 reads this way: 

 

The government is concerned that the interests of all citizens when they are sick shall be properly 

safeguarded, whether they belong or do not belong to voluntary health insurance agencies. This means 

that doctors shall work together as good colleagues whether they are or are not enrolled in medical care 

schemes. It means also that voluntary health insurance agencies must conduct their affairs on the 

highest possible standards of public efficiency. The College is in full agreement with these points. 

 

And then I would like to read section 11: 

 

There must be no discrimination against any doctor in whatsoever way he practices. In particular there 

must be no discrimination against any doctor in the matter of hospital privileges and attachments, 

referrals from one physician to another, or other professional 



 

February 21, 1963 

 
4 

activities involving assistance and co-operation between physicians. The College endorses this view. It 

is no wish of the College that there should grow up divisions between physicians and it will exercise its 

full influence to prevent discrimination in matters of professional practice. Accordingly the College 

undertakes that in advising on applications for hospital appointments, applicants shall be judged solely 

on their merits. 

 

And this agreement was signed on behalf of the government by W.S. Lloyd, on behalf of the college by 

Dr. Dalgleish, witnessed by Dr. Portnuff, Dr. Peacock, members of the cabinet and members of the 

commission. I felt that if the Leader of the Opposition thought it wise to acquaint the public with one 

clause of this agreement, it would be well for the public to have a little more information on a few of the 

other clauses. I wish to tell the Leader of the Opposition that in spite of all he can do to sabotage our 

medical care plan, certainly he left no stone unturned to sabotage, and he hasn‟t been too particular 

about the methods he‟s used, in spite of all this, the medical plan is here to stay. The writing is on the 

wall and soon medical care plans will be spread all across this country. Now, some provinces may start 

with limited plans in one group, but this is just the beginning. As the people see the advantages to that 

group, all other groups are going to be asking for medical care plans — and they will get them. And it is, 

Mr. Speaker, because our CCF government had the courage to stick to its guns through a very difficult 

period and because we won our battle, Canada before long will have a medical care plan all across this 

country. It will, I believe, be jointly financed by the federal and provincial governments. It will, in the 

long run, include everybody. It will be a godsend to the people of this province and of all of Canada, and 

I believe to the medical profession as well, and I think the day will come when they will realize it as do 

most of the doctors in Great Britain today. 

 

Turning now to some of the facts presented by the Hon. Premier in his address yesterday, and in 

particular regarding the industrial and mineral resources development in this province. This great 

diversification that he described didn‟t just happen. It wasn‟t just luck. It didn‟t just fall from a clear 

blue sky. It came about because from the very day the CCF was elected it started out to create conditions 

that would encourage and assist and enable industry to locate in this province. And the speech from the 

throne forecast further incentives to industry in this province. Now, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals are the 

very last people in the world that should talk about lack of industrial development. They had the 

government of this province for a good many years, and how much industry and how much natural 

resource development did we get? What did 



 

February 21, 1963 

 

 
5 

they do to encourage industry to come in this province. We know, as the Premier mentioned yesterday, 

what happened to our forest potential. It was almost ruined and has taken years of a vigorous re-

afforestation program to reclaim the forests. Now, they like to compare as between provinces so I will 

do a little comparing as between provinces during their regime. 

 

During the Liberal regime, in Manitoba, Winnipeg was rapidly going ahead and becoming an important 

industrial centre. The same was true of Edmonton and of Calgary. But how much activity was there in 

Saskatchewan or Regina? I would like to remind them again that during the war years there were 

tremendous plant expansions going on all over the country. We had Liberals in power in Ottawa, 

Liberals in power in Saskatchewan. Now then, even from the viewpoint of national defence it would 

have been an excellent thing to have spread some of this industry over the country and in the west, and 

in the east and a little bit on the west coast. But did they do it? The answer is no. And if they had it 

would have given Saskatchewan a shot in the arm that was needed and, if they had, we would have at 

least had some plants here ready for reconversion. The Leader of the Opposition said something 

yesterday about population. I think he said our population was static, maybe stationary was the word he 

used — as usual a gross exaggeration. But one thing is certain, Mr. Speaker, the population wasn‟t 

stationary during the period of the Liberal regime. That was the time when by thousands the people of 

Saskatchewan left the province and went to other places. And it is only since the CCF government has 

been in office that there has been any significant industrial and natural resource development. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, industry needs power, plenty of power and our CCF government has provided that 

power. It has tripled its generating capacity in a few years and when the Saskatchewan Dam power 

comes in, it‟s going to be quadrupled. And remember, we had to get rid of the Liberals to get any action 

on the South Saskatchewan Dam. 

 

One of the greatest incentives to industry is natural gas. Well, the Saskatchewan government has 

provided that natural gas. In ten short years, from 290 customers the province now has 88,000 natural 

gas customers. So that the power demand of this province has been met. 

 

Now, industry also needs highways. What kind of highways did we have under the Liberals? We have 

good highways today and when you consider the number of miles of highways we have to build in this 

province, our record in the field of highways is second to none in the dominion of Canada. 



 

February 21, 1963 

 
6 

Now I know what the opposition is going to say — well, sure, it‟s all right, but you have had so much 

more money to spend than we had. Well, we agree with you, that is absolutely true, we agree, although it 

is not nearly as much as the Liberals would try to suggest because it takes over two dollars now to do 

what a dollar would do in their regime. But I would like to ask them one question. Why is it that we 

have more money in Saskatchewan today? Why? One of the important reasons is this, that this 

government got busy and diversified the economy to broaden our economic base and because they did, 

millions of dollars of new money now come into this province and some of it goes into the provincial 

treasury. This is why we have more money. 

 

The member from Meadow Lake (Mr. Semchuk) mentioned the other day the action of the CCF 

government in the northern part of the province and what it has done — opened up the northern areas, 

set up Saskatchewan Government Airways, radio communications in the north, staked prospectors to 

develop mining areas, its road to resources program, the very important geological surveys it has made 

which is great help to industry, setting up a core laboratory here which is used extensively by people 

who are interested in mining and oil. Then, of course, there was the industrial development office who 

have made intensive surveys as to what kind of industry can succeed in the province of Saskatchewan, 

and they have been a great help to industries locating here. And then the excellent brochures which they 

have prepared to encourage tourists to come here, and, last year, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan had an all-

time high in the tourist traffic. 

 

Now then, Mr. Speaker, smaller industries need some assistance to get started. Our CCF government has 

given that assistance, only to be criticized by the Liberals. The thing about it is, Mr. Speaker, the 

Liberals not only didn‟t do anything themselves to encourage industry, but they oppose and object to 

almost everything we‟ve done to encourage it. And they are still doing it. I was quite amused when the 

Leader of the Opposition got up here and started sniping at the statement in the speech from the throne 

that there is to be further encouragement to industry, sniping at it before he even knew what that 

encouragement was going to be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Cooper: — He talked about death-bed repentance. This was a death-bed repentance! Well, one 

thing, Mr. Speaker, as far as the Liberals are concerned, they died before they repented. And when 

people die before they repent, you know where they go. 

 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, not only did the Liberals do nothing themselves but they object to everything we 

have done. They object to our natural gas program, to our rural electrification program, to the fact that 

we have increased generating power — they are against it. They object to the 



 

February 21, 1963 

 

 
7 

building of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation building to house this expanding industry — a 

building that will bring all the activities of the power corporation under one roof and make for more 

efficient operation — a building that will mean greater convenience to all the power customers, and a 

building that has provided hundreds of jobs, directly and indirectly, to the people of this province at a 

time when unemployment is high, and I will also say, Mr. Speaker, a building that is going to be a 

source of pride to the citizens of this city and this province. But they object. There is no use saying they 

are not against these things, they‟ve proved over and over again that they are because they go all around 

this province screaming about the debt for power and telephones. Now they know full well that neither 

Saskatchewan nor any other province in this dominion could carry out this tremendous power program 

without large borrowing. They also know that the money borrowed for these utilities is a self-liquidating 

debt, that is that every year it pays the interest on its investment and retires the necessary amount of 

capital. And they know that if this province is going to continue to expand, it‟s got to have tremendous 

expansion in power. Still they object. So there is only one conclusion, Mr. Speaker, that anyone can 

come to, and that is that they are against the government taking the necessary action to meet the power 

needs of this province. And they talk about industry. What hypocritical nonsense they talk. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn for a few minutes to my own constituency, the city of Regina, 

that I have been proud to represent in this legislature since 1952. I have lived in Regina for most of my 

life. I used to think I knew every nook and corner of our city — but not any more. Regina has grown 

beyond recognition. Our population has doubled in just a few years, and the whole face of Regina has 

changed. We have seen an industrial development here and an expansion never dreamed of a few years 

ago. And I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the members of the Liberal party try to corral their leader 

and all together they go for an extensive tour around the city of Regina. But first I would suggest that 

they take their blinders off — maybe that word dates me, Mr. Speaker — but I suggest they open their 

eyes and look around about them and I hope they take in what they do see. 

 

I have a few clippings here that I thought might interest the members of the opposition. 

 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Take them as read. 

 

Mrs. Cooper: — Oh, I won‟t take them as read. I know you would like me to. Here is one regarding the 

growth of Regina. 



 

February 21, 1963 

 
8 

Regina‟s growth rates third spot. City planner, John Preston, Tuesday said that according to records of 

the Dominion Bureau of Statistics of all Canadian cities that had a population of 100,000 or more in 

1962, Regina grew the third fastest since 1951. Only Calgary and Edmonton had a faster growth. 

 

And he goes on to say — of course — I‟m going to read it, he goes on and says: 

 

Of course if they had taken the population of 95,000, Saskatoon would have been the third and Regina 

fourth. 

 

But at least there are two Saskatchewan cities almost at the top of the list in population growth. 

 

And here‟s another clipping from the Leader Post. “Regina Assuming New Role”, and it talks about the 

opening of the new $300,000 Qu‟Appelle Room in the Hotel Saskatchewan, culminating a $2 million 

CPR program to improve facilities for its multi-faced operations in Regina. And he says: 

 

All these developments bespeak the faith of one of Canada‟s largest enterprises in Regina‟s future. 

 

And then he talks about the new convention facilities. He says: 

 

The new Qu‟Appelle Room, with accommodation for 700 for banquets and 1,100 for meetings, and 14 

other small rooms, is now available and will now provide facilities for conventions unexcelled in the 

prairie west. 

 

And I can say from experience that this is true. We had a wonderful convention in that Qu‟Appelle 

Room on Monday night. Those 1,100 seats were filled and people were flowing out into the corridors. 

But he goes on to point out that with these new facilities, Regina is going to replace Winnipeg as a 

convention centre. 

 

And I have something here that I do wish the members of the opposition would read. It is excellent 

reading. I wish I had time to read it myself but I have got to watch the time so I will only give you a few 

highlights. 

 

It says that in 1962 the development of Regina — and this is from the Industrial Development Office — 

1962 has stimulated another progressive year for this city. With a population increase averaging 4,500 

persons annually, Regina is expected to surpass the 120,000 mark by 1963. New employment 

opportunities in industry, transportation and distribution 



 

February 21, 1963 

 

 
9 

facilities are constantly supporting this trend. Construction has held up well and retail sales have 

surpassed the budgeted expectations. Generally, the economy has been prosperous, the future looks 

bright. 

 

Then he goes ahead and lists important and expensive additions to existing industries, and there are a lot 

of them. He talks about nine new companies established in 1962, employing over 100 people. He 

mentions the transportation field, the new $650,000 CPR merchandising warehouse and Reimer Express 

Lines $125,000 terminal warehouse. There are pages of it which I haven‟t time to read. I hope you will. 

He mentions eight companies that have established in the Ross industrial district. He says construction 

activities have been good, building permits $30 million last year, third highest in the history of Regina. 

He talks about the power building, the telephone building — $12 million for industrial construction, and 

so on and so on. But he says this — the most exciting development in the recent history of Regina is the 

comprehensive plan for Wascana Centre Authority, including the University of Saskatchewan Regina 

campus. Construction of the first university building, estimated to cost $6 million, will commence early 

in 1963 and is expected to be completed for enrolment of 1,200 students in 1964. Think what this 

means, not only to the students but to the economy of our city. 

 

He mentions a million dollar shopping centre in Regent Park. A million dollar apartment building on 

Scarth and 15th. A 148-room motor-hotel and a $2 million expansion for the Leader-Post. And then he 

says this: 

 

Undoubtedly, Wascana Centre will have a tremendous effect on the economy of Regina. It is probable 

that the construction phases will unfold sufficient new markets for such items as building projects, 

lighting and recreational accessories and furniture to stimulate the growth of several new industries in 

Regina. 

 

He says, “new techniques from the potash industry may put Regina in the thick of the mining program” 

and he doesn‟t forget this, the $4.75 million contract with Inter-Provincial Steel Company, which will be 

a definite benefit to our city, no thanks to the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Now, before I leave Regina, I would like to have something to say, Mr. Speaker, about the hospital 

situation in our city. Because of the rapidly rising population in here, as well as well-equipped hospitals, 

Regina finds itself with a serious shortage of hospital beds. And I have a suggestion to make, Mr. 

Speaker, in this regard, that I hope will be given very serious and favorable consideration by the 

government. 



 

February 21, 1963 

 
10 

Now, it is a well-known fact that approximately 50 percent of the patients that use the hospitals in 

Regina come from outside the city. They come from all over the province, particularly from the southern 

half. Now, these people are not Regina taxpayers, and this always has been somewhat of a sore point 

here. There is a growing feeling that this situation imposes an unfair tax burden on our citizens of 

Regina, and I myself feel that a hospital that serves to such a large extent people from all across the 

province should be financed by the people as a whole through their government, and I am, therefore, 

suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that the government build, equip and staff and be responsible for the operation 

of a new hospital here that will provide for the additional number of beds and facilities needed. 

 

The university hospital in Saskatchewan has been a great boon to that city and it has relieved the people 

of Saskatoon of considerable financial burdens. Now, I realize that the hospital was built in Saskatoon in 

connection with the medical school as a teaching hospital. But, like Regina, the patients come from all 

over Saskatchewan, and in particular from the northern half of the province. Now, I am not suggesting, 

Mr. Speaker, that a new hospital would necessarily need to be as large or as extensive as the hospital in 

Saskatoon, the university hospital, but it should be adequate for the extra space and equipment needed. 

 

Now, certainly Regina does need more hospital accommodation and I believe that both of our hospitals 

are asking the provincial government for very large sums of money for extension and renovation, but I 

am of the opinion, Mr. Speaker, that an entirely new hospital is the solution to the problem, and would 

not be much more expensive than the proposed additions which I understand come to around $9 million. 

Now I say this for several reasons. Over the past few years there has been very extensive research and a 

great deal of thought and study by a number of experts in the field from both United States and Canada, 

in the field of hospital planning and field of hospital construction. And the trend seems to be away from 

the large, sprawling hospital, which is difficult to administer in an efficient manner. The trend is to 

smaller, more compact hospitals that are more flexible units and lend themselves better to modern trends 

in hospital care. 

 

Now, one of the reasons for this intensive research is the growing concern about the tremendous rise in 

the per diem cost of hospital care that is apparent all over the North American continent, and I have been 

reading a most interesting study on the subject of hospital planning, called “Elements of Progressive 

Patient Care”. This study has been conducted by a very impressive group of specialists, including 

medical doctors, nurses, dieticians, architects, 



 

February 21, 1963 

 

 
11 

social scientists, hospital management people, medical record experts, and expert operations research 

people, and an analytical statistician and chartered accountant. It is a very interesting document. Their 

recommendations are aimed primarily at tailoring hospital services to meet the patients‟ need or, as they 

put it, “the place, the right patient in the right bed, with the right services, at the right time”. This 

suggests specially planned and organized units to be set up to which the patients are assigned, according 

to their degree of illness and need for care, and they suggest a special unit for the most serious cases, 

needing the most intensive care and specialized nursing, and that this should be sort of a nerve centre of 

the hospital, easily accessible, close to all the life-saving equipment, and, of course, this is the group of 

people who need the most intensive and the most expensive type of care. 

 

And then they suggest as they progress from this stage to a less critical stage, they could be moved to a 

unit that requires less intensive and less expensive care; and there are also many ambulatory cases in the 

hospital — they need a different type of service and even less intensive or expensive care. These people 

could be segregated and treated according to their needs. 

 

I would also like to remind you that in the final report of the medical care commission which, by the 

way, I have studied with a good deal of interest, you will find the recommendations that the government 

proceed by stages to implement the Saskatchewan plan for mental hospitals. And they suggest that these 

mental hospitals should be in close proximity to, or on the grounds of, or in a wing of, existing hospital 

planning and I believe they also suggested that physical restoration centres and rehab centres should be 

in the same area. 

 

Now, it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that it would be much easier to incorporate some of these new 

suggestions and modern trends when you can start from scratch with a new hospital. It would be so 

much more difficult to get the necessary flexibility in a hospital that was built before these new ideas 

were abroad. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, because Regina needs more hospital accommodation and, I 

believe, from the viewpoint of both economy and efficiency and keeping in mind future needs, a new 

hospital is the proper solution, and because the situation in Regina regarding outside patients is 

comparable to that of Saskatoon, where they have the university hospital, built by the government, and 

because I believe that a hospital built for Regina by the government would provide for more equity and a 

fairer distribution of costs among all the users of the hospital; for all these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe the government would be justified and would be commended for building a hospital for the city 

of Regina, and once again I urge consideration. 



 

February 21, 1963 

 
12 

Now I see the clock says I must conclude, so in conclusion I would just like to say, Mr. Speaker, that 

because the speech from the throne is a further evidence of the energy and sincerity with which this 

government is proceeding to implement the promises it made to the electors in 1960, and because we are 

going to be able to get up on any platform when the new provincial election rolls around, hold up our 

promises and say, these are the things we promised you; these are the promises we have kept; and 

because the speech from the throne shows progress in Saskatchewan, and further progress is being 

implemented, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased and proud to support the motion. 

 

Mr. D.G. Steuart (Prince Albert): — Mr. Speaker, I would first like to thank the people of Prince 

Albert for the confidence they placed in me on November 14, and I promise that I will do my utmost to 

be worthy of the trust they placed in me. 

 

Prince Albert and its people are, of course, the finest people and the finest city in the province of 

Saskatchewan. That goes without saying, and I would like to invite anyone who hasn‟t been up to Prince 

Albert to come up and see where we feel that Saskatchewan really begins, and, of course, this invitation 

is to both sides of the house. I realize that most of the cabinet ministers are familiar with Prince Albert; 

they spent enough time up there in the by-election, but I am sure if they come up again on a different 

occasion we will give them a much warmer welcome. 

 

Hon. A.G. Kuziak (Minister of Mineral Resources): — We‟ll come up and take you out. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Well, if you don‟t have any better success next time than you had last time, I have 

nothing to worry about. 

 

My congratulations go, Mr. Speaker, to the mover and the seconder and I would like to thank all those 

members who have welcomed me to this legislature. I must say most of the members opposite were 

extremely honest; they said that they hoped my stay would be quite pleasant and quite short; the feeling, 

of course, is mutual. The Hon. Premier said he hoped that I would be constructive, and then he 

proceeded to set me a great example yesterday with his vicious and uncalled-for and personal attack on 

the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Now I happened to be out of the house, unfortunately, but I did hear his speech on the radio and I think 

that the best that can be said for it is that it was long, it was boring, 



 

February 21, 1963 

 

 
13 

it appeared to be a rather weak and stumbling imitation of T.C. Douglas at his worst. It has been 

obvious, Mr. Speaker, for some time that the socialists are slipping, but with the little master gone, and 

under the present leadership, they seem to have really hit the skids. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I listened to the speech from the throne, my first as a member of this assembly, with 

great interest, and, I regret to say, bitter disappointment. 

 

I was interested to learn the reactions of the government that just three months ago had suffered its 

fourth straight defeat at the polls. Mr. T.C. Douglas, our former premier, was fond of calling elections 

the highest court of public opinion. Well, if that is true, this government has been tried in four such 

courts, ranging from Weyburn in the south to Uranium City in the north, and found guilty of gross 

mismanagement of our public affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — The verdict, Mr. Speaker, is even more damning since it was rendered by people from 

the north, the central and the southern parts of this province. By people from all walks of life, and by 

thousands of supporters, former supporters, of the present government. Now, in the three months since 

the Prince Albert by-election, we have witnessed tremendous activity by the members of the 

government. Cabinet ministers have scattered all over this province, holding meetings on every 

conceivable subject. The object appears to be two-fold. First, to give the impression of a busy, active 

government. Second, and probably most important, to attempt to play down and hide the action NDP 

control of this administration. Why, the Hon. Premier has even taken a leaf from the book of Real 

Caouette and he is broadcasting weekly the joys of life under socialism. Well, one of my friends, after 

hearing him talk about all the freedoms brought to us under socialism told me to ask him, “please, don‟t 

give us any more socialist freedoms, we can hardly afford those we have now, and with any more we 

won‟t be able to call our souls our own.” 

 

You know there is a feeling growing in this province, Mr. Speaker, that with friends like the NDP-CCF 

in office, Saskatchewan hardly needs any enemies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — That this latest flurry of activity and propaganda has failed to solve the problems facing 

this province is obvious. That it has failed to redeem this government‟s reputation with the people will 

be equally obvious, whenever our premier 



 

February 21, 1963 

 
14 

has the courage to take his rather dismal record to them in a general election. Watching the 

government‟s action this past few months, and knowing that we face serious problems of economic 

stagnation, mounting taxation, we face the problems of social aid, in the field of education and serious 

lack of industrial development, I had expected much more from the throne speech. I had hoped to see a 

bold plan of action unfold, to get this province moving, to take its place as one of the leading provinces 

of this nation. 

 

I was disappointed, Mr. Speaker, when we need so much leadership, to be offered so little. Why is it, 

Mr. Speaker, that these socialists have failed to learn from their own costly blunders? Why have they 

plunged blindly ahead in the face of mounting public censure, spreading compulsion, restricting our 

freedom and throttling our development? Well, I think the reason is plain. It is because they are 

socialists; they believe in socialism; they have tried to make socialism work; and when it failed, as it has 

failed, they failed as a government. Step by step, law by law, they have spread compulsion and 

regimentation across this province. As their failures grew, so did their propaganda. You know the 

ultimate irony is, the socialists now are beginning to believe what they say themselves. They are victims 

of their own propaganda. 

 

Before you can solve a problem, Mr. Speaker, you must first admit that it exists. This government has no 

plan to ease the burden of taxes on homeowners, on our working people, on our farmers, on the business 

community. It has no plan, because it denies the fact that we are among the highest taxed people in the 

dominion of Canada. There is no program to cut the high cost of government, because they refuse to 

admit that waste and extravagances exist in almost every department and crown corporation. When it is 

pointed out to them, for example, that we in Saskatchewan carry over 2,000 more civil servants than the 

province of Manitoba, where they have a higher population than we do, they claim this is an 

accomplishment. 

 

Faced, for example, very recently with serious criticism concerning inefficiency in the power 

corporation by contractors and unions in the building trade, the minister in charge, after little or no 

investigation, flatly denied the whole thing. It was interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that this brief 

criticizing the power corporation was compiled for the most part by unions in the building trades, these 

including carpenters, and laborers, and electricians, bricklayers, tinsmiths, and the plumbers‟ unions. 

Well, when working men and women in our unions are prepared to spend their own time and their own 

money to put an end to wasteful practices in our crown corporation, then I think it is high time this 

government tried to clean up its own mess. 



 

February 21, 1963 

 

 
15 

I read the minister‟s reply, that he had all ready even before the people presented the brief; he accused 

them of generalities and his was one mass of generalities, Mr. Speaker. This government refuses to clean 

up its own mess; members on this side of the house have over the years uncovered instance after 

instance of waste and extravagance, only to be ignored or abused. The government won‟t clean its own 

house; the costs continue to mount and the taxes continue to grow. But probably the worse example of 

socialist double-talk over the years has been seen in their propaganda concerning the huge public debt 

that they have amassed. 

 

Our present treasurer seems to be following in the footsteps of that famous master of double-talk, the 

late and rather unlamented Clarence Fines. Our treasurer announced recently that our net debt was down 

to about $22.5 million and would soon disappear. The fact is we are deeper in debt today than at any 

time in our history. This government and its corporations owe over $530 million. But how do they arrive 

at their figures? It is very simple; it was pointed out here again today; they say that the money that is 

owed by the power, the telephone, and other crown corporations is self-liquidating so that they don‟t 

owe it, according to them; and they say, look, we are practically out of debt. It is socialist arithmetic, to 

be sure; but, unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the people where they borrowed this money, down in Eastern 

Canada and in the United States, don‟t subscribe to socialism and they insist the money be paid back, 

both the principal and interest, when it falls due. So the debt continued to grow, the payments continue 

to grow and so do our taxes, power bills and telephone bills, and the same attitude prevails when it 

comes to other grave and growing problems. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — The power bills are among the highest in Canada — you should check your own 

figures. Take the social aid program, they like to boast about the social aid program. These socialists 

claim in a very sanctimonious voice to be their brother‟s keeper; well, we think we are our brother‟s 

keepers too, but we would like to see our able-bodied brothers get out and do a little hustling for their 

keep. 

 

The people who are unable to work, by all means give them all the help we can. Most able-bodied men 

want, or they should want, jobs and decent wages. To provide jobs you must have business and 

industrial development, and this the socialists have failed to provide. We need to provide work, for 

example, for chronic social cases through work and wages programs. We haven‟t done it. We need to 

institute a comprehensive re-education plan to train most social aid cases just 



 

February 21, 1963 

 
16 

to hold a job in this very technical and modern age in which we live. What is their answer then? Give 

them a hand out. Last year as many as 27,000 people on social aid, at a cost of almost $6 million, and 

little or nothing to show for it. When the Leader of the Opposition, a day or two ago, stated that the 

social aid situation in this province was becoming a public scandal, oh, they bitterly criticized him, but 

he was telling the truth. We in the Liberal party are not opposed to social aid. If people need help they 

should receive it. But we are opposed to people with assets ranging from farms, with grain in the bins, to 

Cadillacs receiving social aid when they are not entitled to it. They are free-loading off the back of the 

taxpayers, taking their hard-earned tax dollars when they haven‟t got it coming. The provincial 

government must face the ultimate responsibility for this. They pay out most of the money and in the 

final analysis it is their responsibility. They are not keeping faith if they don‟t make an honest effort to 

put a stop to these abuses. If they did what they should do they might have more money to help the sick, 

the needy, the widows and the old people who really need our help. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, their greatest failure, though, had to be in the field of industrial 

expansion. I find it most amusing when they take these figures and they claim now that they show the 

greatest percentage, the greatest percentage of increase in the matter of industrial development. Well, 

now, Mr. Speaker, this is wonderful arithmetic. A man says, I‟ve got one, I get another one, I now have 

two, but I have a 100 percent increase, and I am much better than the fellow who had 100 and gained 50, 

he only had 50 percent increase. Well, I would like to inform them that two times zero is still zero, so 

this had to be their greatest failure. 

 

Mr. Kuziak: — Two times 1944 equals zero. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Two times 21 would be 42, and these fellows would be back where they belong — 

outside this house. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how could the socialists expect, the only socialist government in North America expect to 

get a fair share of free investment? Why, they not only couldn‟t expect, they didn‟t want it. We had our 

crown corporations but of course this experiment failed and cost millions of dollars in the process. So 

the next step was to change their tune and invite these people in that they had been calling “hucksters” 

and “fast buck artists”, these free enterprisers to come in and bring their money and help develop the 

province; but they got their signals mixed. Cabinet ministers and M.L.A.‟s still kept insulting and 

hamstringing the business communities, driving 



 

February 21, 1963 

 

 
17 

them out again. Well, in 1946 they set up an economic and advisory planning board. What did they do? 

They staffed it, for the most part, with political heelers who wouldn‟t know how to meet a payroll or run 

a business if they lived to be a thousand, and again they failed. In 1947 we had the industrial 

development fund. Oh, it was to encourage the establishment and the development of industrial plants 

and programs; and in 1960, Mr. Speaker, the Department of Industry and Information was instituted; and 

again it was to promote industrial and commercial development. Now it is 1963 and we have another 

vague promise in the throne speech that they will promote the private sector of the economy, more 

industrial expansion, but again on paper. 

 

Why have we had to set up all these boards and departments at terrific cost, all to do the same job? Any 

one of them handled properly could have given us our fair share of the great boom that the rest of 

Canada has enjoyed in these post-war years. 

 

We failed. We failed because all the fancy titles and propaganda couldn‟t hide the socialism, and this 

new effort will fail. Just as the other have because it doesn‟t get to the root of the trouble. It doesn‟t 

remove the real road-block restricting our development in Saskatchewan. The answer is simple. Let 

these socialists resign. This will be the greatest blessing they can bestow on the people. This will make 

room for real development in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now we know, Mr. Speaker, this is too much to hope for, and we all know what has happened. Business 

and industry have been driven out and kept out. Our population growth has been stopped, because 

thousands and thousands of our best people have had to leave here to find jobs and opportunities in more 

progressive provinces. Debt piled on debt, tax piled on tax, until we will have the greatest mess to clean 

up when we take over the government that ever faced any administration in the history of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Now, Mr. Speaker, we know they have failed, we know they have failed and we will 

ask the people of Saskatchewan to give us our chance, and we won‟t fail. What must be done in this 

legislature to get the economy of Saskatchewan rolling? Well, first we should institute an independent 

and thorough investigation into every department and into every agency of this government, with a view 

to increasing efficiency; with a view to eliminating unnecessary compulsion and with a view to cutting 

costs. This will clear the air, bring an air of freedom back to this province, it will make possible lower 

taxes, it will make possible reduction in the costs of services provided by the crown corporations. Then 

let‟s look around. Let‟s take 



 

February 21, 1963 

 
18 

an honest look around for once. See how other provinces have been succeeding over the years where we 

have been failing. Manitoba and Alberta, both provinces with conditions very similar to ours. They have 

outstripped us in population, they have outstripped us in industrial development. In fact, they have 

outstripped us by almost any yard-stock with which growth and development are measured, and they 

have accomplished this with governments that differed in some respects but had one thing in common 

— a belief and faith in free enterprise. Free men left alone to develop the province. They encouraged 

people to come into their province and invest their money and their skills. We discourage them; they 

prospered — we fell behind. 

 

I must call your attention, Mr. Speaker, to an article in the February edition of “The Canada Month”, a 

national publication. I will quote from that article: 

 

Manitoba and Saskatchewan are much alike provinces. Both provinces have largely agricultural 

economies and both want new industries to keep the small towns going. This is where the similarity 

ends. For Manitoba is getting the industry and Saskatchewan isn‟t. Last month Manitoba‟s government 

won the Society of Industrial Realtors‟ award for the state or province with the most effective 

development program — the first time it has ever left the United States. 

 

And I continue to quote: 

 

The award was no surprise to Westerners for, while the CCF/NDP government in Saskatchewan has 

spent 18 years frightening away industry, Roblin‟s industry-minded cohort, Gurney Evans, says „we 

think business people are the people to do business but there are some areas where the government can 

help‟. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we hope to see industrial development in this province on a scale comparable to the rest 

of Canada we must have a change in attitude to our government. We must put an end to ever-growing 

government compulsion. We must guarantee a fair deal to people who are prepared to come in here and 

invest their money and their skills and their knowledge in our future. If we have to, we‟ll offer tax 

incentives to new industries who will come in and develop our untapped resources, offer the same deal 

to companies here who are prepared to expand. Then let‟s set up a team of real business and industrial 

experts — people who really know business expansion — and have them go sell every potential 

business and industry on the new advantage of coming to Saskatchewan. It will only be through such an 

industrial and business development that we can hope to provide jobs for unemployed, opportunities for 

our young people — this is the 



 

February 21, 1963 

 

 
19 

only practical way that our province will grow, that our taxes will drop, that increased services on a 

sound basis will be made available to our people. This is our government has failed to do, it has even 

failed to plan for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we listened yesterday to a terrific attack, an uncalled for attack by the Premier on the 

Leader of the Opposition. Now why do they attack him? Because here is a man who has done a 

tremendous job through the Liberal party, on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. And he will lead 

this Liberal party, as soon as they have the intestinal fortitude to call an election, he will lead this Liberal 

party to victory and we will form the next government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — This province has tremendous potentials. We have thousands and thousands of hard-

working people. We‟ve got great untapped natural resources. We are a good province. We can be a great 

province. But we need to remove that dead hand of socialism off the backs of our people. We need to get 

rid of socialism. We need to breathe the fresh air of freedom back into the province, and only if we do 

that will we get this province rolling again. These people have broken faith with the people who elected 

them. They started out as the CCF and they have sold their soul to the NDP. They have a premier who 

has never been endorsed by the people and has not the courage to take his case to the people of this 

province in a general election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sorry to say that the throne speech indicates another lost year for the province of 

Saskatchewan. I will oppose the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D. Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, first of all I would like to congratulate the newly-elected 

member of Prince Albert (Mr. Steuart) for the fine contribution we have just heard in this house this 

afternoon, and want to welcome him as a colleague to this legislature. I also want to extend my best 

wishes and congratulations to the member from Milestone (Mr. Erb) for having made an intelligent 

decision in joining the great Liberal party of Saskatchewan. I welcome you to this side of the house and 

I am confident that your contribution to the debate and committee will be greatly appreciated and in the 

final analysis will contribute much in the ultimate defeat of this present government. 

 

I also want to congratulate the mover and the seconder of the throne speech. The presentations were 

good but the contents misleading. Some politicians are often carried away 



 

February 21, 1963 

 
20 

by sheer enthusiasm. Some in recent days were carried away by sheer disgust. The member for Meadow 

Lake (Mr. Semchuk) the other day was carried away by unwarranted enthusiasm of what this 

government had done for the people in the north. He spoke of Meadow Lake as the greatest wheat-

growing centre of the north; how the government had provided the community with good roads; the fine 

school that provided a high standard of education for all; the hospital and medical facilities that provided 

the best of health; and all with a minimum of cost; how the government had opened up the north by 

serving the area with a power grid 175 miles north of Meadow Lake. Well, Mr. Speaker, this must have 

all happened in the last 11 months. To prove this I would like to read from a report published in the Star-

Phoenix on March 23, 1962, on conditions that existed only a few months ago. At the outset I would like 

to say that I have no particular pleasure in reading this, but in view of the statements made by the 

Premier yesterday and recent reports in the Leader-Post, I feel that this report will confirm that the social 

aid program is a real scandal in the province of Saskatchewan. Now the Meadow Lake council had a 

meeting not so very long ago, about 12 months ago, and I will only read a few paragraphs from this 

article in the Star-Phoenix of March 23: 

 

In addition to immediate and legitimate cost of social aid arising out of the welfare program, other 

problems and other costs are growing at a rate that threatens the morale and the ethical and financial 

stability of the whole community. The apparent use of social aid as the accepted and acceptable way of 

life is widely evident. Young couples of the area, both urban and rural, with no physical means of 

support, little education and fewer skills, marry and go on social aid as a means of support. For years a 

large percentage of beds in the local hospital maternity wards have been almost continuously occupied 

by unwed mothers and their babies, sometimes unwed mothers and their daughters confined at the 

same time. 

 

And it goes on to say . . . 

 

Mr. M. Semchuk (Meadow Lake): — We‟re not responsible for that. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — And it goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 

 

regularly for several days at the end of each month, when social aid cheques are sent out, local liquor 

sales jump out of all proportion to the rest of the month. 



 

February 21, 1963 

 

 
21 

Crime and disrespect for the law and the law enforcement is rising rapidly with the corresponding rise 

of police costs to the town. School facilities lag behind population growth. Some of its second and 

third generation families born and raised on social aid. Major expenses of the town in 1961 were social 

aid $96,000, medical care $17,000, and police costs $17,000. 

 

Briefly, this is the great development of the north the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. Semchuk) is so 

enthusiastic about. When we talk about these things the mayor of Regina wants us to resign. As long as I 

am a member of this house, we will continue to scrutinize every department to see that the taxpayer 

receives full value for his dollar. 

 

An Hon. Member: — There‟s your record, there‟s your record. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we had the unfortunate opportunity to listen to the Premier of 

Saskatchewan in a barrage of criticism levelled at the Leader of the Opposition. At first I was 

disappointed at the small group of students of the university and visitors attending the session to hear the 

Premier of the province. But, after such a cheap performance, it was not worthy of better attendance. I 

noticed a group of students leaving the chamber half way through the course of his speech, not to return. 

The day before when the Leader of the Opposition spoke there were three times as many students and 

visitors in the chamber, listening carefully and intelligently as he outlined the Liberal program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — The Premier attacked the Leader of the Opposition on every statement he had made and 

will make till the day he and his government will be defeated at the polls. I can hardly imagine the 

Premier being annoyed to such an extent as he displayed yesterday at the Leader of the Opposition, but 

rather am inclined to believe that he is annoyed at the people of Saskatchewan who turned down the 

government candidates at Athabasca, Turtleford, Weyburn, and Prince Albert. Since his election as 

leader, the socialists have slipped all over Saskatchewan. His uninspiring and colorless performance of 

the past year makes the task of the Liberals definitely easier in the months ahead. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — Saskatchewan has no leadership. 



 

February 21, 1963 

 
22 

Mr. Boldt: — The lack of contents of the throne speech is a sure sign that this government is faltering 

and stumbling along and the electorate is just eagerly awaiting for an opportunity to sweep them out of 

office. Another sure sign that this government is on the way out is the fact that the Tory and Social 

Credit leaders of the province have for the last six months continuously levelled all criticism at the 

provincial Liberal party and have completely forgotten about the NDP. Mr. Pederson and Mr. Kelln are 

two of the very few that do not want the Liberal victory These two gentlemen are trying to convince the 

electorate that the Liberals and the NDP are closely related. After hearing the Leader of the Opposition 

and the Premier in this debate I am thoroughly convinced that the Liberals and the NDP are farther apart 

than ever before and to those that are not convinced I challenge them to ask the Premier when they can 

expect him to join the great Liberal party of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Morse): — We wouldn‟t take him. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No, Heaven forbid, No. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Our leader enjoys the confidence and support of the Liberal party, was elected to this 

house in 1960, he scared Tommy Douglas right out of the province, and, incidentally, I want to 

congratulate the member for Prince Albert (Mr. Steuart) — he scared the Premier right out of this house 

a few moments ago. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — The Leader of the Opposition certainly was instrumental in electing Liberals in three by-

elections and has . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Brockelbank: — I rise to a point of privilege on behalf of the Premier. The Premier has many 

things to do as head man in the cabinet. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — The Leader of the Opposition was certainly instrumental in electing Liberals in three by-

elections and reorganized the party to the extent that today it is the greatest political force in the 

province. In comparison, what claims have Messrs. Pederson and Kelln to the premiership of this 

province. Mr. Speaker, in Ottawa the recent government has been accused of indecision. In 

Saskatchewan the government could rightfully be accused of not having made wise decisions on 

numerous occasions. Let us take a look at some of the decisions that have been made. 



 

February 21, 1963 

 

 
23 

The house has seen numerous changes since the last election in 1960. Perhaps the first mistake, Mr. 

Speaker, was made by the electorates themselves by electing this government to office in 1960. Since 

1960 we have had three ministers of finance, we have had our second minister of education, our third 

minister of public works, our second minister of municipal affairs, our second minister of co-operation, 

our second Speaker, our third Deputy-Speaker, and a third minister of public health — and a change of 

party name — the NDP — the new displaced persons. The Premier has juggled his ministers at such a 

clip that I would think, Mr. Speaker, that it would hardly be fair to expect us to always correctly 

associate the minister to the department he is in charge of. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, I believe there have also been major changes in the party. As I have already stated, 

they changed their name to the New Democratic Party. They used to pride themselves as the party of 

reform, the party of the farmer and labor, humanity first, abundant living, the party that keeps its 

promises, etc. Well this great party had a convention last July. This was during the medical crisis. 

Naturally there were some resolutions of interest on medicare. The two resolutions, outside the ones on 

medical care, that were of the most interest, as reported in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix of July 23, 1962, 

are as follows: 

 

That the convention urge the government to lower the legal drinking age from 21 to 18. 

 

The second resolution of important was “that the government make it an offence for any person, except 

a parent or guardian, to give liquor to anyone under 18”. Mr. Speaker, I believe that the majority of 

citizens of Saskatchewan will agree that these resolutions merit discussion. I personally am concerned as 

to the number of people we could keep out of the beer parlours, instead of more in. I am sure that the 

Minister of Social Welfare shares my concern. When resolutions such as these as quoted are foremost in 

the minds of delegates of a political party, I think it is high time that we make every effort to get our 

medical doctors back and do some real mind searching. To my knowledge, there was no discussion 

reported on radio or the newspapers on industrial development, on agriculture, financial aid to young 

farmers, social welfare, Indian affairs, on education, or labor and employment. Oh, yes, I believe there 

was a resolution on employment. It went something like this: 

 

Whereas there are too many employees in the public service that do not believe in the philosophies and 

policies of the government and therefore do not work to the best of their ability in the interests of the 

people of 



 

February 21, 1963 

 
24 

Saskatchewan, be it resolved that the entire question of hiring public servants be referred to the 

incoming provincial council. 

 

It was passed. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes, it would be. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — I am asking the government if they intend to act upon the wishes of the convention. I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, that the government has taken the wrong approach in trying to solve some of the 

problems, especially those related to rural municipalities. The government has taken the attitude that by 

merely increasing the size of the municipality, by enlarging the boundary lines, all the troubles of the 

R.M.‟s will be solved. Although municipal men and school trustees agree to a large extent that revision 

of boundaries for school purposes is desirable and practical, they certainly do not agree that the same 

holds true when related to municipal government. Therefore, the municipality within these boundaries 

set out by the advisory commission have requested the minister that no change of boundaries is desirable 

and, therefore, very few, if any, will request a vote to be taken on municipal units or the counties. It 

would appear to me then that the government should embark upon a new approach in solving the 

problems which are mainly financial. It is agreed by all political parties in Canada that tax-sharing 

agreements of the federal government with the provinces is a good thing. In the field of education the 

government has a similar formula where the low assessed school units are aided by equalization grants. I 

see no reason why the have-not municipalities should not be dealt with in a similar manner. I think it 

would be rather difficult to convince the higher-assessed municipalities that have finished the grid road 

program in their area, have good maintenance equipment, and are operating at a relatively low mill rate, 

to vote for a large unit with the low-assessed R.M.‟s added to their unit, which would only tend to 

increase the cost and raise the taxes. 

 

I do not believe that this would be a fair way of equalizing the cost, namely within a given boundary. I 

believe the equalizing should be done by the entire provincial area, rather than locally, and am fully 

convinced that equalization grants would serve this purpose without interfering with the local economy. 

The government will argue that the continuing committee recommended the setting up of municipal 

units or the county and the advisory commission has been busy setting up the boundaries. They will 

argue that these committees were headed by experts in the field, and they certainly will say that they had 

all the qualifications. Well, experts are not always right. I would like to remind the government and the 

people of Saskatchewan that about two years ago 29 university professors demanded the head of James 

Coyne. Ever since June 18 these professors are remarkably silent. 



 

February 21, 1963 

 

 
25 

Mr. Speaker, I also have a grave concern, and so do some of the municipal councils of the municipalities 

in my constituency in the handling of special grants to municipalities. It has been brought to my 

attention that the member for Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) advises the council that the request for special 

grants should be made through him. Is this the policy of the minister that special grants to municipalities 

in some areas, namely constituencies represented by NDP members, should be channelled through their 

members? Special grants should be made available to the municipalities when certain factors are taken 

into consideration, namely the assessment and the emergency of the project and, in reality, should not be 

dependent on the sitting member‟s ability to influence the minister. The action taken by the member of 

Kinistino is a shameful act and a flagrant disregard for a good standard of sound administration. 

 

Then, of course, Mr. Speaker, the social aid problem is causing much concern. Somehow I feel that the 

minister has finally acknowledged a weakness in the act and the abuses that are apparent throughout the 

province. The minister, together with some members of his staff, have held numerous meetings in the 

province with municipal and social welfare officials. I was interested to note that at a meeting in Tisdale 

— I have a clipping here from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix which stated that the hon. members, Mr. J.H. 

Brockelbank, Provincial Treasurer and member for Kelsey, and Robert Perkins, M.L.A. for Nipawin, 

both spoke briefly. Invitations to speak at these meetings were not given to the member from Prince 

Albert (Mr. Steuart) and myself as we were invited to a similar meeting in Prince Albert. I just wonder 

why they made a political meeting out of this meeting in Tisdale. 

 

I am afraid very little has been accomplished in the way of solving abuses under the act and until the 

government is prepared to change some sections in the act, together with the federal government, I see 

little hope of a change of heart among social aid recipients. One of the changes in the act, I believe is a 

must, is that the employable social aid recipients must and should give service for cash assistance 

received. This has already been agreed upon by the premiers of the provinces in Canada and it is now up 

to the federal government to pursue this policy. Another thing wrong with the act is the schedule. The 

schedule to me seems only fair when the recipient is unemployable. In many areas a municipal official 

could make a far better deal with the applicant than under the act. Where this has been done in the past, 

the government official making his rounds insists that the recipient be put on the schedule. In other 

words, the applicant either qualifies for the maximum amount or nothing. Let the minister ask himself 

this question. Is it fair to put two applicants on the same schedule where one was able to earn $2,000 and 

the other only $500 in a given period? 



 

February 21, 1963 

 
26 

We also note, Mr. Speaker, that social aid payments are a direct gift to the recipient. No note is signed or 

receipt issued by the recipient. Where the recipient is unemployable, this could be justified. But for the 

employable recipient to enjoy all these benefits, I can hardly agree. I would probably go along as far as 

the clothing and food is concerned, but certainly do not agree that instalment payments on electrical 

appliances, payments on mortgage on the home and arrears of taxes should be included. I believe you 

would find that many an applicant would withdraw his application for aid if he were asked to sign a 

note. The fact that in 1954 we had 5,866 people on social aid as compared to 25,549 in 1961 is alarming 

to all taxpayers in the province, with the cost for 1953-54 a little over a million dollars and up to almost 

$6 million in 1961. Then, of course, in recent weeks we have heard the interference in the administration 

of social welfare by civic officials. Such acts will only tend to weaken the administration of social 

welfare and ultimately defeat the good intent of the honest and highly trained welfare officials. Such 

interference, Mr. Speaker, is highly unwarranted in the light of the various appeal boards the applicant is 

privileged to go to. In the light of recent happenings of a certain case in my area with the child welfare 

department, with the reports of social aid abuses in many areas in the province, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

repeat and appeal to the minister for a complete overhaul of his department and demand the end to 

abuses of hard-earned taxpayers‟ dollars. 

 

I would like to say a few words about farm credit. Farm credit is on the minds of young farmers and 

would-be farmers. Past and present governments have failed to adequately assess financial needs. The 

federal Credit Corporation Act, replacing the Farm Loan Board Act, and the provincial act of 1959 to 

provide assistance to farmers in establishment and development of family farms as economic farm units, 

fail entirely to meet the necessary needs of young farmers. I have no argument of the amount of money 

available to each farmer, nor the terms of repayment and the interest rate, but in order to qualify, and this 

is the experience of dozens of young farmers of my area, for a considerable amount of money, both acts 

require too much security. In most cases young farmers in need of loans are asked to provide for more 

security than they have, with the result that their needs are not met if this security is not provided. The 

mere fact that the federal and provincial acts boast at the very small percentage of loss, I believe it is 

considerably less than one percent, would indicate to me that the acts are not broad enough in scope. I 

believe that farm credit is of a major importance to individual young farmers and to the industry itself; 

that the government should make loans more readily available. To me it seems absurd for the 

government to make loans of up to $25,000 to individual farmers who must have at least $50,000 assets 

to be eligible. These individuals do not need loans financed by governments. They should be asked to go 

to other sources, but, rather, loans should go to those young individuals who were born and 



 

February 21, 1963 

 

 
27 

raised on farms, who would like to remain on the farm, with the background and character of the 

individual taken into consideration at the time of application. I believe that governments must and 

should take certain risks if we are to keep the young people of the farm on the farm. A percentage of loss 

on loans, I believe, would be quite in order and the results in the end most gratifying. This government 

has lost billions in its experiments with crown corporations, it should be willing to risk some to farm 

industry. 

 

A few weeks ago I heard the Premier on the television program stating that $3.5 million in loans had 

been borrowed by students from the government, interest free. How about applying this generous 

gesture to young farmers? 

 

These problems that I have mentioned would be dealt with by a Liberal government in a most effective 

manner. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, in my opinion, the throne speech does not indicate that the government 

has a solution to the rural municipal problem; it doesn‟t intend to deal adequately with the social aid 

program; nor has it a program to assist the small farmer with his financial needs; I shall not support the 

motion. 

 

Mr. M. Semchuk (Meadow Lake): — I wonder if the member would mind giving me the date of that 

article that he read on Meadow Lake. I didn‟t catch the date. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — March 23, 1962. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is the house ready for the question? 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): — In rising to take part in the throne speech debate, I would first like to 

add my words of welcome to those that have already been extended, by members on both sides of the 

house, to the newly-elected M.L.A. from the constituency of Prince Albert (Mr. Steuart) and as well to 

the former Minister of Health and, also, a former school teacher of mine, in the person of the M.L.A. 

from Milestone (Mr. Erb). Both of these members, I know, are going to add greatly to the work of the 

opposition in the months that are to come, as I feel that the challenges that have been presented to the 

government across the way are definitely not going to be accepted in the near future because the 

government knows that if it did go to the people this year, they would be lucky if one of them were 

returned to sit in this house. So, Mr. Speaker, I am quite certain that, for the short time that we on this 

side of the house will be in opposition, both of these members are going to add a great deal to the work 

of the opposition in presenting to the people of this province the 



 

February 21, 1963 

 
28 

issues of the day and protecting the rights and interests of the people of this province from the socialist 

government sitting to your right. 

 

I would also like to take this opportunity to extend to previous speakers, and I would say particularly to 

the Leader of the Opposition, my congratulations on the addresses that they have presented in this 

debate. I can say that I think I agree much more with what has been said by the Leader of the Opposition 

and the two members that have just spoken this afternoon than I can with the remarks of other speakers 

during the course of this debate. I regret that I was unable to listen to all the remarks of the Premier 

yesterday. I heard a major portion of his address over the radio, while driving in my car, so I did not 

miss entirely the remarks that he had to make at times. 

 

Most of the remarks that I have to make in regard to those remarks I will be saving up for the radio time 

tomorrow afternoon, in order that I might answer some of the remarks that he made at that time, both in 

relation to the Leader of the Opposition and to the Liberal party generally. 

 

For the few moments I wish to speak this afternoon I want to deal with some of the remarks that have 

been made in this legislature since the beginning of the debate, and I think chiefly with the remarks 

made this afternoon by the lady member for Regina (Mrs. Cooper). 

 

We have heard many arguments in this house, they are made daily from both sides, using population 

figures of the province of Saskatchewan to prove their points. The Leader of the Opposition had figures 

to prove that the population of Saskatchewan had not advanced in the way that it should have since this 

government came into office. This afternoon we had the lady member for Regina presenting figures that 

she intended to prove would show that it was previous governments that were responsible for this fact 

and not the present government that is sitting on your right. 

 

However, I think both of these figures failed to prove either of the points to the satisfaction of anyone, 

and so I went to the trouble of getting the figures which I think would best indicate the progress in this 

province in comparison to our two neighboring provinces in the last 19 years under the present 

government that sits to your right, and that is the population figures of 1946, which was after this 

government came into office; after the war years had been concluded; after the period of depression. I 

am taking the figures of the three prairie provinces, beginning in the year 1946, giving them to you as 

they were at that time, and then giving them to you as they were in the census of 1961. I think this, 

better than any other figure that has been presented to this house, will indicate the comparative figure as 

far as the prosperity of the three prairie provinces are concerned. 



 

February 21, 1963 

 

 
29 

In 1946, for example, in the province of Alberta, there were 803,330 people residing in the province of 

Alberta. What is the figure for 1961? In 1961 there are 1,331,944 people resident in the province of 

Alberta. Then let us look at the province of Manitoba. Manitoba in 1946 had 726,923 people, whereas 

today Manitoba has a population of 921,686. How about Saskatchewan? Well, Saskatchewan in 1946 

had a higher population than the province of Alberta and a much higher population than our neighboring 

province of Manitoba. In 1946 we had 832,688 people living in this province. Today we have 925,181. 

In other words, in comparison to an increase of 500,000 population in the province of Alberta and 

200,000 in the province of Manitoba, we here in the province of Saskatchewan have had to settle for an 

increase of 90,000 in population in that same period. These are figures, Mr. Speaker, that the 

government across the way cannot refute; they cannot bring up arguments to prove that some other 

political party, or some other political group has been responsible for the fact that these figures have not 

been different over the period from 1946 to 1961. There is only one political party in this province, and 

that is the party represented on the government side of this house, that must accept the responsibility for 

the fact that Saskatchewan has lagged behind, that Saskatchewan has not enjoyed the economic progress 

that has been enjoyed in our neighboring provinces of Manitoba and Alberta. I hope this, along with the 

evidence that has been presented, will be enough to indicate to my friends across the way that they 

cannot hope to prove, no matter what they say about the population of this province, they cannot hope to 

work their way out of the difficulty by trying to blame this problem on others. 

 

I think this afternoon as well I must . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak: — I wonder if you will give us population statistics from, say 1934 to 1946. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — I am just going to that. I am just going into that now. I‟m glad you brought that up 

because I was hoping that someone might suggest that I go back and cover a little more of 

Saskatchewan‟s history, after what has been said in debate in the last two or three days. I read the 

remarks of one of the movers of the speech from the throne, talking about this government across the 

way bringing Saskatchewan from a wilderness up to the prosperity of the present day. Well, I want to 

indicate to my friend across the way that he couldn‟t have been born prior to the time this government 

came into office, or he would have known the facts about the time when Saskatchewan was a 

wilderness, and he would have known the political party that brought us from the days of wilderness 



 

February 21, 1963 

 
30 

up to the position of its greatest prosperity in 1929. And, of course, Mr. Speaker, that was a Liberal 

government, which came into office in 1905, when this province was born, when there were just a few 

thousand people resident within the boundaries, when these parliament buildings did not sit on this 

present location, when most of the public buildings had not been constructed, when there was no school 

system whatsoever, at the time when the provincial government took over in 1905. We had no medical 

facilities. There were no roads, because there were no cars in 1905 in the province of Saskatchewan. But 

from the date of 1905, when we were created a province, to 1929, the entire school system of this 

province had to be constructed, pretty well to the point where it is at the present time, with certain 

differences in administration. The school system from 1905 to 1929 was built up to a point where the 

people in this province had built more schools and maintained more school buildings in this province 

than they do at the present time — from 1905 to 1929. As well, we found that in 1911 the members of 

this legislature first moved into this building that we now occupy. Back in 1911 this building was built 

during the early years of progress in the province of Saskatchewan. We can go into the question of 

health facilities in this province. Our mental hospitals which were constructed during that period of year. 

We can consider as well our tuberculosis sanatoria, all of which were built during the period that I have 

mentioned, 1905 to 1929. 

 

At the same time, also, we were building the facilities that were required at that time and could be 

provided for a population of 930,000 in 1929 — which was a larger population than the present 

government has to provide facilities for at the present time in the province. This was all done in a period 

of 24 years, with a total expenditure of not more than the money that this government will have to spend 

in this present year when they bring down their budget. That is all the money that the government had to 

spend in the province and create the facilities in this province for 930,000 people, and I would suggest to 

my friend who suggested that his party had brought Saskatchewan from a wilderness, that had they had 

the problems to deal with that previous governments had to deal with, from 1905 down to the time they 

came into office, if they had ever had to deal with half the problems that those governments had to deal 

with in those years, then they would have something to take pride in. They would have something to say 

to the people of this province, that we deserve recognition for what we did for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In those early days those governments did not have the hand-outs from the federal treasury that this 

government has enjoyed since it came into office in 1944. Those governments did pretty well all their 

own financing and all their own work to provide the facilities necessary for the people 



 

February 21, 1963 

 

 
31 

in those days. So I say here, to the members of this legislature, that when my friends across the way try 

to tell the old, old story of nothing being done before there was a CCF government in this province, it is 

only because they are not old enough, they are ignorant of the facts, or they will not go back and read 

the history of this province, if they make statements such as have been made in this debate and in many 

other debates in this house since the present government came into office. 

 

I just want to say, before taking my place this afternoon and adjourning the debate, a few words with 

regard to social welfare services in our province. During the last few months the Minister of Social 

Welfare has been holding meetings about the province. I can see many reasons for holding these 

meetings. I am quite certain that after the addresses have been made by other in this house that the 

people of this province can well realize why the minister should be holding such meetings. But, on the 

other hand, if he thinks for one moment that those meetings were called in order to give advice to the 

people of this province, as to what to do, I fail to realize how he would get that information from the 

formation of the meetings that were held when I attended. I would like to call them political meetings — 

political meetings. I make that charge here today At every meeting the minister stood up and he made a 

speech that he might have made in this legislature. He had comparisons of social welfare figures for all 

the provinces in Canada. Why did he have to have those? What was the purpose of those? How was that 

going to gain for him any advice to the solution of the social welfare problem in this province? 

 

At meetings where there were only CCF members, I noted by the papers, all those members were asked 

to speak. Where there were Liberal members, they were not. And so I can say now that I think those 

meetings were called for only one reason. For window-dressing, and to try to convince the social welfare 

workers throughout this province and the municipal people, that the minister had a genuine interest in 

knowing exactly what the social welfare problems were in this province. 

 

I am quite certain that the minister has done nothing to date, at least that I know of, to correct many of 

the problems that were suggested to him at those meetings. I would like to state to the minister, though, 

that I do appreciate this one fact. That over the last year or two, due to the demands of the public, due to 

the demands of those who have to operate the social welfare program in this province, that he has 

acceded to some of those demands, sometimes very quietly. 

 

I can remember the first occasion on which one of the larger towns in this province decided they were 

going to take the matter of protecting the money of the people of this 



 

February 21, 1963 

 
32 

province in their own hands. They were going to lay down regulations in their community with regard to 

the handling of social welfare. The minister told them in no uncertain terms that they had no business 

putting down such regulations but today he goes out to the country and says, oh, yes, you should be 

doing that — you should have those regulations in force. The municipalities are responsible for this 

problem of social aid, and you fellows, you councillors, we are quite happy now if you will sit down and 

make out all your own regulations. He knows as well as I do that every social welfare worker in this 

province has a book, a good thick book, full of regulations and graphs and guides, as he might call them 

today — they were originally regulations. When his inspectors go out they are still regulations, he still 

calls them a guide, and he says, you can do anything you like with regard to these regulations. Town 

councillors and municipal councillors can sit down and they can draw up their own regulations and their 

own guides, if they so desire; but still when the officials of his department go about they still tell the 

social welfare workers what they should be doing and the actions they should be taking in granting 

social aid in this province. They still tell them whether they think they are not giving enough, it is not 

very often that they suggest that they are giving too much, not too frequently they suggest that, it is 

usually the suggestion that perhaps they are not keeping quite up with the standards that are suggested in 

the manual that is sent out by the government of this province. 

 

However, I would like to say this. That I think that the major portion of the responsibility for our 

difficulties in the field of social welfare at the present time in this province, cannot be laid at the door of 

the civic officials or the municipal officials of this province. It must be laid squarely at the door of this 

provincial government. The reason that I say that is this. Every time I have noticed when some person 

has been cut off another pension payment by the provincial government of this province, there is a little 

notation put on the letter, “If you find yourself in difficulties, go to your municipal officials and get 

some social aid”. They will cut them off the pensions that the provincial government has responsibility 

for and then they will send them over to the local municipal officials and tell them that if they are in 

financial need, that is the place that they should go. 

 

I think it is high time in this province that we have a uniform system of social welfare payments so that 

the provincial government accepts full responsibility for all those over a certain age level, if we are 

going to divide this according to ages; so that there are not three possible pensions for everyone over 65 

years of age; so that the government of this province cannot slough off the responsibility onto the 

municipality, and so that no longer will the municipalities, possibly if they desire to do so, try to place 

that responsibility on the government of this province. 



 

February 21, 1963 

 

 
33 

I think it is high time that we had a uniform policy that would provide these pensions on a common 

sense basis, and not have two or three government bodies, responsible for the payment of the social aid 

in this province. And I think that is where one of the main solutions to this problem lies at the present 

time. So I say to the minister that I think that these meetings he held with regard to social welfare were 

window-dressing. Certainly there were many got up at the meetings, I was at two of them, and asked 

questions. There were many got up and made suggestions, but I don‟t think that there was anyone at 

those meetings, as far as I am aware, that really received anything back out of them. I don‟t think they 

were convinced by the minister that he was doing better for the people than the governments in other 

provinces of Canada were doing. I don‟t know if they were convinced he was doing as well for the 

province as they were doing in other provinces in Canada or not. But I think much of what he tried to 

put across at those meetings was done for strictly political purposes. Trying to mend the fences of the 

government of this province. Knowing that their popularity is at a low ebb as far as the public is 

concerned, and trying to revive it with meetings held at the expense of the people of this province, 

instead of at the expense of his political party if he wants to promote the aims of his own political group 

across the way. 

 

And so, in adjourning the debate, I just want to say that it is time that the minister was sincere about this 

problem; that he took it out of the sphere of politics; and placed it in a sane and sensible administration 

so that the problem can be solved in the future and so that the people that are in need in this province can 

get the true benefits of the tax dollars that are paid for social welfare purposes. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:34 o‟clock p.m. 


