



















































Hansard: April 04, 1963


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session – Fourteenth Legislature 

36th Day 

 

Thursday, April 4, 1963 

 

The House met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

Mr. A.L. Stevens (Rosetown): — Before the orders of the day are called I wish to make an 

announcement which should be of great interest to some members of this legislature, and particularly the 

members from Milestone (Mr. Erb) and Morse (Mr. Thatcher). Mr. Speaker, a new era in political life of 

this province has been born in Assiniboia. A new party has been formed which should appeal to 

members out of place in their established party, and the great new Messiah is Hazen Argue. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That statement is out of order. 

 

Mr. W.R. Thatcher (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, of course that is out of order and of course it is a lot of 

nonsense too. Mr. Hazen Argue will be the M.P. for Assiniboia after Monday – for the Liberal party. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think the statement is out of order and any discussion on it will also be out of order. 

 

Special Commitee on Expropriation 

 

Hon. Mr. Lloyd moved: 

 

That Mr. Whelan, as Chairman, together with Messrs. Walker, Willis, Thibault, Thurston, Cameron, 

Gardiner and Stavely be constituted to conduce an enquiry, 



 

April 4, 1963 
 

 2 

following prorogation of the Assembly and during the inter-sessional period into all matters relating 

to the expropriation of lands by public and private authorities; 

 

That the said committee have power to send for persons, papers and records and to examine witnesses 

under oath; to receive representations from persons employed by public and private authorities 

empowered to expropriate land, from interested persons and from members of the general public and 

for this purpose to hold meetings or hearings away from the seat of Government in order that the 

fullest representation maybe received without inconveniencing those desiring to be heard; 

 

That the committee have power to engage legal counsel and such advisers and assistants as are 

required for the purpose of the enquiry and, in addition, if considered necessary or desirable, to 

request the assistance of staff employed by the departments of Government; and 

 

That the said committee do submit a report, together with a draft Bill to the Government on behalf of 

the Assembly, on or before December 31, 1963, in order to facilitate action being taken upon any 

recommendation it may desire to make arising from its enquiry, the said report to be submitted to the 

Assembly not later than the tenth sitting day of the next ensuring session of the Assembly. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — The motion as it appears on the order paper is self-explanatory. It is simply a 

follow-up to complete the motion previously accepted by the legislature with regard to an inter-sessional 

committee to enquire into expropriation procedures as presently defined by the statues of the province. 

The members of the committee have been discussed, the names appear here. I would consequently then 

move, seconded by Mr. Brockelbank, the resolution as it appears on the order paper. 

 

Mr. W.R. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, when the opposition was considering this particular motion, some 

of our members felt rather strongly that they should have the privilege of presenting a minority report if 

they didn’t agree with the ultimate recommendation. I discussed this with the Premier and he told me he 

could see nothing that would prevent this. I don’t see anything in the resolution but I would like to have 

the assurance of the Premier that this would be so. 



 

April 4, 1963 
 

 3 

Premier Lloyd: — Mr. Chairman, insofar as . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must warn members that the Premier will be closing the debate if he speaks now. 

 

Premier Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, insofar as I am aware, the right to propose a minority report is 

something that has never been rejected or never been denied. I have in mind here too the precedent 

which was established in regard to the legislative committee in regard to certain liquor licensing and 

certain extensions in the way of disposing of liquor in the province. You will recall that at that time that 

several of the members, while they did not submit minority reports in total, did dissent with regard to 

certain specific items of it and I would presume that that procedure or the procedure of a total minority 

report if so desired is in the hands of the committee and certainly so far as we are concerned there is no 

reason to have any apprehension about it being denied. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:02 o’clock p.m. 

 

 


