



















































Hansard: February 26, 1964


391 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
SIXTH SESSION – FOURTEENTH LEGISLATURE 

15th day 

 

Wednesday, February 26th, 1964 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I would like to 

welcome a group of school children from the North Park School, Saskatoon, I am sure the members will join me in saying 

how pleased we are to have them with us today, and we hope their stay in the capital city will be an enjoyable and informative 

one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

LEADER POST HEADLINES RE: METEORITE 

 

Mr. A. Kluzak (Shaunavon): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the Day are proceeded with, I would like to call to the 

attention of the house to the headlines of last night’s Leader Post that a meteorite had been found in the Garden Head area of 

the Shaunavon constituency. This is only the fourth meteorite that has ever been recovered in Saskatchewan. This was found 

by Mr. Reberger during 1944, and, Mr. Speaker, this again proves that the people of Shaunavon constituency when they get 

hold of something good, they believe in hanging on to it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the Budget Motion moved by the Hon. Mr. Brockelbank. 

 

Mrs. Gladys Strum (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to welcome the students in the gallery. The school 

from which they come is very near my home in Saskatoon. I live in City Park, and I would like to welcome them and Mr. 

Brosie, their teacher and to tell them we hope they have a happy day here and that it isn’t very often that you get a chance to 

really check up on your members by hearing them speak directly to you, while you sit in the gallery. 

 

I’m sorry that the Leader of the Opposition has left the chamber, I was hoping that he would be here when I was about to tell 

him how pleased I was that he was back in his seat. I noticed by the paper last night, that he had been to Ottawa, and that he 

had been speaking to Mr. Pearson for 15 minutes. I was very sorry, Mr. Pearson couldn’t even remember what they were 

talking about. I was hoping that it would have been portable pensions or the unemployment situation, or many, many of the 

very important questions in which we are involved. I am hoping that we will hear from Mr. Thatcher a little later as to what 

his business was in Ottawa at this particular time. 

 

Hon. R.A. Walker (Attorney-General): — Mr. Pearson is a very busy man. 

 



 

February 26th, 1964 

 

 

392 

Mrs. Strum: — Now, Mr. Speaker, at this session we have been hearing a great deal about stagnation, and about loss of 

industry and loss of population and this I find very hard to understand because everywhere I look as I go about this province, 

and as I drive around my own city of Saskatoon, the evidence that I see is exactly contrary. If one hasn’t been out for a while 

around the suburbs, and we are all around the suburbs these days I imagine, you drive down a street and you see whole blocks 

of new homes and that you couldn’t remember having been there before. You see new plants, new industries, you pick up the 

paper and you se very, very encouraging symptoms of not stagnation, but of sustained healthy growth, and you would have to 

be blind, Mr. Speaker, if you didn’t see this, or else very stubborn, what shall I say, not subversive exactly, but it reminds me 

of an old poem that I had to learn in school one time and it started off like this: Sir Walter wrote this; 

 

 Breathes there a man with a soul so dead, 

 Who never to himself hath said, 

 This is my own, my native land, 

 Whose heart has ne’er within him burned, 

 As home his footsteps he hath turned 

 From wandering on some foreign strand. 

 

and Mr. Scott was very hard on this character who was so very lacking in patriotic fervour, because he said: 

 

 If such there breathe, go mark him well, 

 For him no minstrel chorous swells, 

 Proud though his title, high his name, 

 Boundless his wealth 

 As wish could claim 

 Despite those titles, power and pelf 

 The wretch, concentred all in self, 

 Living shall forfeit fair renown 

 and doubly dying shall go down to the vile dust 

 From whence he sprung 

 Unwept, unhonoured, and unsung. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mrs. Strum: — I wouldn’t wish this on anybody, of course, especially one of my former seat mates and, like Mr. Horsman 

who yesterday said he didn’t hate anybody, I too can’t hate anybody, because I find it gives you ulcers, and that I can’t afford. 

So I found out long ago that it was much better to love every body and to just hate the sin but not the sinner. It is not so long 

since I sat in the opposition with Mr. Thatcher in Ottawa, and I would be pleased to eat dinner with Mr. Horsman because he 

gave the most sensible speech I have heard this session, and I understand now how Mr. Horsman got himself elected for so 

many years. He talked the sort of human, warm common sense that people like to hear their members talk as they go about the 

country. 

 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Why don’t you copy him? 

 

Mrs. Strum: — I wouldn’t copy you anyway. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, really we have evidence like the Leader Post last night, ―Under the Dome‖, I hope you all read this 

column by Mr. King, it was very, very illuminating and I would like to commend to you this issue of the Leader Post, 

February 15th, pardon me, The Star Phoenix, third page, and this heading says; 

 

 Saskatchewan Really Booms, Business records Tumble in all directions in 1963 

 

and it goes on to say; 

 

Saskatchewan has become Canada’s Cinderella province. Last year it chalked up its biggest business year ever. Retail sales 

soared to estimated $1,045,000,000, and 8.8 per cent increase over the previous record set in 1962. Residents became the 

nation’s biggest per capita earners and spenders, and they set new production highs and consumer buying records all over 

the wheat province, according to the Saskatchewan Retail Merchants Association Annual Report released Friday. 

 



 

February 26th, 1964 

 

 

393 

I wrote for one and they were very pleased to send me this and another booklet, and there is more good material set out in 

table form here than I had seen for a long time and it is all DBS figures. 

 

 The success story of 1963 was all the more remarkable, in that the province’s economy is based on agriculture. 

 

said Roth Walker, SRMA Secretary-Manager, in his 20 page statistics packed report. 

 

Record crops and export grain sales gave a healthy autumn impetus to an already good year that established records in farm 

labour and business income. Other high figures were recorded in mineral, construction, and manufacturing production. 

Consumer credit rose accordingly with record sales of staple goods, cars, farm implements, and a wide variety of household 

amenities. 

 

He summarizes the report as follows, under point heading in highlights, and these highlights of the annual report included, 

 

Total value of production in Saskatchewan last year was $2,169,000,000, a 14.4 per cent increase over 1962. The per capita 

personal income jumped to nearly $2,000. 

 

This figure is higher than any I have ever seen but this is the figure they used, and all figures at this date are based on an 

estimate because all of the returns aren’t in. But the figure he gives is $1,927, a 15.2 per cent hike over 1962 figures and the 

highest of any province in Canada. The total personal income during 1963 increased 14.1 per cent to $1,800,000,000. 

 

Consumer credit, and this is something we have been hearing about, the lack of credit, from the Leader of the Opposition, but 

this puts consumer credit here: 

 

 Consumer credit at an all time high of $311,650,000, an increase of 13 per cent. 

 

and these are the independent merchants and so they like to give you this figure. 

 

Sales by independent merchants in 1963 increased from $674,943,300 to $708,684,600 for 67.82 per cent of the total 

market, a slight increase over 1962. 

 

And this goes on and it gives department stores, retail chains, consumer co-ops, breaks down the whole selling field, and gives 

you a picture of consumer spending in this province. This they think is a good index to the state of the economy and they look 

forward to a good year next year because as the Provincial Treasurer pointed out, much of our good crop is still in storage, 

and our crop last year was equivalent of almost two normal crop yields in this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a great deal has been said in this debate by the financial critic, the member from Moosomin, (Mr. 

McDonald) about the overage in the tax yield. The member from Prince Albert yesterday again tried to make a great thing of 

this, you would think it was a sin to find that your tax rate gave you more than you expected to get. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the first session I sat through in 1961 in this house saw just the opposite, a deficit in the previous year’s 

accounting. The Provincial Treasurer who is now Premier, was forced to bring in a deficit budget item for $3,000,000 for 

relief fodder. The 1960 crop was disappointing in many areas of the province, and this of course, could not be anticipated in 

February of that year when the budget was brought down. 

 

In 1961 crop yields were low too and any provincial treasurer who had any sense of responsibility would naturally try to pare 

expenditures to fit basic demands for the maintenance and protection of services that people expect to have provided and paid 

for by their tax dollars. The production figure for wheat in 1961 was only 137,000,000 bushels and, naturally the Provincial 

Treasurer had these figures before him when he worked on his budget in January and February in 1962. The crop for 1962 

shows a figure of 354,000,000 bushels, roughly 2½ times as much as 1961 crop. Now, while I 



 

February 26th, 1964 

 

 

394 

believe that the Provincial Treasurer is a very shrewd and far-sighted person, I don’t think he is clairvoyant and he couldn’t 

possible be expected to know what the crop would be. But are we to bewail the fact that a burgeoning economy provides a 

greater yield in taxes than the same rates would bring in if we were to experience another crop failure, or glutted markets were 

to give us no price or no sales, as we have seen so often in the past, or if we were to slip down into a recession. 

 

Obviously this is a very flimsy argument and unworthy of a man of the talent of the member from Moosomin. In fact this 

experience of the tax cup running over is a common complaint, according to the Leader Post last night. On page three, Stirling 

King in his column ―Under the Dome‖ discusses this very thing. 

 

Alberta’s provincial treasurer ran into a surplus of about $30,000,000 in one year, and this makes Alberta’s citizens the 

highest revenue producing per capita taxpayers in Canada at $28.50 per capita. 

 

You’ve all read this, I’m sure. By your red faces I know you did. 

 

 as compared to $23.00 per capita in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Never heard it before. 

 

Mrs. Strum: — Well, you should learn to read. Mr. Speaker, taxes are not measured in isolation, taxes are relative to two 

other factors. First, personal income from all sources, and secondly, what taxes pay for in service for the people of the 

province and when you buy services they come cheaper by the million, that is when we include all the people of the province 

and our population is now just under the million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, dealing with income or ability to pay, as Mr. King points out in his article, the Saskatchewan people will obtain 

an all-time high record of personal income, second only to that of Ontario. He disagrees with the Saskatchewan retailers 

report, but this is still an incomplete figure and both are only estimates. 

 

Assuming that Ontario were first, the Ontario Minister of Finance did not choose to cut $5,000,000 off the taxes for their 

hospital and medical costs as we did when we reduced ours by $5,000,000 and saved our taxpayers $20.00 a family. Oh no, 

Ontario, perhaps because it has the highest personal income level in Canada, felt perfectly justified in increasing its hospital 

insurance rates for single people, from $2.10 a month to $3.25 and for families from $4.20 to $6.60 a month, an increase 

roughly of 55 per cent. In addition the gasoline tax was raised 2¢ a gallon – in the highest province in Canada, in relation to 

personal income. 

 

Before I proceed any further, Mr. Speaker, tax revenues are basic to the discussion of a budget and so much has been said by 

opposition members about over-taxation, I shall now take a little time to discuss taxes as an instrument of government in 

contemporary society. 

 

Indeed, Mr. Speaker, while few people could be said to really enjoy paying taxes, few sensible people would deny that taxes 

are necessary. Indeed responsible people freely admit that when we pay for services with our taxes, we are using the best 

method yet devised to buy the services we all need, services to cover education, hospital and medical needs, to pay for market 

or grid roads and highways, and many other services that a community demands. Further, few people in today’s society could 

be found who oppose borrowing for the financing of public utilities, for example, dams for hydro electric power, or power 

transmission lines, or pipe lines for gas, or highways for commercial or access roads or to attract tourists. 

 

Telephones are now part of our investments in capital costs, and so is education. In fact, education is considered now to be 

one of the legitimate expenditures in a development program for industry. It is one of the input ingredients along with power, 

raw materials and capital. Surely, Mr. Speaker, the promotion of health is basic to the welfare and growth of any nation. Our 

taxes represent a joint payment on behalf of all of us for the benefit and use of all of us. Taxation, in the true sense in which 

we all share by payment of gasoline tax, motor license tax and 5 per cent sales tax and our hospitalization and medical service 

premiums, helps us to buy jointly what you and I couldn’t even begin to afford if we tried to operate as individuals in these 

areas. 

 



 

February 26th, 1964 

 

 

395 

The phenomenal growth in roads, power, water supply, and the greatly expanded education and health protection we enjoy 

obviously answers the question – What do we get in return for our taxes? Now, let us consider what relation these tax 

expenditures bear to income or, has our income base expanded sufficiently to support our growing tax base? Let us first take 

gross income figures and then break them down. Personal income per person in Saskatchewan is 3.6 times as great as it was 

20 years ago. Take an average of two, four year periods, 20 years apart, from 1940 to 1943. The Saskatchewan average was 

$441. and 20 years later, the period from 1960 to 1963, showed the rise to an all time high of $1,584. These are earlier figures 

than those last night which brought it to $1,900, an increase of almost four times the previous figures of $441. and again I say 

those later figures this year are an estimate, but the others are DBS figures going back 20 years. 

 

The 1940-43 average $41. – note this, this was only 78 per cent of the Canadian average income. We were low as far as our 

personal income went in relation to the rest of Canada. Twenty years later, Mr. Speaker, the second four year period, which 

contained the crop failure year of 1961, represents a figure which is 98 per cent of the Canadian average of $1,620. If you 

take the higher figure of $1,923, which Mr. King suggest, we would be above the Canadian average, and this is the one the 

retailers association uses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no government can take the credit for international hunger or rainfall, but the Saskatchewan government can say 

with confidence that the provincial economy can well afford to match in service with growth in income. Indeed, any 

government administering the affairs of a rapidly expanding province such as ours would be failing the legitimate 

expectations of its people, were it to deny these services which can only be met out of revenue. 

 

The income of the province this year, which the Provincial Treasurer pointed out, is made up of several substantial and 

growing segments as follows; Agriculture products, Mineral production, Construction, private and public investments, factory 

shipments, representing processed or manufactured goods, electrical energy and natural gas. These basic areas of activity give 

rise to an every growing number of services which represent spending and this in turn represents employment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that the non-agriculture sectors have contributed substantially to the rising income average figure, 

while agriculture this year has swelled production totals. The non-agriculture production of commodities employed 63 out of 

every 100 workers outside of those engaged in agriculture, as compared with only 41 out of 100 in 1941 and 47 out of 100 in 

1946. The various categories of production covering sources of wealth, expressed in millions of dollars in the two basic 

periods we are comparing, that is from 1940 to 1943 and 20 years later, 1960 to 1963 are as follows: (This income is made up 

of agricultural and non-agricultural categories). First, agriculture averaged over the 1940 to 1943 period was $225,000,000, 

20 years later, a four year average from 1960 to 1963, yielded $580,000,000, 20 years later, a four year average from 1960 to 

1963, yielded $580,800,000. Mr. Speaker, note the jump from $225,000,000 to $585,800,000 in value, is not expressed in a 

similar percentage of the total income of the province. 

 

In 1940 to 1943 the agricultural section was 74.8 per cent of the province’s income, but in 1960 to 1963, while the gross 

value had more than doubled, going from $225,000,000 to $585,800,000, or a gain of 158 per cent, this still represented only 

50.6 of the total value of Saskatchewan’s new wealth, while non-agricultural production had risen from 25.2 to 49.3 of the 

total in the period 1960 to 1963. 

 

Now, I’m going to disappoint you, I’m not going to blame this on the Liberals, because I think that is just stupid to blame 

everything on the previous administration. We all know that this is child’s talk and I refuse to engage in it. The value of this 

upsurge in non-agricultural production in Saskatchewan expressed in millions of dollars reads thus: For the 1940-to 1943 

period, the total was $75,800,000 while the four year period from 1960 to 1963 reached a new high of $566,300,000, or a 

gross of gain of 647 per cent. I’m going to repeat that, our non-agricultural segment of 20 years had shown an increase of 647 

per cent. Indeed, everywhere it seems, one sees evidence of, not stagnation, but of healthy continuing growth. 

 

In the city of Saskatoon, where I live, and which I have the honour to represent, since 1960, or in the last three years alone, 

existing plants have expanded their services by investing roughly $4,500,000 in new extensions, and these are familiar names, 

Saskatchewan Co-op Creamery, Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, Vegetable Oils, Dairy and Poultry Pool, Empire Meat, Labatts 

Brewery, Modern Press, Coca-Cola, Intercontinental Packers, Western Canada 



 

February 26th, 1964 

 

 

396 

Vegetable Oil Products. and 12 others. Note this in passing, that 22 firms can spend $4,500,000 on plant extension and 

employ only 60 people in addition to their regular staff. This, my friends, is automation. Since 1960, new industries 

established or announced, for Saskatoon, include 27 firms. These are the new industries, these others were extensions, but we 

have in addition really new industries covering potash, chemicals, ammunition, corrugated paper cartons, cement, feed mills, 

structural steel, furniture, fibre glass boats, cathode ray tubes, cleaning products, baking, furniture, plastic, metal works, 

patent medicines, etcetera. Although the plants are highly automated, and represent a total of only approximately 500 

employees, yet their wages in turn support many others in service trades. The investment in these plants totals roughly 

$50,000,000. 

 

Not the least of the reasons for their locating in this province is our cheap fuel cost provided by the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation. Our gas rates in Regina and Saskatoon for 171 M.P.F. are identical, and compare favorably with Winnipeg 

which charges $154.14, and Brandon which charges $158.69 as against our $126.94 for the same quantity of energy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budget again provides substantial grant to the university. Ten years ago the operating grant averaged 

$516.00 per student. It now stands at $644.00 per student, and in addition to this operating grant of $6,678,000 which 

represents an increase of $500,000, the university plans a capital development program of $12,500,000 of this sum, 

$4,500,000 will be financed directly from provincial grants to be supplemented if necessary by provincial guarantee loans. 

Indeed the campus in Saskatoon, as you all know if you have visited there recently, in the last three or four years has had so 

many new buildings and so many extensions to existing colleges such as St. Thomas Moore, and St. Andrews, extensions to 

the Gym and now a new residence for girls, that one can hardly find his way around the once familiar driveways, even though 

you live there. 

 

The university expenditure supports not only students and professors buy I can recall one news item last year that put the 

payroll of the university at $3,000,000. This will have grown constantly with the greatly expanded building program. This is 

big business for my city which is stimulated by government expenditures of tax money. 

 

Because so much of our revenue this year relates to our farms, I would like to give credit to the Minister of Agriculture. As 

the budget points out, international hunger coincides with two consecutive good crops, one of which is still largely in storage 

on our farms. 

 

I am pleased that the opposition’s financial critic is in his seat and that he has noticed that the Iron Curtain countries are 

hungry. I anticipate that next year he will be pleading with us to admit Red China to a seat in the U.N. Now I must include the 

member for Moosomin under a new heading, in the column here marked, ―change, promising hope,‖ and I think Hammy is 

coming along just fine, and by about five years from now he’ll have caught up. 

 

I submit, Mr. Speaker, that the change in the long term average yield for wheat includes short crops and crop failures like 

1961, and yet the long term average has risen from 15 to 18 bushels per acre. This is not due only to the Divine Providence 

and rainfall, and not only because the farmer invests heavily in modern machinery. When one scans the 90 pages devoted to 

agriculture in the 1963 Public Accounts, one sees the great spectrum of the many-pronged attack on production. The picture 

of production and farm income has been completely altered by changing practises on the farms of Saskatchewan. The many 

programs of research and assistance cover water, fodder and pasture projects, farm labour and recruitment, livestock 

improvement, dairy improvements, assistance and inspection services for dairy, and frozen food plants, and then all of these 

other things which cost money, and which include the most recent million dollar estimate to establish the veterinary college. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while this adds up to an impressive program, credit must be given to the farmers utilizing the advances made by 

research, and while the budget figure total of almost $10,5000,000 for agriculture, represents direct payment to cover many 

different programs, it does not in fact give a true picture of the total spent on behalf of farm families in rural areas. While 

deploring that the government doesn’t spend more of its budget on the farmers, the opposition members unfailingly refuse to 

mention that urban and rural communities alike will share this year in the benefits of expenditures for public health of 

$10,720,000, medical and hospital $16,000,000 social welfare $8,870,000, education $26,500,000, highway and grid roads 

$15,710,000, and many others will be employed in public works projects, and this leads us to the drift of population from 

rural to urban centres. 

 



 

February 26th, 1964 

 

 

397 

Now, when a debate gets to this stage, other people have stolen all your thunder and your carefully prepared material has been 

used by some one else, but there’s something that I don’t think anyone else has mentioned so far in this debate, and I think it’s 

important. That is the size of the families today as compared to the pioneer families at the turn of the century. I was one of 

eight children, and many of you in this house were members of large families, but the trend in western countries is towards 

smaller families. Where 100 babies might represent only 10 or 12 families 30 years ago, 100 babies today may represent 20 or 

30 families, and conversely 20 families today may add only 40 or 50 people to the population, while 30 years ago, 20 families 

might add 100, 150, or even 200 young citizens to the population, and this of course, slows our rate of natural increase. 

However, Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member from Hanley, (Mr. Walker) said, population is not a measure of progress, and if it 

were, those ancient lands of China and India would never have fallen behind the western world. In fact they have begun to 

realize the threat of over-population and have taken steps to limit the size of families. 

 

The great social and industrial revolution that we have seen in our province is not related to population growth or population 

loss. The hon. member from Moosomin mentioned bringing people back in box cars. I wish to remind him that this is how 

they left, on top of box cars. Many thousands more left because of the stagnation of the thirties and the early forties and again 

I do not blame the Liberal party for this. This was part of a worldwide situation, I only blame them for accepting this as a 

natural condition. In the 12 year period between 1932 and 1944, the loss of population measured over 250,251 according to 

our figures. In 1942 alone, the province lost 60,000 people, but these were war years. Not only did we lose men in combat, 

but on the prairies young men and women enlisted in greater numbers than from the other provinces of Canada. Those who 

could not get into the armed forces enlisted in the army of production in war plants. The aircraft and shipbuilding on the west 

attracted some, but by far the greater number found jobs in Ontario, where the federal government very rapidly with public 

money built socialized war plants to produce a great industrial complex to produce ammunition. And they had to do this. They 

were justified in doing this. The only thing I didn’t like was when they gave many of them away to their friends at the end of 

the war for one dollar a piece. 

 

Many young women became civil servants as the secretariat mounted and the office staff of the government mushroomed to 

service a nation at war. Because we had no industry, because we lacked the basic ingredients for industrial expansion, namely 

power, water, access roads and skills that industry must have, we were bypassed for war plants and war contracts. We were 

considered to be a food producing area, and we were given incentives to produce eggs for powdered eggs, milk for powdered 

milk, and hogs for bacon for export, cattle and grain to feed our comrades in arms. The only exception to this was the limited 

production of timber in the far north. 

 

Demographic studies of the period from 1930 to 1950 indicates that during the depression, the mothers of first babies were 

much older than the young mothers of today. Because of drought and depression, marriages were postponed and in face so 

serious was the shortage of babies, that the bachelor Prime Minister McKenzie King followed France in introducing the baby 

bonus. He did, you’ve forgotten that. After the war, the war brides and the return of the troops remedied this condition to 

some extent, but still many of the gratuities earned by our young people in the forces were spent to remedy their lack of 

education because the war proved that they did not have the basic education to man the planes and to do the work necessary to 

win the war. The long period of enforced idleness in Britain had spawned a military campus where courses were available to 

all who could benefit by them. This was the real beginning of the adult education movement in Canada, and our recognition of 

the place of training for a new society. A society using complicated machines. But these young people no longer felt the need 

of the parental roof. Indeed, unless they could be content with coal-oil lamps, and outdoor toilets, and muddy lanes for roads, 

they found only frustration on the farm. In highly mechanized military operations they became trained engineers and there is 

no doubt that their influence has had an effect on our conversion to large-scale operations and mechanized agriculture. 

 

Let us top blaming each other for this. Like the hon. member for Wilkie, (Mr. Horsman) who made such a sensible 

contribution yesterday, as I said before, I bear no resentment to the individual people, but I do resent the continuous short 

selling of our province by the members of the opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mrs. Strum: — And this is not even smart on their party, because everybody 



 

February 26th, 1964 

 

 

398 

knows better and they wonder what’s the matter with the publicity that goes out on that side of the house all the time. 

 

So let us not waste time looking back, but let us admit that we have still much to do, before we have cleaned up the ugly 

pockets which still exist and heaven knows, there are enough of them. All you have to do is go North and teach in an Indian 

community as I did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to congratulate the lady member for Saskatoon, (Mrs. Strum ) for 

the wonderful presentation and I would also like to congratulate all the members of this house who have participated in the 

debate so far. I am sure that there have been good contributions whether we see eye to eye or not. I wish God’s speed and 

good health to all those of our friends in this legislature who are retiring from a voluntary point of view, and I would like to 

wish at this time, a very special good luck particularly to my seat mate, Mr. Horsman. 

 

I think I would be remiss if I wouldn’t make one slight correction to the hon. member from Saskatoon when she mentioned the 

question by comparing energy rates with Manitoba insofar as gas is concerned. The fact is that whenever the members of the 

government compare energy rates for gas in this province with other provinces, invariably they use Manitoba. And when they 

compare energy rates electricity with another province, they use the province of Alberta. In both cases, Manitoba is endowed 

by the grace of the good Lord to have energy, cheap electricity in its province, and they have developed it to the maximum. 

Alberta has natural gas resources and gas energy very cheaply. So it is rather unfair that when you compare one with the other 

in this respect. 

 

In the very little time allotted, I find it rather difficult to deal to any great degree with the budget speech. It shows of course, 

the ability of the government to waste the hard earned tax dollars and for not putting these tax dollars in the places where they 

are needed most, that is in the assisting of many of our underprivileged people in this province. The fumbling method used 

from time to time to explain why we have these surpluses and why we have this excessive taxation, indicates that we have 

quite a juggler in our Provincial Treasurer. You know if Ed Sullivan were to have been in town and looking for a new act, and 

happened to appear in our city on the day that the Provincial Treasurer presented his budget, I’m sure to his amazement, he 

would have found what he wanted. He was looking for a juggling act and he would have found it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — For juggling figures, our Provincial Treasurer is our man. Our charming lady from Saskatoon did a 

marvelous job this afternoon, for a short while . . . 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Provincial Treasurer): — On a point of privilege, I would like to suggest to you, that when the 

member for Gravelbourg suggests that any member in this house is juggling figures, it is practically the same as saying the 

member is telling something that is untrue, its unparliamentary and should be withdrawn. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — . . . I repeat, how these figures are handled, Mr. Speaker, I believe that our financial critic clearly explained 

the way and means that the Treasurer uses, its to minimize the complete debt of this province and minimize the tax burden, 

now if that is juggling or not juggling, figures can be made to do wonderful things, Mr. Speaker. I would like to tell the 

Provincial Treasurer at this point that you cannot overtax the people of this province continuously and go on your wild 

spending sprees without hurting someone. That someone invariably ends up to be the little fellow who is caught in the 

squeeze. Throughout his speech, Mr. Speaker, the Treasurer mentioned another horizon, no doubt, the second horizon that he 

saw. It must have been a mirage, because in my estimation, there is only one horizon. These horizons that you see, taxation or 

otherwise, will someday prove, Mr. Treasurer, to be your downfall, and that’s very soon. 

 



 

February 26th, 1964 

 

 

399 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — The CCF-NDP have constantly looked into the past, because they have really no complete plans for the 

future, that is plans for tomorrow. Socialist speakers in this house, have all referred to the thirties. Now, let us for a change 

refer to the future, let us look forward. Then where has your planning been? For political purposes, I believe only, their plans 

have been only to change their name, Their present administration, Mr. Speaker, has so often changed its name, I wonder 

really what they are today. Sometimes they are the CCF, other times they are the NDP. In 1960, they were CCF-NDP, what 

are they now? If they are the CCF-NDP, do they adhere to the Winnipeg declaration? If they are the CCF, do they adhere to 

the Regina Manifesto? This has not been clearly illustrated in or out of this house, Mr. Speaker. The inner powers of the NDP 

are chameleon like, they change their colors at will. I have yet to hear one member from that side of the house, Mr. Speaker, 

for that matter state that have reputed the principles laid down by the Winnipeg Declaration at Winnipeg, when they made that 

unholy alliance with labour. They have the nerve, Mr. Speaker, to climb upon the shoulders of the CLC to get a free ride. 

Many wage earners, Mr. Speaker, soon realized that it was dangerous for themselves politically to tie themselves to a political 

party, particularly a socialist party, that’s out to destroy the very source of income for the wage earners, in this case private 

capital through their industries. However, Mr. Speaker, the alliance did not pay off, and in a sneaky sort of way, they tried to 

disown them, labour, and now they’re going out as CCF. 

 

Why, Mr. Speaker, do they not make a public declaration and say so, as to what party they want, that they want no part of the 

NDP. Refute now, that they want no part of the NDP. Refute now, Mr. Speaker, the Winnipeg declaration. If they’re not the 

NDP, and they are the CCF, why don’t they say so. They turned their back, Mr. Speaker, on the very cradle of their birth, the 

farm people. When they went to Winnipeg, they rejected many farmers who opposed such a move, but they went on and 

utterly disregarded them and their friends. If they are not the CCF, they should deny such statements as the following, and I’ll 

quote from their Regina Manifesto; 

 

Transportation, communications and electrical power must first come in the list of industries to be socialized. Other such as 

mining, pulp and paper, and the distribution of coal and gasoline etc. 

 

It is quite obvious, Mr. Speaker, by this statement from the manifesto, why we have no pulp mills in this province. Why our 

mining industries have not kept pace with the other provinces. Such statements, Mr. Speaker, as, ―no CCF government will 

rest content until it has eradicated capitalism and put into operation the full program of socialized planning‖. 

 

Mr. Walker: — That’s your grandfather’s speech that you’re reading. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — It is no wonder, Mr. Speaker, with such statements that we lag behind other provinces. I challenge, Mr. 

Speaker, the members across the floor to stand and be counted and tell us they believe in socialism and its rigid controls or to 

refute them now. They should refute the manifesto now, or else stand up and say what they are, and open the door for free 

unrestricted industrial expansion, where you and I will benefit from taxes derived there – from. No wonder we lag behind and 

not once, Mr. Speaker, in eight years or in the last four or five years, where they have been changing their names back and 

forth, have they denied the manifesto or the declaration. You know, there’s a little animal with a long tail that climbs on the 

trees and changes its color that is what they are doing all the time. On top of that, Mr. Speaker, what do they do? They keep 

on dividing the people as they have done in the past, they’re going to keep on creating deception among the people. This, Mr. 

Speaker, is the truly Marx’s principle. 

 

The interests of labour, the farmer and the businessman as organized associations, are somewhat in conflict with each other. 

Their needs are bound to be far different, but by promoting these classes and these groups, divide and conquer. The aims of 

these associations, Mr. Speaker, are not compatible with one another, but good government policies are usually concerned for 

the people generally, the labourer as a man; the farmer; the businessman; but basically the welfare and the needs of a man and 

his family. We say as Liberals, that the guide posts of tomorrow are those of a society that will produce more goods, probably 

sometimes with less people, but with more employment, and therefore, we must plan for tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. 

 



 

February 26th, 1964 

 

 

400 

Liberal programs of expansion are for tomorrow and not yesterday. We as Liberals look to the tomorrow and we talk of the 

future. Where do they stand across the way? 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, the NDP, the socialist, the CCF, or what have you, they stand for the future, they have indicated so, 

by their actions, they believe in taxing the heels out of us, and our future generations. This is typical socialist planning. 

Planning to put into bondage our children and their children under the yoke of tax burden. This is a new type of fuedal system. 

It is state fuedalism and it is worse. It is easy to tax. It is very difficult to tax people when it is not fair. But when the economy 

is not buoyant, it is a little different question; when there are such things as recessions. This rising type of taxation is 

unbearable on the long run to any economy and Mr. Treasurer should remember that. The only break that we have had this 

year is the fabulous crop that we’ve had, and the good Lord put it there, Mr. Speaker. This has prevented the cold chills of 

hardships on all taxpayers of this province, and I suppose our socialist friends across the way will want to take credit for the 

wonderful buoyant economy that we have had at this moment. And you have noticed them from time to time throughout these 

speeches taking some credit for that buoyant economy. Oh, they are taking credit. Who shall we give credit to? To the wheat 

producers or to the NDP, for wheat sales, for the good wheat payments? To the NDP? Someone on the other side of the house 

said, ―so we have high taxes, so what. Look at the services we’re giving‖. I agree, they’re giving some services, but what loss 

of privileges and at what cost? Many of these are exorbitant charges right across the board. You’ve reduced the health rates, 

you’ve reduced the power rates this year, are you going to raise them after the election, should you be so fortunate to get 

elected as you have done in the past? 

 

There is an election in the offing, Mr. Speaker, and pre-election reductions are a peculiar situation; election increases, they are 

familiar with. I believe, that the reductions that they have put on, Mr. Speaker, are the greatest hoax ever perpetrated on the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Look what happened in the past, Mr. Speaker. . . 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Premier): — What about insurance? 

 

Mr. Coderre: — . . . I’m coming to that, Mr. Premier. Let us take the hospitalization tax for example. Before the 1956 

election the family rate was reduced from $45.00 to $35.00, and just after the election, up went the rates fro the 1961 year, 

and the yearly family rates rose from $35.00 to $48.00. Every time, before an election, Down! after the election, Up! In 1957, 

up, 1957 was $45.00. In 1959 $35.00, in 1961 $48.00. What happened to their automobile insurance? In 1951, their 

automobile insurance showed a deficit in this house of over $800,000. Rates were not increased., it was an election year. They 

were increased in 1957-1958, increased in 1958-1959 and more increases after the 1960 election. This year, another modest 

increase. They have covered up of course. When can there be an end to this, Mr. Speaker? There must be an end to these 

increases. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberals can provide and will provide a better opportunity for tomorrow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Policies of centralization in this government has proven detrimental to the people of Saskatchewan. Growth 

in Saskatchewan actually has been a growth in reverse. We know it has been caused by the socialists. Population decline, 

industrial decline and employment decline, tax increases, regulation increases and rail abandonment increases, is this their 

plan for economy? 

 



 

February 26th, 1964 

 

 

401 

About these plans for centralization, Mr. Speaker, the CCF say nothing. They are only too anxious that we’ll forget the fears 

that they have created, say by the proposed country system etc. They’re waiting for the opportune time. That is after the 

election, if you get elected, not a hope you have. 

 

I would draw attention of this house, Mr. Speaker, that we the people of Saskatchewan must be forever on our guard because 

of constant infringements on the rights of the people by the CCF-NDP. The CCF-NDP have done nothing except create fear in 

the hearts of the people of Saskatchewan. No wonder, Mr. Speaker, developments are not as great as they should be. 

Investment capital, except public capital has been reluctant to invest in any amount comparable to other provinces. Those who 

have invested, Mr. Speaker, have done so very cautiously. Others have passed us by. Why have we not developed like our 

sister provinces? Only, Mr. Speaker, by their actions, by the threat of expropriation, by threat of their public monopoly, by 

threat of control by regulation, by control by infiltration, control by centralization and we could go on and on, of our local 

governments. This has created sufficient fears into hearts of free men, Mr. Speaker, that we have not kept pace with the other 

provinces. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — We have lost the best brains and manpower of our province, and out of our university. In other words, 

they’ve kept everything out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that a bill of this legislature or an act of this legislature, should be passed to make it possible for the 

government of Saskatchewan, to present a bill or a dunner to the provinces of Manitoba, Alberta, and British Columbia, for 

having imported all these young men right out of our schools and university, because they owe us the debt of having educating 

the, and . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — And they have selling out of Saskatchewan, exporting them. Where, Mr. Speaker, do we as Liberals stand? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Party is a party of reform . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — We are travelling, Mr. Speaker, neither to the left nor to the right, but straight ahead. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — That phrase raises a howl from them, Mr. Speaker, because they are concerned. I would say, Mr. Speaker, 

that as Liberals, we stand right behind investment capital, be it private capital, be it corporate capital, be it co-operative 

capital or public capital, to make Saskatchewan a better province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Provincial Liberal policies, Mr. Speaker, plans and platforms are geared for a new tomorrow. Free the 

shackles of overtaxation. We on this side of the house, Mr. Speaker, have patient confidence in the ultimate justice of the 

people, and our hopes and our hopes of Saskatchewan for the future. It is quite obvious, Mr. Speaker, that I cannot support the 

motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 



 

February 26th, 1964 

 

 

402 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabaska): — Mr. Speaker, I would like first of all to comment on some of the remarks, the lady member 

from Saskatoon, (Mrs. Strum) made, and I think our hon. colleagues made a similar statement. It is very interesting to hear the 

lady member’s reference to the cheap power rates in this province. There are people in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, who 

will not go along with the contention of the hon. lady. Power rates all over my constituency are too high compared to the other 

provinces of this dominion and the ridiculous is reached in the settlement of Sandy Bay. When one considers that in the 

settlement of Sandy Bay, the residents who are one mile from the Churchill River power development which supplies all the 

electrical power to Flin Flon, the mines and Creighton are charged more by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation than the 

residents in Creighton, 70 miles away. These new horizons which the provincial treasurer refers to are very blue . . . 

 

Mr. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Better buy the company . . . 

 

Mr. Guy: — For instance, a 200 kilowatt hours power bill in Flin Flon is $5.25, Creighton $5.51, due to the five per cent tax, 

while in Sandy Bay, one mile from the source of power, it is $10.50. Now if that isn’t the most ridiculous situation, and that’s 

the way the power corporation in this province is helping the residents of Northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am going to refer first of all to the roads to resources program, as this is one of the most vital programs 

in my constituency. The budget contains provision to commence two major roads, one from the Churchill River north to 

Reindeer Lake, and one from Squaw Rapids to Cumberland House. These roads are desirable and I am pleased to see that 

these are included in the budget. However, I am quite concerned over the fact that the Sandy Bay, Island Falls, Pelican 

Narrows road was not specifically included in the budget for this year. In 1960, this road was made up as an election promise 

to the people of Sandy Bay and Island Falls, since then Pelican Narrows has been included in the plans for this road. It soon 

became obvious that it was only an election promise, so the people of these communities formed a road association. Since that 

time they have worked ceaselessly and tirelessly to get action on this road. This government kept blaming the federal 

government for not including this road in the road to resources program, although the federal government kept assuring them 

that if they would recommend a road, they would be given favourable consideration. In January 1963, the Minister of Natural 

Resources and other officials met with the road association and promised they would make this recommendation immediately. 

June came and this was still not done, it was not until late July, that the federal government, Federal Northern Affairs Minister 

came to Regina, and while here, the announcement was made that our road to Island Falls and Sandy Bay, and the 

Cumberland House road would be included in the roads to resources program. It is perfectly clear, Mr. Speaker, that the 

willingness of the federal government to see these roads included for the benefit of Saskatchewan people embarrassed the 

minister into finally making the request which was immediately accepted. 

 

When we met the minister in January last year, he made it clear that the Cumberland House road and our road would have 

equal priority, which were pleased to acknowledge even though our road had been first mentioned and applied for. Since that 

time, $65,000 has been spent on the Cumberland House road, while on $29,000 for preliminary work has been spent on the 

Sandy Bay road. The fact that this road is not specifically mentioned in the budget, and the fact that the capital expenditure 

for roads and air fields for the coming year has been decreased by $351,000, leaves great doubts in our mind that much work 

will be done on this road this year. We hope that when the estimates come up that the minister will be able to assure us that 

our road is receiving equal priority and that a substantial amount will be spent in construction during the coming year. The 

road from Churchill to Reindeer Lake will open up a good potential mineral area. It is to be hoped however, that the scandal 

attached to the building of the portion of this road from La Ronge to the Churchill River which I referred to earlier in this 

house, by the Department of Highways, will not be repeated on this stretch of the highway. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 



 

February 26th, 1964 

 

 

403 

Mr. Guy: — Some consideration to tendering this project to private companies, although this idea is abhorred by the 

socialists opposite, should be given to avoid the inefficiency and waste of time, money and effort, that occurred last time. 

Now it is apparent that with a reduction of $350,000 in the amount spent on northern roads and air fields, that many northern 

residents will still be isolated for several months of the year, during the freeze up and break up. This reduction coming on the 

heels of a $130,000 reduction last year, is hard to understand by our northern residents when they hear of the four lane 

highways, new bridges and grants for grid roads in the southern part of the province. 

 

I am thinking of those people in the communities of Stanley, South End Reindeer, Wellestone, Fond Du Lac, who have no 

hope of a road for many years and who have petitioned the government on many occasions for consideration of a legitimate 

plea for air field construction. These people have the same right as the people in the south for the necessary services to protect 

life and limb. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Guy: — These people don’t ask for very much, Mr. Speaker, but they deserve more than promises for more abundant 

living which this government has no intention of carrying out. While on the topic of communication, I want to pay tribute to 

the radio operators who man the outpost DNR radio station in the northern part of this province. Since the inception of radio 

service to all northern communities, they have been instrumental in saving many lives, but they have told me also, they dread 

the time they must send messages for health services necessary to save a life, knowing full well, these services cannot be 

provided due to the lack of roads or lack of landing strips. It is also to be hoped that Saskatchewan Government Telephones 

will continue at a stepped up pace the extension of micro-wave service to outlying areas. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it was obvious from this budget that the Provincial Treasurer has become so intoxicated with the new 

developments that have occurred in the potash and helium industry that he has completely forgotten the role that metal mining 

has played in the past in the economy of this province, and the role it could still play under different government policies. 

After all, a consciencious parent does not forsake his first born when new additions come along. In this budget, two references 

were made to our northern resources. On page six, appeared this sentence, 

 

 Further developments in metal mining and in forestry can be expected. 

 

and on page 15, we have; 

 

 We have incentive programs to stimulate mineral exploration in the north. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if the further developments and incentive program referred to are no better than the ones this government 

has practiced for 20 years, they may as well be forgotten. The greatest failure that this government will be condemned for in 

the coming election will be its failure to develop the human and natural resources of our province, and nowhere is this more 

noticable than in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

We find that the further development and incentive programs of this government have been so successful that the value of 

metallic mineral production has declined for the fourth consecutive year, from $92,000,000 in 1958-1959 to $68,000,000 in 

1962-1963. Give this government 12 more years and at that rate metal mining would go out of existence. Their exploration 

policies have been so successful there has been a corresponding drop in claims stake from 2,540 to 1,301 during the same 

period. Their Prospectors Assistance Plan and Native Assistance Plan have been failures also, with the result that explorations 

and prospecting are at a virtual stand still. This is most unfortunate when we consider that perhaps with the exception of the 

tourist industry, mining is the industry in which the immediate future of northern Saskatchewan will most likely depend. 

 



 

February 26th, 1964 

 

 

404 

Now, let us see how successful our forest development has been. A study of reports show that the value of forest products 

produced decreased from 8,250,000 in 1959 to 7,500,000 in 1962, and total revenue dropped from $725,000 to $410,000. 

This is truly another successful program of our socialists. The government will say that this shows good conservation policy. 

Mr. Speaker, the only conservation shown here is in the ideas and imagination of the government opposite. The Stanford 

report which this government is so proud of, says; 

 

 Our forest could sustain an annual depletion of 108,000,000 cubic feet. 

 

And in the worst fire year that this province ever had, the government only took 60 per cent of the allowable cut, and in a 

normal fire year, only 25 per cent of the allowable cut was taken. The report also said that we could maintain six pulp mills, 

but after 20 years of socialism, we have non. We are not dismayed, we have had four promises with the fifth promise under 

consideration, as the Minister of Industry and Information says. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Guy: — The truth is, Mr. Speaker, what conservation is to this government is restriction, compulsion and stagnation to 

the province and to the people in the forest industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Guy: — The third major resource industry in northern Saskatchewan is the commercial fishing industry, and we find a 

similar pattern here. Last year out of a total production limit of 21,000,000 pounds, only 68 per cent was actually taken. 

 

There, Mr. Speaker, are the three most important natural resources which are not being developed to their full potential for the 

benefit of our northern residents. What is the government’s reply when asked about the above lack of development? It was 

given by the Premier and the hon. Minister of Natural Resources when they returned from a tour of the north this fall and said; 

 

 The north’s natural resources are not enough to provide a living for the residents. 

 

The truth of this statement is that they are not enough under the socialist plan for development. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Guy: — But this discovery after 19 years in government, if it is true, has become rather belatedly and is of little 

condolence to the people living there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Party cannot share this defeatist attitude of the government. Some resources are limited to be sure, 

but today, there has been a lack of development rather than a lack of resources. The figures that I have just mentioned will 

prove this point. 

 

We feel that with the free enterprise principles and policies of a Liberal government, that the future of the north is not the bare 

and economic wasteland envisioned by the Premier and his cabinet, but a land full of promise and abundance for those with 

the imagination, faith and the willingness to develop it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Through the Premier’s and the Minister of Natural Resources’ own admission the government opposite has 

failed to develop the human resources of northern Saskatchewan also, because on their return from this same tour, they 

reported; 

 



 

February 26th, 1964 

 

 

405 

That the northern native is no longer happy with his lot. He is most unhappy to subsist on social aid. The people need work, 

better housing and more opportunities. 

 

This is true, Mr. Speaker, the independent spirit of the far northern native is not happy, but he has no choice after 19 years of 

socialist attempt to control every action of his life. Any hope for improvement appears remote when one considers that the 

natural population of our northland will double within the next ten to 15 years. The socialist approach to the problem has been 

to emphasize the social development while ignore the economic development. This might be considered a humanitarian 

approach but it is not a realistical or practical one. It should be recognized that economic and social development must come 

together, a strong economic climate will go a long way to solving many of the social problems. It is obvious that the policies 

of the NDP government have failed, so a new Liberal government must adopt several fundamental policies to bring about the 

desired economic and social development. Since past and present policies are so obviously a failure, the immediate need is a 

searching assessment of these policies as they are related to the potential northern Saskatchewan. If this is done, it is quite 

probable that a need for a complete administrative overhaul will be shown. At present the whole administrative process is 

bogged down with too many departments, too many ministers, too many policies, too many overlapping of cost, time and 

authority, and too much politics. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Guy: — The result is that confusion reigns supreme. Orders come from Regina, are counteracted in Prince Albert and 

probably never reach the northern regions at all. Many of the officials involved have never seen the north, let alone 

understand it. Political expediency has become the byword for northern Saskatchewan under this government and I was 

amazed when I read a report of the address of the Minister of Natural Resources, which he gave to this year’s Trappers 

Convention. This is an opportunity for the minister to meet with delegates from all areas from the far north, and this is his 

opportunity to outline programs and plans the government has for their area. But the minister chose to make a political speech 

on behalf of the members for Cumberland and Meadow Lake. I’d like to refer to a clipping in the Prince Albert Herald which 

had a report of his speech, and this is what the hon. minister said; 

 

He cautioned his audience that it was most important for the settlers of the north to have the right representation in Regina 

and Ottawa. He referred to W.J. Berezowsky, MLA for Cumberland and Martin Semchuk MLA for Meadow Lake. Later on 

he said, its better to chose someone you know that a new one who might miss the target. 

 

The socialist target of course. I would imagine that the specific plea for the two MLA’s mentioned was no doubt to overcome 

the bad image that these two MLA’s created with the disgusting performance at Loon Lake during the Christmas season. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, the trappers returned from that convention extremely disappointed and with a firmer conviction 

than ever before that the only interest of the government opposite is a political one. The convention was summed up by one of 

the delegates, when he was asked about the convention he said, as it was reported in the Prince Albert Herald, 

 

Less talk and more action was urged by delegates who felt that more time should be spent on demonstrating trapping etc, 

instead of listening to political speeches. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 



 

February 26th, 1964 

 

 

406 

Mr. Guy: — Economic expansion can be and will be under a Liberal government achieved by a return to the principles of 

free responsible enterprise. This will mean that private co-operative and government agencies will work together to bring 

about development instead of against each other as they do at present. They will each in his own way play an individual and 

combined role in the future of the north. The socialists opposite when they took office, did all in their power to eradicate 

private enterprise and were amazingly successful. Their first report stated that to be consistent with true socialism, there must 

be an orderly change to social ownership in the development of our natural resources. This social ownership was attempted by 

a group of crown corporations. The record is clear in these failures. Crown corporation after crown corporation was formed, 

lost the taxpayer’s money and was abandoned, until only those which had a complete monopoly and were subsidized by 

government, remained to continue losing money. Marketing services came and went, exploited the fishermen and trappers to 

the limit of their ability to pay, went broke and disappeared, or at least, Mr. Speaker, I should say the name disappeared, 

although the same old wolves appeared now in sheep clothing and under the name of Northern Co-operative Services. 

 

When the government announced the turning of the fish marketing services and northern trading stores over to co-operatives, 

owned and operated by the people themselves, it was greeted with enthusiasm. The local people tried, they set up local boards 

of directors and were ready to give the co-ops a fair trial, and Mr. Speaker, they have tried to make these co-ops a success, but 

it was an impossibility under the guidance of this government. For who appeared on the central board of directors? No other 

than those who failed so miserably in the administration of the marketing services. They had milked the people dry as a 

marketing service and could not resist the desire to milk them dry again, when they freshened as co-operatives. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Since that time, they have hired a flock of advisers based on political philosophy rather than business 

experience, who have been able to keep the local organizations thoroughly confused. Local directors have little to say and are 

at the mercy of the glib socialists from the central board and other government departments. Now, in spite of accusations from 

the members opposite that I am opposed to our northern Co-ops, I am going to say that I think that the establishment of co-

operative societies which follow the true principles of co-operation of open and voluntary membership, democratic control 

and non-political are good for the people of the north. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Guy: — But I am opposed to government controlled organizations using the name of Co-op to exploit the people of my 

constituency. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Guy: — I can assure these people that I will not rest until they are free to run their organizations as a true co-operative 

for the benefit of the members. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Guy: — I am sorry that I haven’t time to give all the sorry and sordid details of the record of the co-operatives but I am 

going to say before I go off the air, one thing to these people who are members of these co-ops. When they have their meeting 

later on this month, above all, I urge them not to be overwhelmed by the flock of government officials that will descend upon 

them, they should stand up for their rights, demand a full accounting to find where their money goes, find out who gets the 

commission and what they did 



 

February 26th, 1964 

 

 

407 

to earn it. Find out why the prices paid are so low. Find out their administration expense, ask for the salaries of the co-op 

advisors and management and compare it with what they earn for an honest day’s work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Remember that the co-operative organizations are for the benefit of them, the people, not the government and 

the results should bear this in mind. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to go back to some of the figures which I have here in regard to our northern Co-op Fisheries. 

I have here a statement from Co-op Fisheries for Barrier Lake for the summer of 1963. Now in the past the reply to my claims 

regarding Co-op Fisheries Limited by members opposite has been that co-op members do not have the opportunity to do any 

better anywhere else. Today I am going to show you that this is not true and I also have some figures from private fish dealers. 

Now this statement that I refer to from the Co-op Fisheries Limited for the summer of 1963, shows a total sales of $10,282.94 

and a total expense of $9,378.38. The total available for fishermen was $1,004.00 or ten per cent of what their fish sold for. 

When one considers that there were 57,423 pounds of fish involved in this particular operation, it worked out that the 

fishermen received an average of 1-7/10 cents a pound. I happen to know this particular operation, and I know that the 

fishermen used their own nets, their own boats, their own motors, they even had to put up their own ice and shavings during 

the winter. The total expenses, I would like to look at for just a moment, show that the Co-operative Fisheries Limited 

Commission was $1,243. or 12 per cent of sales. If that isn’t a great rate of interest, 12 per cent commission on the sales of 

fish from this lake. The charge for the use of the Beaver Lake plant was $2,417. I thought they owned these plants. I thought 

they were being given to them, here they are being charged $2,500. practically for the use of this plant, during one summer 

season. Now I also have the record of total initial and final payments for this particular operation for the last three years. 

Whitefish, B-whitefish 5¢, pickerel 6¢, jackfish 2¢, same price over the last three years. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to point out that at this particular time when the initial payment was made they over-paid 

the area $1,793 by paying the prices of 5¢ for white, 6¢ for pickerel and 2¢ for jackfish. So this is what we have existing 

today, we have an operator who went in there figuring that the government would sell his fish at the best prices possible, he 

invested $1,400. in groceries and wages and so on, he sold $10,282.00 worth of fish, he received $2,797.00 from which he 

has to pay bay $1,793.00 because there was an overpayment to the area. So he will start next year $1,793.00 in the hole plus 

$400.00 loss from this year’s operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also have in my hand some statements from Cameron Fish Producers, a private dealer, and if we look at this 

statement of which I have chosen the same month of the year, the summer months when the price this dealer was able to get 

on the fish market was the same as the co-op fish services were able to obtain. We find that on one statement there was . . . 

 

Hon. Frank Meakes (Minister of Co-operation and Co-operative Development): — What date? 

 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Sit down. 

 

Mr. Guy: — The minister can ask all the questions he likes when I finish my speech. 

 

Mr. Meakes: — What place are you quoting now? 

 



 

February 26th, 1964 

 

 

408 

Mr. Guy: — This was Macoun Lake, and I would note that Macoun Lake is the same flying distance from the fish marketing 

plant that the previous lake was. All right, now these are the figures. Twenty-eight hundred and ninety pounds of fish brought 

the fishermen $330.54 or 11¢ a pound average. Another statement here shows 2,622 pounds of fish brought $296.26 or ten 

cents a pound average. I can go through these statements and show you where the fishermen received anywhere from nine to 

11¢ a pound. That isn’t the whole story, because these fishermen did not provide any nets, they did not provide any motors, 

they did not provide any boats, they did not provide any capital at all, they went out there and this was the money they 

received on the lake. Flying and everything else was covered by the fish dealer. 

 

Now I would like to refer to the actual prices paid for the fish and I am going to confine it to pickerel because this is the only 

fish that appears on both statements in any large quantity. We find that the price for pickerel in the operation at Barrier Lake 

was 6¢ a pound. We find here on these statements that the price for pickerel in June to the person right on the lake was 12¢ 

pound, and here is another one for June, where it was 14¢ per pound, and here is another one where it was 12¢ a pound, here 

is another one for 14¢ a pound and I can go on and if you go back into March, you will find that they were getting form 20¢ to 

29¢ a pound for pickerel. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, how do you account for these particular statements that are issued by co-op management and by these 

private dealers? The truth is, Mr. Speaker, that the local fish co-ops under the central co-op fisheries lack guidance. 

Fishermen could make more by catching 30,000 pounds during the seasons of the year when the price is high, than by 

spreading 50,000 pounds over the whole year. But the C.F.L. directors and salesmen would rather see the fishermen take out 

50,000 pounds, even though it might be economically not feasible because they are paid on a per pound basis. That is why 

they don’t care whether the fishermen go out and fish on economical lakes, they are going to get their pint of blood from 

every bit of work that these fishermen do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Guy: — So if co-op management advisers would get out into the filed and do their job and forget playing politics and tell 

these fishermen when to fish and when not to fish, when the price is good and when the price is bad, then not only would we 

conserve the fish that are in these lakes, but we would conserve the sweat and energy of the fishermen who are going out to 

take the catch. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the co-op era of this government as we have seen has not been too successful as yet. So we 

find that the socialists befuddled and hanging from the ropes, are certainly not the ―greatest‖ in the terms of the new 

heavyweight champion of the world. To save their political life, they have swallowed their pride and are desperately making 

overtures to private enterprises to come to their rescue in developing the north to help save their political hide. But to date, 

private enterprise and investment, aware of the stated aim of this government, have not taken the bait, because evidence 

remains that they don’t mean it. Now as long as this attitude continues to exist, private enterprise will not return. But I can 

assure all people young and old, all organizations, private, co-operative or otherwise, who are willing to risk their time, 

energy and capital in the development of our resources, that under a Liberal administration, they will receive just and equal 

treatment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Encouragement and financial assistance will be given for prospecting, exploration and development. 

Compulsive restriction and monopoly control will be removed. We want to part of the socialist or co-operative state. We want 

a system of free responsible enterprise, where private business and investment will work side by side with co-operative 

endeavor under the wise guidance of government for the benefit of everyone concerned. 

 



 

February 26th, 1964 

 

 

409 

Now any program of development for the north must include a year round work and wages program that will provide northern 

work for northerners. Although the present government gives lip service to this policy, their practise leaves a lot to be desired. 

Many of our programs are weakened by the failure to employ our northern people to the best advantage, and I would like to 

point out several examples of this. Last year the Department of Natural Resources built a tourist museum in La Ronge and it 

cost them $8,000.00. Before this project was undertaken, they were going the length and breadth of the northern part of our 

province saying, ―we are going to provide work for our northerners‖, but when the museum was built, it was built by D.N.R. 

employees, many of them coming from the southern part of the province. There were only two local people who received 

limited work on this particular project. This turned out to be northern work for southerners. We have a similar situation on the 

lake patrol in La Ronge during the summer months. They brought in an outsider this year and then they spent two weeks 

hiring a local man to show him the lake. Why didn’t they give the local man the year round work? Now I understand, Mr. 

Speaker, that this particular chap was a close relative to one of the members opposite, but I am sure that had nothing to do 

with him getting the job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Now in the northern part of the province, there is a limited amount of summer work for students, and many of 

our students during the summer were able to receive employment with Saskair, and this has happened for quite a few years, 

but last year when these students, whose parents also work for Saskair, applied for employment, they were told that there was 

a new policy and no relatives of those employed already with the corporation could be employed, and then a week or two 

later, who arrives on the scene but the nephew of the managing director. Brought in to take back tales to the administration, of 

what the members were doing. 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — How cheap can you get? 

 

Mr. Guy: — I have never seen a cheaper outfit in my life than the government that sits across from me and the cabinet 

ministers in particular, emphasize the cheapness of that government. 

 

Winter works incentive programs administered for the benefit of those in need up there should be administered for that 

particular need rather than for business and political advantages, as it sometimes is done. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it was no wonder that the Deputy Minister of Natural Resources told the trappers convention employment 

opportunities are getting worse for northern residents. I am afraid that it will become worse until all the government’s friends 

and relations from the south are looked after. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Guy: — It is a shame to think that they have more friends and relatives wanting on the ―Gravy Train‖ than these 

increased industries in the south, which they boast about, can accommodate. 

 

Now the most important element in the social development of our northern people is generally acknowledged to be education. 

Through education they will improve their ability to be able to acquire jobs, they will be able to improve their health and 

living standards, and they will be able to understand, enjoy and contribute to a far greater degree to our way of life. 

 

Now I want to congratulate the federal and provincial governments for what they have achieved to date in the field of 

education for our northern people. I want especially to congratulate the Home and School Association in La Ronge for their 

interest, which has been instrumental in organizing adult education, vocational and up-grading courses. These programs are 

being well received and are showing positive results. 

 



 

February 26th, 1964 

 

 

410 

During the year the new technical school in Prince Albert was opened. This will be a great asset to the northern part of the 

province. But I am afraid however, that many of the programs still are not aimed to training our northern students in the 

necessary skills and techniques needed for their environment. It is to be hoped that as this school develops that it will give 

consideration to courses in the particular skills and training needed in our mining, forestry, fishing and construction industries. 

It is to be hoped that present vocational and technical schools that do exist can extend their scope to the training of students in 

a variety of fields whereby they can better equip themselves for employment opportunities. 

 

I would also at this time like to suggest that consideration should be given to a central high school for northern students. At 

present many students are going to high schools in schools scattered all over Saskatchewan and other provinces. It would be 

much better for them and for the department to have a central high schools, and I would respectfully submit that La Ronge 

would be a suitable location, as it is centrally located and already has made a beginning in providing vocational and technical 

facilities. 

 

In referring again to the budget, I was gratified to hear that a housing corporation was to be established for northern residents. 

I hope this government will continue to improve the living standards of these people. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am not going to take too much time of this house, but I have two or three other little interesting things I 

would like to say. 

 

Hon. A.G. Kuziak (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Exaggeration. 

 

Mr. Guy: — All right, Mr. Speaker, I have something here that may be an exaggeration. I hope it is, because I have in my 

hand here a document and I want to bring it to the attention of this house, a pamphlet that was distributed to the northern area 

teachers convention, and to my mind this sort of material is not in the best interests of the northern area teachers, nor northern 

Saskatchewan as a whole. 

 

The speaker who distributed this material was listed as a speaker on visual aids. It turned out to be a speech on the benefits of 

co-operation and the evils of free enterprise, and this is the document, Mr. Speaker. It is a little document written in about the 

type of printing and language that you would find for a grade two or three student and this is what it says: 

 

 Who owns the store? Let’s hear what the owners have to say. 

 

And on the front page is Joe’s store. 

 

My name is Joe. This is my store. I built it. My money bought the goods I sell in it, I pay you what I want to for your furs. 

You pay what I ask for my goods. If there is extra money when they year is over, it is mine. 

 

Now the next three pages go on: 

 

 This is our store. The Co-op store. 

 

Now that is fine, I have nothing against co-op stores, but why in the name of heavens should this type of political propaganda 

be put into the schools of our province at the grade two level. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

An Hon. Member: — Why don’t you try to understand it 

 

Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, this subversive attempt to infiltrate our northern schools with this propaganda should not be 

tolerated, and this points out what I said earlier about this government that it is against private enterprise, and I can show you 

how it is carried out in even a further example. 

 



 

February 26th, 1964 

 

 

411 

This same attitude was borne out by a statement made by A.C. Towill, supervisor of Community Development Services for 

the Department of Natural Resources, when addressing the Indian-Eskimo conference in Regina and I would like to refer to 

the statement that he made. According to the Leader Post, October 26th, 1963, it was reported that Mr. Towill used visual 

aids when addressing the members of the association. One chart depicted traders and trappers achieving a decent livelihood 

through forming their own producing and marketing co-operatives for the prime staples of the north. As an alternative the 

chart showed a number of fat traders, the capitalists puffing on big cigars and dollar signs for their eyes, as an example of 

possible exploitation. Now, Mr. Speaker, how on earth can we persuade the private enterprise business people to come to our 

province when this attitude is continually shown. Mr. Speaker, I would like to refer for just a moment to the Uranium City 

area. A few years ago, I moved a resolution that this government do everything possible to assist the municipal corporation 

and the people through a period of economic slow-down. If the government has done anything, or everything possible, it 

hasn’t borne too much fruit. The are is suffering to a considerable extent from the general slow-down in exploration and 

prosperity. Their immediate future depends on the discovery of new mineral wealth. People of the area have made 

considerable effort to establish a tourist industry, and more assistance from the tourist branch would be appreciated. The 

financial position of the municipal corporation of Uranium City has been made more difficult by the closing down of Gunner 

Mines. This has limited greatly the total assessment and tax base for the corporation, while not reducing to any great extent 

the services provided or the debt. I hope the government opposite will give them financial assistance when requested, and do 

all possible to diversity the economy of the area to maintain the community in its present position until the uranium industry 

revives. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, before closing I would like to refer for just a moment to the so-called Premier’s tour last fall, to the 

northern part of this province. It was rather astounding that his tour to find the problems of northern Saskatchewan should be 

confined to the Meadow Lake and Cumberland constituencies, when the constituency of Athabaska is larger than both of them 

combined and certainly the residents for the most part are more typical of northern conditions than in either of the other two 

constituencies. Now, the Premier has good excuse, I’ll grant you. He said it was the weather. The weather. But he managed to 

go by road to Creighton, he managed to go by road to Meadow Lake, from the central point of Prince Albert, one on the east 

side of province and one on the west, but he couldn’t take the road straight up the centre to La Ronge where the people were 

waiting there to get information and request some help from the government. I am afraid, Mr. Speaker, that this was merely a 

political tour for the benefit of two of his MLAs whose future in this house, to say the least, is very doubtful. And that his 

political tour for their benefit rather than any determined effort to find out the true problems of the north. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I cannot see any ―new horizons‖ and as there is a continual blurring of the present horizons in this 

province, I am afraid that I cannot support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Hon. O.A. Turnbull (Minister of Education): — Would the hon. member permit a question? 

 

Mr. Guy: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Turnbull: — As I understood you, you said there was political propaganda in our schools. I wonder if you could identify 

the school where this particular pamphlet was distributed. Second question, who was the speaker? Third, was it distributed 

during school hours? Fourth, was it authorized by the Department of Education? 

 

Mr. Guy: — I can answer those questions, Mr. Speaker, the pamphlet was this one that I have in my hand, put out by the Co-

operative Union of Saskatchewan, the speaker was T.A. Downs, supervisor of publicity in visual aid. Now, all right, just a 

minute . . . 

 

Mr. Turnbull: — What department? 

 



 

February 26th, 1964 

 

 

412 

Mr. Guy: — . . . all right, the Co-operative Union of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. R.A. Walker (Attorney-General): — You know, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Guy: — No, no, I want to answer this question. I’d love to answer this question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! will the members be quiet. The question was properly asked for information and the member 

chose to answer it, now let that member answer the question. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, the occasion of the presentation of this pamphlet to every teacher in the northern areas, 

was the Northern Education Annual Convention sponsored by the Northern Education Committee which is a part of the 

Department of Education of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Hon. C.G. Willis (Minister of Highways and Transportation): — I move to adjourn the debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! Will the member kindly refrain until we get a little order, please. 

 

Has the hon. member leave to adjourn the debate? 

 

I hear a number of noes that the member does not have leave to adjourn the debate. Those who want the debate adjourned say, 

Aye, and those opposed say, No. 

 

Debate adjourned 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

HON. O.A. TURNBULL: (Minster of Education) moved second reading of Bill No. 31 – An Act to amend The Larger 

School Units Act. 

 

He said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, bill no. 31 proposes certain amendments to the Larger Unit Act. These amendments are confined to three 

matters. One matter has to do with leave of absence to employees hired by unit boards, other than teachers and is designed in 

particular at this time to allow the unit board to grant leave of absence to their secretaries in order that they can avail 

themselves of the opportunity offered to them by the College of Commerce at the university. These opportunities are in 

connection with a two year course given by the College of Commerce, resulting in a certificate indicating certain 

examinations that have been taken. 

 

The second main point deals with the changes of the grant formula as related to the larger unit. Hon. members will notice that 

we are giving emphasis to the elementary interim certificate teachers, to the high school standard certificate teachers, and to 

the standard certificate teachers. 

 

We are introducing a further important amendment and that is we are reducing the factor which is weighted on the urban 

assessment, at 135 to 125, and we feel that this is a proper adjustment, because it is in the city systems where the accelerated 

growth in education is taking place, and 



 

February 26th, 1964 

 

 

413 

the city systems are pressed because of this rate of growth. 

 

The third matter is related to the maximum borrowing power of the units. School units may now borrow not more than 1½ per 

cent of their total assessment within any one year, or a total of not more than five per cent of the total assessment. The 

amendment that the house will be asked to consider will be to amend the total borrowing from five per cent to the total 

assessment to eight per cent of the total assessment. This is still considerably less than the city systems which have a total 

borrowing power of 15 per cent. With these remarks, Mr. Speaker, I would move second reading of this bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. E.I. WOOD: (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 32 – An Act to amend The Municipal 

Water Assistance Act, 1960. 

 

He said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill has to do with The Municipal Water Assistance Act. As the house is well aware, we have been making 

grants to urban municipalities, towns and villages, that is in regard to giving them assistance in the installation of sewer and 

water. We have hitherto not made these grants available to hamlets. I have had discussions with the rural municipality that 

will be involved in this, and they feel that it is a good principle that water and sewer be made available to hamlets. Grants 

under this act besides being made available to towns and villages, also are now procurable by the hamlets. Especially those 

hamlets that are able to qualify and to have the necessary substance to necessitate this sort of development. 

 

With these few words, I move second reading of this bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

MR. WOOD moved second reading of Bill No. 33, An Act to amend The Department of Municipal Affairs Act. 

 

He said: 

 

As you are aware the community planning branch of the Department of Municipal Affairs has to do with annexations to 

towns, villages and cities etc. in the province. We find that from time to time these things become rather controversial. In 

many instances, they are not. It is simply a matter of agreement between the town or village which is annexing certain portion 

of the rural municipality and the people that are involved in these annexation are also well agreed and there’s no problem at 

all involved. But in different instances, we do find that sometimes the property owners that are involved in these annexations 

are not in agreement with it and we find from time to time the rural municipality may not wish to have this property taken 

from their jurisdiction and put into the town, city of village. 

 

A year ago the Urban Municipal Association suggested that a committee be set up to deal with these matters. I am not 

prepared to turn over to the jurisdiction of a board this work; I think that the elected representatives should retain their control 

of the large per cent at least of the government of this province, but I do feel that there’s a good place in here for an advisory 

committee in regards to these places where trouble has arisen. I’ve discussed this matter with both the urban and the rural 

municipal people and they are in agreement with this, and our thinking is that we will be endeavoring to set up a board to 

assist the minister in these affairs. In many cases I have sometimed inadequate information regarding them. I think it would be 

much better to have a committee that are prepared to sit down and look at these matters, hear representation on both sides of 

the case, and give advice to the minister concerning what should be done on these annexations. 

 

It is my understanding that it is not possible for this sort of a board to be set up under the Municipal Affairs Act as it is at 

present, and this short amendment is giving us the authority to set up this sort of a board. 

 

With these words, I will move second reading to this bill. 

 



 

February 26th, 1964 

 

 

414 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — I wonder if the minister will permit a question for further clarification. I take it this is 

an advisory board to the minister, in order to advise him on this matter. Has this board any power making decisions that 

would be binding on any other municipality in this case? 

 

Mr. Wood: — Not insofar as this amendment is concerned. It gives us power to set up a board to advise the minister. The 

board that we are contemplating which I spoke about at some length would not, I feel have any binding powers themselves. 

They would make recommendations to the minister and the orders would be issued by the minister or Lieutenant-Governor in 

Council as the case may be. In the case of cities, it has to be by order of the Lieutenant Governor In Council. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

MR. WOOD moved second reading of Bill No. 34 – An Act to amend The Town Act. 

 

He said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill contains a number of amendments to the Town Act. There are none of them that I feel are controversial. 

They have been discussed with the urban municipal people on many occasions, and some of them could be advocated by 

them. I think some of them could be discussed in committee, and with this I will move second reading of this bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

MR. WOOD moved second reading of Bill No. 35–An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 1960. 

 

He said: 

 

This is an act to amend The Rural Municipality Act. There again are several minor amendments to the Rural Municipal Act. I 

do not think that it is too controversial. Again, they have been discussed by the rural municipal people and I don’t think there 

is anything in here that we’re going to find controversial and it can better be discussed in the committee as a whole, and I thus 

move second reading of this bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 p.m. 


