



















































Hansard: March 17, 1964


777 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
SIXTH SESSION – FOURTEENTH LEGISLATURE 

29th Day 

 

Tuesday, March 17, 1964. 
 
The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE BOWLING CONTEST WITH MAYOR AND ALDERMEN VS CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Telephones): — Before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I would like to bring to 
the attention of the house something that is very close to us here. To go back a little into history for the past fifteen years the 
official opening of the South Saskatchewan Plant bowling league has been started off by a game between the cabinet and the 
mayor and aldermen. Sometimes we have won, or often they have won. As a matter of fact, we won a year ago but the stakes 
were not very high. I think we bet these steps directly north of the building, the ones down into the lake, against the city hall. 
Well, we beat them but we didn’t have them sign a performance bond so we are still stuck with the steps, but they are 
welcome to come and take them anytime. 
 
However, this year the mayor decided, I think at the risk of some irate taxpayers when they come to pay the bill, that there 
would be a trophy for the winners, which will be moved back and forth from year to year. This year for the first time I was 
able to get five cabinet ministers to agree to go. Something always happens, one of them doesn’t get there so I took along the 
member from Rosetown as a spare, and he played a pretty good game too. The Minister of Natural Resources couldn’t come. 
But here we have the trophy; they beat us pretty badly the first game; we beat them the next two; and as a result had a higher 
score, but this very fine trophy ―Civic and Provincial Trophy, Five Pin Bowling Championship‖ is a very splendid thing and I 
want to thank the mayor for having been thoughtful enough to put it up for annual competition. So the names you see on here 
are, Kuziak, Wood, Williams, Willis and our friend Stevens. I don’t know just what the goddess here is doing but she is 
apparently giving the sign of victory here in some way or other, you will notice. That is all I have and you will probably see 
this back and forward over the years between the city and the cabinet. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

ST. PATRICK’S DAY TRIBUTES 
 

Mr. Ed. Whelan (Regina City): — Before the Orders of the Day Mr. Speaker, first I would like to congratulate the team that 
won the bowling cup, and second I would like to remind all members that this is the day when citizens who appreciate good 
humour, good fellowship, good music and good poetry, join that loquacious verbose and unpredictable group known as The 
Sons of Ireland. The tolerance of Irishmen stretches to the extremes, Mr. Speaker, when they take into their group of March 
17th people of every kind and creed and by so doing, prove their friendship and appreciation of others. People who may 
mistakenly be annoyed by reference to their racial origin will never find the same annoyance shown when you call an 
Irishman an Irishman. In all their songs and stories the exuberant good nature and good humour of an Irishman outweighs all 
his argumentative and impossible characteristics. In appreciation of his shortcomings and in appreciation of his immeasurable 
ego and his unequalled contribution to literature, music and politics and on behalf of all the members of the legislature, I 
would like to wish all Irishmen the best of health and the top of the morning. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Whelan: — On this day in this legislature, an Irishman would find the editor of the Leader Post is a good fellow. 
Incidentally, the representative of the Leader Post says this is going a bit too far. His roughest political opponent is found to 
be a fine gentleman and his most sarcastic critic a friend. Before I take my seat, Mr. Speaker, I should like to call attention 



 

March 17, 1964 
 

 
778 

of all members to a brown envelope on your desks, marked with the stamp of the Irish Embassy in Ottawa and in the envelope 
is a booklet called ―Ireland of the Welcome‖; this booklet from the old sod is a souvenir sent to us by His Excellency the Irish 
Ambassador to Canada, Patrick William Fay, and on behalf of all members, I would like to express our sincere thanks. 
 
The other day I received an advertisement for a book on the history of all Irish families. I could find out all about the Whelans 
for $21.00. After due consideration I decided not to spend the $21.00 for it might take five times as much to correct what I am 
sure would be wrong information. Certainly the temptation to find out about the Gallaghers and the McCarthys and the Foleys 
existed, but on second thought, like any other information in the book about the Whelans, it would likely be inaccurate or 
exaggerated. To all Irishmen, I say on this March 17th, good luck and good health. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. R.A. McCarthy (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, on this, probably the last occasion which I will have to pay tribute in 
this house to our Patron Saint, I just want to say a few words. I think I have spoken on this for a great number of years, and I 
have told you all I know about Ireland which isn’t very much, but I think I have told you all the stories that I know but I think 
that you will agree with me, Sir, that on this day there are only two classes of people, the Irish and those who wish they were, 
and I notice that the people on this side are all Irish; they are all properly dressed. I don’t see very many over there that are, 
but I want to congratulate the two ladies on their very nice dresses this morning; they look very nice. 
 
Now, I was rather interested to note the Regina member said about the history of Ireland, the history of clans. I suppose most 
of you know that in the early days of Ireland there were clans, just the same as there were in Scotland, the McCarthy clan were 
from the Lakes of Killarney. I’m not too sure where the Whelans came from, I think it was down in that fishing village, down 
in the other end . .  
 

Mr. Whelan: — Tell them more . .  
 

Mr. McCarthy: — I’m not very sure about that, but at any rate I have a shack down at the lake, it was brought from a 
Scotsman years ago, it had ―Bonnie Brae‖ on it. I didn’t like that so I changed it to ―Blarney Castle‖. Now a lot of people 
don’t know that this is ―Blarney Castle‖; it is right along the top. I have a lot of fun about this; people say ―Blarney Castle‖ 
and ask what that means but actually there is a history to Blarney Castle. 
 
Blarney Castle was built in the reign of Queen Elizabeth. The then head of the clan was a Member of Parliament. A friend of 
mine who travelled all around the world was coming back and he got back to Ireland and he intended to stay a week, but it 
was so nice that he stayed two weeks and he brought me this history. If any of you people are down at my shack, I will show 
you the history of Blarney Castle; it is quite interesting; it was built by the McCarthy clan; finally burned down once; they 
built it up again; it burned down a second time, and they built it up but they didn’t have enough money to pay for it so a 
Scotsman got a mortgage on it and I believe now it is under the control of a Scotsman. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. McCarthy: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not good at telling stories but I think I have told this one before Sir, but I’m going 
to attempt to tell you this. 
 
In the early days there were clans in Scotland and clans in Ireland and, of course, the person who became the head of them 
was the biggest fellow, the best fighter, and all this, and he had to defeat all the other chieftains before he became head of the 
Scottish clan. A great big giant had done this so there was a chap in Ireland and he had to beat all his clan. This Scottish guy 
decided he would go to Ireland and do battle with the Irish guy, of course, it was in the days when the Channel was low, and 
he being a big man walked across the Channel to Ireland. He was going up the road and he was wondering where this fellow 
lived, this Irishman, and they told him he lived right down there. This Irish guy’s wife looked out the window, and they had 
heard about this fellow, and he said ―My gracious here comes this Scotchman; he is a very big fellow; I don’t know whether I 



 

March 17, 1964 
 

 
779 

can handle him or not‖ and the wife said, ―Now, look, you leave it to me and I’ll look after it,‖ and he said ―All right, what do 
you want me to do?‖ She said, ―Go in there and get in bed and lay down and cover up.‖ That was all right; he did that. The 
Scotchman came along and knocked at the door and wanted to know if this was where the Irish giant lived, and she said yes, 
and he said ―I would like to meet him‖ and she said ―Unfortunately, he is away just now, but would you like to see the baby of 
the family‖ and he said he would, and he walked in and looked at this Irish guy, and thought it was the baby and he turned 
around and went back to Scotland. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure it would be unworthy of the Irish if the other race did not respond and 
say a word in appreciation of the contribution which they have made today in this house. I am sure, too, Mr. Speaker, that 
many of us will have to take advantage of the invitation of the member from Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) to go down and sit 
down with him some time and look over his books. I thought the member from Cannington was getting started a bit early on 
the 17th of March yesterday, when on one occasion the Minister of Mineral Resources was trying to agree with him and he 
said ―I don’t want you to agree with me‖. He beat the gun by a bit. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Lloyd: — I’m sure that few things illustrate the adaptability and the initiative and the imagination of the Irish more than 
what is claimed for this particular day. I say this because they recognize St. Patrick today and recognize it as his birthday, and 
the only thing wrong with this is, that St. Patrick, first of all wasn’t an Irishman and secondly he wasn’t born on March 17th, 
but we wish them well anyway. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. McCarthy: — I can’t quite take that. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. McCarthy: — I can’t quite take that, I was just reading a book on St. Patrick’s origin and it bears out what I say. There 
is only the Irish and those that wish they were. There are five different countries that claim him as their native son, so it bears 
out what I said, and what he said, of course, is wrong. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE MIDGET “B” HOCKEY CHAMPIONSHIP – TURTLEFORD 
 

Mr. Franklin E. Foley (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to join in this happy occasion the day dedicated to all 
Irish, and to thank those who have made a contribution on this day, particularly for the very fine material from the Irish 
Embassy, it is nice to be remembered at this time. 
 
I rise, especially, this morning, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate the community of Turtleford in my constituency, who on 
Saturday won the Provincial Midget ―B‖ Hockey Championship in a two game, total-point series against the Beechy 
Bombers. This is the third provincial championship to come to our community of Turtleford in the past recent years, and I’m 
sure that all hon. members would like to join with me in congratulating them on this accomplishment and wishing both the 
Turtleford Tigers and the Beechy Bombers lots of success in the future. 
 
Before I take my seat, Mr. Speaker, I want especially to express appreciation from this side of the house for the very fine 
contribution that the hon. member for Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) has made over the years on this particular day. I can recall, 
was it last year or the year before, the member coming into the Assembly, complete with his Irish hat, and I believe he was 
swinging his shillelagh, all set to do honourable combat to the distinct shame of the opposite side, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
believe there were any takers. 
 
Just in conclusion, a couple of bits of Irish wit, the author of this little selection is a Major McCarthy, no doubt related, he 
said: 
 



 

March 17, 1964 
 

 
780 

the love of the land dominates the Irishman’s every other urge. As a farmer of 60, outside my home town back in Tipperary 
put it, the girl I’m going to marry isn’t much to look at, but she has a darling bit of land. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE PROFESSOR A. HARDY 
 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity and privilege of 
bringing to the attention of the hon. members in the house another personage of fame. 
 
You have on your desks the ―Bundle Wagon‖ issued by an organization in Saskatoon, which contains a fine tribute and 
farewell to Professor A. Hardy formerly of the University of Saskatchewan Extension Department, who went to Ceylon on 
loan and who performed heroic works and service on behalf of the people in Ceylon in assisting them in agricultural 
advancements. Professor Hardy died December 3, 1963. I hope hon. members will read this farewell message to a man who 
contributed so much to agriculture in Saskatchewan. I think it can be summed up very briefly if one will look at the last 
paragraph in this message which says: 
 

And so has passed on a giant of a man, who first adopted Saskatchewan for his native land, and then took Ceylon to his 
bosom. In reality, the world was his parish, and all men were his brothers. To know him was to love him and admire him. 
His obituary can best be summed up in four simple words – Here was a Man. 

 
Here was a man who would rank beside, perhaps St. Patrick of Ireland, in having given us a worthwhile contribution to 
humanity; he was well known for his kindness, neighbourliness, and goodness and getting along well with people and serving 
people well. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE SASKATCHEWAN SAVINGS BONDS 
 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Provincial Treasurer): — Before the Orders of the Day, I would like to announce that his morning 
that there has been a very excellent response to this year’s savings bonds campaign. It will be necessary to stop the sales on 
Friday, March 20th at midnight. Sales returns received by the Treasury Department up to the close of business March 16th 
last night, amounted to $8,147,000. For the same period during last year’s savings bonds campaign, amounted to $7,188,000 
so we are practically a million ahead of last year. 
 
The closing sales date of March 20th this year, which corresponds with March 26th last year means that the selling period was 
15 days this year and for last year’s series it was 17 days, and I think, Sir, that by Friday night the amount will be well over 
our objective of what we would like to achieve. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

INQUIRY RE EXPROPRIATION LEGISLATION 
 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I hesitate to bring a Scotch note into the 
proceedings this morning, but being of Scotch ancestry, I was wondering after the expenditures made this past year for the 
purpose of having a group of the legislature meet in an expropriation committee and the announcement by the government in 
the throne speech that a bill would be placed before the house whether we are going to have the results of the work of this 
committee presented to us in the form of legislation before the present session concludes. 
 



 

March 17, 1964 
 

 
781 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I recall the words in the speech from the throne. It said that action would be 
taken at an early date, and I appreciate the fact that members might take from that it would be a bill of this particular session. I 
took the opportunity earlier to express appreciation for the work of the committee and the other committees as well. 
 
Whether or not a bill will be presented at this session is a matter of government policy which will be disclosed at the proper 
time. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
HON. W.S. LLOYD (Premier) moved second reading of Bill No. 65 – An Act to amend The Income Tax Act, 1961. 
 
He said: 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. Mr. Brockelbank, who has just left the house, I will just say a brief word of explanation on 
this bill. It is, as will be noted, An Act to amend The Income Tax Act, 1961. It is an amendment which has been requested by 
the government of Canada and which has been discussed with all of the provinces and agreed to by those provinces which 
have tax collection agreements with the federal government. 
 
It is necessary then to pass these amendments in order to comply with federal-provincial collection agreements. There are no 
changes in principle in the bill, they are of a technical and administrative nature, and as a result perhaps can be more 
adequately discussed in committee of the whole. 
 
With that brief word of explanation, I would move second reading on behalf of the Hon. Mr. Brockelbank. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Wood (Minister of Municipal Affairs) 
for second reading of Bill No. 61 – An Act to facilitate the Development of Industrial Communities. 
 

Mr. F.E. Foley (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, I have now had an opportunity of studying the bill, and I have no further 
comment. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 
 

MOTION TO DELAY ADJOURNMENT OF HOUSE 
 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, may I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Blakeney: 
 

That the adjournment of the house do not take place at the hour affixed by Standing Order 5 (3). 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

REPORT OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
 
By unanimous consent, the Assembly reverted to Routine Proceedings – presenting reports by standing and special 
committees. 
 
Mr. Thiessen, from the Select Standing Committee on Public Accounts and Printing, presents the first report of the said 
committee. 
 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move, seconded by Mr. 
Berezowsky: 
 



 

March 17, 1964 
 

 
782 

That the first report of the Select Standing Committee on Public Accounts and Printing, be now concurred in. 
 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to suggest that this matter is on division because of the refusal 
of the Attorney General to provide information that was requested by the . .  
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! Are you objecting to leave being granted? I haven’t put the motion yet. I will put the motion 
again, I think you misunderstand me. Is leave granted? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I cannot then propose the motion. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT AND PROROGATION 
 
At 10:25 o’clock p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor, having entered the chamber, took his seat on the throne and gave 
royal assent to the bills presented to him. 
 
His Honour the Lieutenant Governor then said: 
 
Mr. Speaker, and the Members of the Legislative Assembly: 
 
It is my duty to relieve you of further attendance at the Legislative Assembly. In doing so, I wish to thank you and 
congratulate you upon the work you have done. I wish also to express my confidence that the approval of the programs and 
plans presented to you will continue to provide the services necessary to the growth and development of our province. 
 
We are thankful for the fruits of last season’s bountiful harvest and for the opportunities to participate in a growing and 
developing economy. Your action in adopting legislation and plans relating to further agricultural and industrial development 
will contribute to the further growth of our province. 
 
You have again indicated your concern for young people by approving substantial increases in school grants, by making 
provision for additional vocational schools, by maintaining and extending student loans and bursaries, by passing legislation 
designed to further improve the training of teachers and by making provision for further development of our University. 
 
It is of utmost importance that the people of Saskatchewan have opportunity to enjoy leisure time. The development of the 
recreational resources of Saskatchewan is a public service meriting high priority. The decisions you have made to provide for 
further provincial parks, regional parks and picnic site developments, and to build additional roads in northern resource and 
recreational areas, will provide more of our citizens easier access to holiday areas. 
 
The need for adequate planning, development and use of the province’s water resources has become all the more apparent in 
light of the increased demands of agriculture, industry, communities and farm and urban homes. The decision you have made 
to create a Water Resources Commission will contribute further to the proper utilization and conservation of this vital 
resource. 
 
The Address you presented to her Majesty the Queen on the occasion of the birth of her third son reflects the sentiments and 
affection of the people of Saskatchewan who rejoice in this happy event. 
 
I thank you for the provision you have made to meet the further requirements of the public service and assure you the sum of 
money voted will be used economically, prudently and in the public interest. 
 
In taking leave of you, I desire to thank you for the manner in which you have devoted your energies to the activities of the 
session and wish you the full blessing of Providence as you return again to your respective homes. 
 



 

March 17, 1964 
 

 
783 

The Hon. Mr. Walker, Provincial Secretary, then said: 
 
Mr. Speaker, and Members of the Legislative Assembly: 
 
It is the will and pleasure of His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor that this Legislative Assembly be prorogued until it pleases 
His Honour to summon the same for the dispatch of business, and the Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 
 


