



















































Hansard: March 05, 1964


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 

SIXTH SESSION – FOURTEENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

21st Day 
 

Thursday, March 5th, 1964 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER RE TABLING OF LETTER 
 

Mr. Speaker: — While I am on feet, calling Orders of the day, I would like to make the following statement. 

 

The house apparently found itself in some difficulty the other evening when the hon. Minister of Social Welfare quoted 

from a private letter, which made reference to the proceedings in this house during the present session. 

 

I would draw to the attention of the hon. members, citation 157-5, in the fourth edition of Beauchesne‘s Parliamentary 

Rules and forms, in which he says: 

 

It is not in order to read articles in newspapers, letters or communications, emanating from persons outside the house 

and referring, or commenting upon, or denying anything that is said by a member, or expressing any opinions 

reflecting on proceedings within the house. 

 

It would therefore appear that the hon. minister was out of order simply by reading the letter. 

 

The rules with respect to tabling documents quoted in debate are quite clear: official state papers must not be quoted in 

debate unless the member is prepared to lay the document on the table; the same rule does not, however, apply to 

private letters and I would refer the house to Beauchesne, fourth edition, citation 159-3 and Mr. Speaker Parker‘s ruling 

in this house on February 4, 1935, February 20, 1936 and February 9, 1938. 

 

Nevertheless, since the house is entitled to the same information as the member who quotes from a private letter, it has 

become established that even private correspondence quoted in the house must be tabled, or at the very least, the 

member must divulge to the house the name and address of the sender, unless the member himself is prepared to take 

full responsibility for the truth and accuracy of the contents of the correspondence. I would in this connection cite 

Beauchesne again, the fourth edition, citation 179-2. 

 

If a member proposes to read a communication in its entirety, or even a portion, without divulging the name and 

address of the sender and the member refuses to take the responsibility for the truth and accuracy of the contents, 

such a communication should be laid on the table and particularly if so desired by any member of the house. 

 

In my own opinion, the most acceptable practice is for the member who has quoted from a private letter to lay the 

document on the table. 

 

I do not feel that it would be in order for me to insist that the minister table this correspondence for I am sure that the 

house would want to respect the privacy of correspondence, but I feel that since the house permitted the minister to 

quote from the document in the debate the other evening and since he offered at that time to table the document, he 

should either lay the letter on the table or divulge the name and address of the sender or he himself should accept fully 

responsibility for the truth and accuracy of the statements quoted. 

 



March 5, 1964 

 

 
646 

Hon. A.M. Nicholson (Minister of Social Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank you for your ruling. I am 

pleased to lay the letter on the table; I have communicated with the writer; the writer is Mr. M.G. Henderson, the 

manager of the Saskatoon branch of the Toronto Dominion Bank. He has no objection whatever to this letter, which I 

explained was a copy of a letter to the Provincial Treasurer written on the 24th of February. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Hon. R.A. Walker (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to, on behalf of all the members of the 

legislature, welcome to the galleries here this afternoon, a very fine, a very outstanding class of students from the new 

composite high school located at Clavet. That school, as hon. members have noted, may have noted is pictured in the 

annual report of the Department of Education. It is an outstanding school because of its architecture and because of its 

facilities but it is also an outstanding school, Mr. Speaker, because of the fine young people who attend it, and we have 

here an excellent sample of the classes who attend that school, accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Adrian. They are in 

the Speaker‘s gallery here today and I am sure I don‘t have to point out just where they are, if you look around you will 

see a flock of very bright young people, and that is them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of every member of the legislature I want to welcome them here, I want to express the hope that 

they will have a fine tour through the natural history museum and that they will have a safe journey back and that some 

of them eventually will find their way into this legislature as members. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Ed Whelan (Regina city): — On behalf of all the hon. members I would like to welcome to this assembly 70 

intelligent, capable, attractive young ladies from Sacred Heart Academy, they are the grade 12 students from that 

school, they are with their principal Sister Mary Winnifred and Sister Mary St. Matthew, and I am sure all hon. 

members will extend to them our sincere wish that their stay with us this afternoon will be both pleasant and 

informative. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mrs. Marjorie Cooper (Regina city): — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to call your attention to a very fine group of 

young people in the Speaker‘s gallery, if you are looking for bright students they come from Argyle School, grade 8 

and that is them. I am sure that we welcome them here, they are here with their teacher, Mrs. Dowrin, and I hope that 

they will find that their visit here is educational and enjoyable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT OF DEATH OF HARRY JONES, M.P. FOR SASKATOON 
 

Mr. Nicholson: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all members have learned with regret of the passing of Harry Jones, 

M.P. for Saskatoon. Mr. Jones was born in the Lloydminster district, attending public and high school there, collegiate 

and university in Saskatoon. He joined the R.C.A.F. in 1941, and had a most distinguished career with the armed 

services. Since his return to Canada he was admitted to the bar, practised law and was elected to the House of 

Commons in 1957. I had the good fortune to be a member of the House of Commons during that parliament with Mr. 

Jones. He was the parliamentary assistant to the Minister of Veterans‘ Affairs. Mr. Jones was active in the John 

Howard Society, and a great number of national and international organizations during his short lifetime. I am sure that 

all hon. members will wish to extend deepest sympathy to Mrs. Jones and the family in the passing of such a young and 

promising Canadian. 

 



March 5, 1964 

 

647 

Mr. A.T Stone (Saskatoon City): — I, too, would like to express the sorrow of all the people of the city of Saskatoon 

over the passing of Harry Jones, Member of Parliament for that city. 

 

I don‘t think there is any person who has captured the hearts of so many people and the loss will be greatly felt in the 

community. 

 

I first became acquainted with Harry while he was at university, and was president of the Young 

Progressive-Conservative Party and our friendship has been most cordial. It was very sad and a difficulty thing for me 

to believe that such a charming person and one who had, and could, contribute so much to the community would be 

taken away in his prime of life. I, too, wish to add my condolences to his family in their bereavement. 

 

Mrs. M.J. Batten (Humboldt): — I would like to join, as I am sure all the other members would, in expressing our 

sympathy to the bereaved family and I would like to say, that all those of us who have had anything to do with the late 

Harry Jones were impressed by his courage, his gallantry, his utmost and heartfelt dedication to his party and to his 

country. He did a task well, he carried on even when his strength gave out, and I am sure that he has set a fine example 

for all of us in public life to follow. 

 

CORRECTION TO NEWSPAPER REPORT 
 

Mr. D.T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — A news report of an exchange in this legislature yesterday, while 

the Minister of Mineral Resources was speaking, mentioned my name as the one taking part. I want to draw to your 

attention, Mr. Speaker, that I was not in the house when the exchange took place, so, therefore, could not be involved. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION RE RAIL LINE ABANDONMENT 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on Mr. Thiessen‘s motion re rail line abandonment and the proposed 

amendment thereto. 

 

Mr. J.H. Staveley (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, during the debate on amendment two weeks ago, I pointed out in this 

house that the possibility of abandonment of hundreds of miles of railway line in Saskatchewan was the cause of 

utmost concern to the people of this province. 

 

I also stated I was sure that every member of this legislature was opposed to any wholesale abandonment of branch 

lines in Saskatchewan and that the only difference in our opinion was probably a matter of degree and approach. Just 

before I adjourned, or rather moved adjournment of that debate, I was engaged in a discussion with the hon. Premier 

and the hon. Minister of Agriculture on the question as to where I had secured my information with regard to the 

committee to be set up by the government of Canada to deal with this problem, and which was to be known as the 

Branch Line Rationalization Committee. Now when I advised the house the source of this information I was accused by 

the Minister of Agriculture of making an official announcement on behalf of the federal government and divulging 

confidential information. 

 

I am sure that all hon. members of this house will realize that these were only frivolous statements. Now the only 

reason, Mr. Speaker, that I gave the source of that information was that all hon. members of this house might know that 

the statement was based on fact and not fiction, and for the further information of the house I would like to say that an 

hour after our personal conversation, the hon. Mr. McIlraith told 175 people at a public banquet what he had told me 

and certainly there was nothing confidential about it whatsoever. 

 

But the hon. Minister of Agriculture appeared to know nothing about the plans of the federal government to deal with 

this problem which faces the people of our province. Actually, I thought that I was being rather kind to him, because 

what I might have said was that if he read the newspapers I am sure he would have been aware of the situation. I notice 

too that the hon. Minister of Mineral Resources, has made quite an issue over the fact that he has to read to page 13 in 
the Regina Leader Post to find some item pertaining to his political party. But I can assure the hon. members of this 

house that there have been several items in the same paper over the past some time dealing with the situation of the 

abandonment of branch railway lines in this province. 

 



March 5, 1964 

 

 
648 

I would refer to the Regina Leader Post of January 27th, 1964, and I would like to quote Donald Gordon when he said 

and I quote: 

 

He had not discussed the new rationalization agency with the government and knew no more about it than what he 

had read in the press. 

 

And I would also quote the Hon. George McIlraith in the same issue of the same paper as follows: 

 

The branch line rationalization authority would be under the jurisdiction of the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

And I am quite sure, Mr. Speaker, that he did not refer to the hon. provincial Minister of Agriculture across the way. 

Then he goes on and I again quote: 

 

This is recognition that branch line rationalization is primarily a concern to rural communities and farmers of western 

Canada. 

 

Now certainly these statements were not on page 13, Mr. Speaker, – I don‘t think that anybody would have to read 

beyond page three. 

 

As far as I am concerned this is one case where the hon. Minister of Agriculture has pulled the wool over his own eyes, 

because he didn‘t wish to see. He just did not want to see anything that might give hope to the people of our province 

in facing this problem which they do face. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, rail line abandonment is not a political matter. But it is the responsibility of government and it is the 

responsibility of the government of Canada because the question of rail line abandonment comes under that 

jurisdiction. It is the responsibility of the government of Canada also because that government is responsible for all of 

Canada and certainly Saskatchewan is a part of Canada. We are a young province and we are distinctive by virtue of 

our small population compared to our large area. If you will check a map showing the network of railway lines in our 

province, you will see how closely allied our growth and population pattern are with our railway system. 

 

What is going to happen to our rural areas and our smaller urban points if these services and facilities are removed? I 

would suggest that the whole pattern of the social and economic life of these communities will be disrupted and broken 

down with fantastic financial losses by depreciated property values and by increased farming costs. We do not see any 

abandonment or proposed abandonment of branch lines that serve potash mines – but agriculture, the basis of our 

Saskatchewan economy, is to suffer, and our smaller urban points will become ghost towns or will possibly disappear 

entirely. 

 

Now I said earlier that the government of Canada is responsible for all of Canada, and how can the federal government 

expect such an integral part of Canada as our province of Saskatchewan to grow, to extend, and to make its 

contribution to the national economy if those basic services, needed for our development are curtailed or removed. This 

is not in the national interest, Mr. Speaker, and mark my words, the Liberal government of Canada will not stand idly 

by and see any wholesale abandonment of branch railway lines in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Staveley: — However, as the legislature of this province, it is our duty to bring these matters to the attention of the 

federal government and in so doing we should be decisive. I believe that my colleague, the hon. member from 

Gravelbourg (Mr. Coderre) described the motion before the house as wishy-washy, and I do not believe that he could 

have described it more accurately. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the people in our Weyburn constituency are very much concerned about all of the talk which has 

been going on about rail line abandonment and about the resulting changes which would of necessity take place if the 
railway companies proceed with their program of wholesale branch line abandonment. If the suggested plans for our 

area are carried out, we could lose well over 100 miles of railway lines in our community. The communities affected 

would be the city of Weyburn, Hume, Griffin, Froude, Stoughton, Goodwater, Colgate, the town of Radville and 

Ceylon. Radville for example, once a divisional point for the Canadian National Railway would not have one single 

line in or out of that town. So you can see why we are concerned, and you can see why any wholesale abandonment 

program must not be carried out. 



March 5, 1964 

 

649 

Possibly, Mr. Speaker, it might be in the national interest if the government of Canada would further subsidize these 

railways rather than allow the disruption and breakdown of our Saskatchewan communities, and certainly it would not 

be the first time that a federal government has subsidized an economic area of this country. 

 

Just look at the subsidies paid to the coal mining industry in the Maritimes, and look at those areas just recently classed 

as depressed areas, with assistance to be given by way of tax concessions and accelerated depreciation. These are just 

forms of subsidies and so, Mr. Speaker, there are ways and means of resolving this problem which faces us here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now it will be the responsibility of the Branchline Rationalization Committee to fully investigate all facets of branch 

line abandonment, and the effects of branch line abandonment, before any further disruption of our rail facilities would 

be allowed to take place and I think that our fears might be somewhat allayed if we all understood the meaning of the 

word rationalization. 

 

I believe that this word expresses the real outlook of this committee and points out the duty of the committee which is 

to rationalize this whole situation of rail line abandonment. If you will refer to Websters Dictionary you will find the 

word rationalize means and I quote: 

 

to rely solely on reason for guidance. 

 

The word rational means to be agreeable to reason, and a rational man is one who will listen intelligently to both sides 

of a question. And I think that the meaning of these words is the key note of the work which this committee will be 

doing. I would like to forecast, Mr. Speaker, that this committee will hold public hearings in those communities which 

might be affected, and will be more than prepared to hear the whole story of the effect that branchline abandonment 

will have on both the social and economic life of those communities and I think that time will prove that this statement 

is correct. 

 

I am very critical of this government for the part that it has played in promoting fears and misgivings in the minds of 

our people with respect to this situation, and surely, if this government was honestly interested it would have 

investigated the true facts and the full facts and it would have given our people the complete and true picture which is 

something which this government seldom does. 

 

The hon. Minister of Industry and Information could have secured exactly the same information that I have, but instead 

of that, what has he been doing? He has been sending his staff all over this province crying blue ruin. Now this is an 

old story, Mr. Speaker, – create an issue in the minds of the men and then in the hope of political advantage oppose the 

very issue it has created. True Jekyll and Hyde tactics, which appear so often in the actions of this government when 

political expediency is involved. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Staveley: — Now I would just like to read the amendment – it is very brief: 

 

That this assembly urge the federal government not to allow the abandonment of any rail line which might adversely 

affect any community in Saskatchewan. 

 

And dealing with those words, Mr. Speaker, I would point out to all members of this house, that this amendment is 

decisive, it is brief, and concise, and it completely represents the wishes of those thousands of people who might be 

affected by branch line abandonment. The intent in this amendment is not covered over and smothered up with 

unnecessary and excessive verbiage as is the case with the original motion. I think, Mr. Speaker, that if the hon. 

members to your right will put the interests of our province before the interests of their political party, every one of 

them will support this amendment as I will support it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. H. Ray Dahlman (Bengough): — Mr. Speaker, I had been so happy up until this point being able to take part in 

discussing this resolution, believing that there were no political implications involved, but after listing to the member 

from Weyburn I believe I am going to change my mind just a bit. 

 



March 5, 1964 

 

 
650 

This is one resolution with which we must not, if we are going to be effective in our arguments, play politics, but all 

political parties must play the same way, and I don‘t think that the member for Weyburn (Mr. Staveley) was justified in 

suggesting that the Minister of Industry and Information sent agents out to cry blue ruin. He sent them out to gather 

facts. Now this is the truth of the matter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Dahlman: — We have discussed this resolution at some length now and the details are not going to vary very 

much from here on in, but I think we have to assess the position that we are in now in respect to the railway 

abandonment, in going back in history and reviewing for a moment, just how our railway system was set up. 

 

It seems to me that we are coming to an era as far as transportation is concerned over the whole of the dominion of 

Canada, yes, in all of North American, because these problems exist in the States as well. In the beginning, as 

civilization moved westward over the plains, railways moved in to help develop the country. This was not done 

according to any plan. Here again we saw private enterprise moving in, in reckless competition to one another, railway 

companies moved in and yes, they built lines, one running parallel to the other, and we have a hodge-podge system 

today. 

 

Now we have come to an era where most of the express and the lighter freight is being hauled on rubber. We are in a 

transition period now from steel to rubber. The main carrier will still remain on steel while the fast-moving freight will 

move on rubber. As a matter of fact, railway companies today in Canada are using what they call the piggy-back 

system, where they move trucks and then deliver the goods to the branch lines. 

 

In the prairies, of course, we have a different problem than exists in the rest of Canada. Here we have a captive market 

in the wheat industry. There is no other way in which we can move wheat off the prairies to the terminals or to the mills 

except by railway. The whole system must be assessed as a unit in determining its profit and loss. We would have no 

rivers did we not have streams, or their tributaries. The same thing prevails with railroads. If we were to assess the 

mainlines on their own traffic area, the freight they pick up along their own routes, they would not be self-supporting 

either, if this was the case. 

 

I‘m just thinking now of our position down south of the CPR main line, which the member from Weyburn (Mr. 

Staveley) is concerned with, that if we were to take and use the formula that is being used by the railways in assessing 

the profitability of a line then there would not be one remaining line south of the main line. Now this is the position that 

we are in. 

 

Now are we going to have two sets of farmers? Those who live close to the line and can carry on with small trucks the 

way we are doing now and are we going to have a group of farmers who must haul their produce for 100 miles? Now 

that is the position we are in. 

 

I think that if you were to ask the elevator companies what their choice would be, you would find that it would be 

profitable for them to carry on the way they are, rather than having to move their facilities up on the main line, in 

making what you might call inland terminals. This is their concern, that they must have no piecemeal abandonment of 

branch lines, but a planned withdrawal in some areas if this is necessary, so that duplication of facilities need not affect 

them as adversely as a company or as providing facilities to farmers. 

 

So I think there must be some responsible authority and who are they. The member mentioned that the responsibility 

was the federal government‘s which it is. Also provincial governments and others are concerned. And the proposition 

of a railway rationalization board being set up is the only avenue that I see that is workable at the present time. I 

understand this committee is going to be set up and their work will be to determine and appraise the effects of rail 

abandonment on the whole economy. We must equate the operating loss of railways with increased costs to farmers, 

elevator companies, roads, 



March 5, 1964 

 

651 

our municipalities and government, loss of trade by merchant and service agencies, dislocation of schools and service 

centres generally through the loss of railways. The loss of tax revenue of the local government who provide these social 

services are certainly greatly concerned. 

 

I was glad to read in the Leader Post, I think it was last night‘s Leader Post, where the federal budget having brought 

down an estimate of $100,000,000 to be set up for railways subsidization. I think that we have reason to be hopeful that 

whatever committee is set up by the federal government, will take all these considerations into view and with this 

amount being set aside for railways, subsidization would indicate to us at least, that they are concerned enough and 

prepared to render subsidies in view of railway abandonment at this time. 

 

I don‘t think there is very much else that I care to add at this time, Mr. Speaker, except to say that when the 

rationalization board has been set up, we may also have to have an advisory council on transportation. The federal 

government may have to have jurisdiction of inter-provincial trucking which will certainly in many instances replace 

the freight traffic on the railway lines. 

 

What are we doing in this resolution, Mr. Speaker, is not that we wish to debate it in the legislature but what we want 

to do in this legislature is deal with it and assure the people of this province that this legislature is ready to go to work 

on their behalf. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Dahlman: — We are prepared to do all in our power to see that no one will suffer undue hardships because of the 

loss of service by main carriers of freight and express, and I think this is all that I need to say at this time. I want to 

assure those people who are listening in today and this discussion this afternoon, to feel assured that every member of 

this legislature is willing to do all that he can on the behalf of those people who are under apprehension of railway 

abandonment. With that, Mr. Speaker, I wish to say that I‘m going to support the original motion. The amendment, I 

am sure that the member who moved the amendment had real concern and I would agree, except that I don‘t think we 

can point out in detail just what advice to give the rationalization board. 

 

I think this is their job to make this survey and make this assessment and I don‘t think that at this time, we should 

pin-point exactly what the results of their investigation will be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. D.T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I would not sit idly by and see a resolution on the 

magnitude of this topic go by without taking part in so important a debate. 

 

I want to assure the members of this legislature that I am very interested in this resolution at the present time because I 

may be one of the few members in this house who has had actual experience of watching a branch line or railroad line 

being pulled up and I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that railway companies today pull up a mile of railway an awful lot 

faster than they put it down 50 years ago. 

 

I have had the actual experience of seeing about a mile and a half of railway pulled up right through my own farm, and 

I have the experience of seeing how the abandoning or puling up of a railway line affects certain communities. In view 

of these facts, I want to offer some suggestions to the legislature here this afternoon. I was disappointed at the seeming 

lack of a definite stand taken by the members of the government side of the house. When the two members who spoke 

originally on this motion introducing it in the legislature about a week or so ago, they seemed to me, Mr. Speaker, to be 

almost apologetic, and then after listening to the member who just spoke, I thought he too, should have taken a more 

definite stand, and that is why I am so very pleased that my colleague, the member for Gravelbourg (Mr. Coderre) and 

my colleague the member for Weyburn (Mr. Staveley) have taken a real realistic and definite stand on this matter. 

 



March 5, 1964 

 

 
652 

The line that I have most experience with that is now abandoned, is the Wolseley-Reston line, a branch line of the 

Canadian Pacific Railway, and when this line was up for abandonment, the people concerned banded together and they 

formed what they called a ―Railway Retention Committee‖ and so they came to the appropriate department of this 

government for help and for legal advice and for counsel and the government was good enough to provide the services 

of a man for them. And over the course of a year or so, before the actual pulling up the line took place, many 

committee meetings were held in the various communities among the municipalities concerned, both urban and rural 

and businessmen and farmers and all the residents in the area. As far as I was concerned, I thought these businessmen 

and the people by and large had put up a very good case. It is true that in the end, we lost the railway. 

 

I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, to indicate to you, my concern of developments within this government later. Just a few 

weeks ago, I was very concerned as all the people in the area that I represent were, because we found that the C.N.R. 

supposedly had listed another great stretch of railway to be up for discussion before the Railway Rationalization 

Committee and this stretch of C.N.R. line is as far as we are concerned, the main C.N.R. line south of the C.P.R. 

trans-Canada line, and if anything was to happen to this line, Mr. Speaker, the farmers and the businessmen of that area 

would have to go back to conditions that their forefathers put up with some 50 years ago, where they would have to 

haul their grain and haul their supplies a distance of some 30 miles to the north or 30 miles to the south and we felt for 

the security of our communities established along that line and so we were very concerned, and further to that, we had a 

branch line of the C.N.R. from Peebles to Hansworth, a distance of some 30 miles involved, also. 

 

So all in all, we had two lines of railways that would concern 21 or more shipping points and shipping points that in the 

last two years alone have taken out millions and millions of bushels of wheat and as far as I am concerned, and as far as 

my people are concerned, they have hauled enough grain to pay for the operation of those lines and we see no reason in 

the world why those lines should be even considered for listing. But I am convinced and I am assured in my own mind 

with the intended legislation being proposed by the federal Liberal government at Ottawa at the present time and in 

view of the committees that are going to be set up, and the way this whole problem of rail line abandonment is going to 

be handled, that these two lines will not be taken out in the immediate future. 

 

But having the experience of what happened on the Wolseley-Reston line, and what happened as far as the provincial 

government agencies that we thought were protecting our rights, I want to draw to the attention of the Minister of 

Information right now, that I think the effort this time should be more sincere and more concrete than in the past. Now, 

the gentleman and the agencies of the government that handled this business for us, we believe were sincere. As I say, 

we lost the railroad, and now when this C.N.R. line has been listed for abandonment, the Department of Industry and 

Information has seen fit to call the meetings in areas all along that line. Now I would hope, Mr. Speaker, when they call 

these meetings and ask the people to be out, that this time they will do all they can in their power to see that nothing 

happens to these lines, because I was quite concerned, as was everybody down in that area concerned, when they saw a 

statement attributed to the Minister of Industry and Information. The statement that he gave was that we didn‘t say 

much about the pulling of the Wolseley-Reston line at the time and because after all there was a parallel C.N.R. line. 

Well, that may be fine, Mr. Minister to make that statement, but the people who were concerned certainly thought you 

should have said more and I hope that this time, when you are going down to that area, and when you are leaving the 

impression with the people of that area, that you are trying to do something for them, that you are doing it sincerely and 

if anything should happen to this line and if it should be pulled up 15 or 20 years from now, somebody couldn‘t come 

along and say, well we didn‘t say too much because after all there were lines 30 miles to the north and 30 miles to the 

south. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in view of the experience that we in our area have had in respect to rail line abandonment we want 

something positive, we want something definite, and something sincere from this government at this time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, having pointed out the problems in my area at the present time, and the problems we have had in the past, 

and having pointed out to the people that are concerned, that in my opinion at least because of the legislation that is 

before the federal Liberal government at Ottawa at the present time, I am firmly convinced that nothing will happen to 

this vital line of ours. But then having had the experience of what has happened to other lines, and 



March 5, 1964 

 

653 

what may happen to other lines in the province, I want to suggest some steps that this government should be taking 

immediately because they didn‘t do this in my area, especially east of the town of Winthorp, Kennedy, Kipling and 

right through to the Manitoba border. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that every community in Saskatchewan that is being faced with possible loss of rail lines, 

should now compile information as to how this situation would affect all segments of the communities, especially 

farmers, and we want to be sure that before any action is taken, not just the position of the railways be taken into the 

consideration, but most important of all, the position of the people and the business and economic position of the 

community, be the prime factor of consideration. 

 

We must convince the provincial and the federal governments, as well as the Board of Transport Commissioners that 

more people will be affected by rail line abandonment than just the Canadian Pacific and Canadian National Railways. 

It appears that past action regarding the lifting of rail lines took the position of the railway company into account more 

than the consideration of the people of those communities affected. This should not be the policy in the future. 

 

This matter of proposed rail line abandonment is so important that this provincial government should be seriously 

adapting definite programs now, to deal with emergencies in communities that would be affected if any given line were 

taken out. The Department of Highways should be assessing – if the minister of muttering would stop muttering maybe 

we could get this across and I want him to pay particular attention – the Department of Highways should be assessing 

improved highway requirements necessitated by having to haul grain and heavy freight to and from points affected. The 

Department of Municipal Affairs should now be studying grid road requirements to service a new pattern of trading 

centre developments. 

 

This is very important, the Highway Traffic Board should not be allowed to sanction excessively high rates for greater 

passenger travel for other agencies including Saskatchewan Transportation Company by virtue of the fact that there is 

no longer competition from rail travel in areas where rail lines have been discontinued. 

 

The Department of Industry and Information should now start interviewing elevator companies to see what their 

policies are in regard to future expansion or centralization of grain handling facilities. The whole continuous process of 

centralization by this government itself must be reviewed if a clear picture of future development in the province are to 

be scrutinized. 

 

I am convinced that most of the difficulties which we find ourselves in today are because of the policy of centralization 

by this government. For years now, we have been hearing and are hearing that smaller urban communities are a thing of 

the past. Their policies are pointed towards a single trading centre for a specific area. Millions of dollars have been 

spent in this province to propagate this theory, is it any wonder then, that railways as well as other corporations are 

shaping their programs to fit these conditions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is time that that trend was stopped, and it is time that someone stared championing the rights of urban 

and rural preservation and developments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — When this is done, then most of our difficulties will disappear, and instead of curtailment of 

services and development, situations will arise where we will be increasing services and to add to rapid development of 

these areas to a point where population will be maintained and increased. Along with an economic upsurge, with the 

result, we will be building our province to a point where more transportation facilities will be required as we have seen 

in the history of other provinces of Canada and other countries of the world. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, in the very few minutes that I have had at my disposal, I want to assure you that as far as I am 

concerned, along with my colleagues on this side of the house, we are convinced that a definite and a positive stand 

must be taken at this time. We are convinced that we cannot come in on this resolution, we must be brief, we must be to 

the point as the member for Gravelbourg done, when he stated that 
 

this assembly urge the federal government not to allow the abandonment of any rail line or lines which might 

adversely affect any community in Saskatchewan. 

 



March 5, 1964 

 

 
654 

And by the reasons I have given, Mr. Speaker, and by the statement and the conditions that I have tried to bring to the 

attention of members of this legislature this afternoon, you will realize that I am going to support this very important 

amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Hon. Russell Brown (Minister of Industry and Information): — Mr. Speaker, I feel I should say a few words in this 

debate on this resolution because some comments have been made with respect to the activities of the provincial 

government and particularly the transportation branch of the Department of Industry and Information which is charged 

with responsibility of dealing with this very, very real problem. 

 

I want to say right now though, that I suppose as long as I remain in this house, I‘ll never cease to be amazed at the 

antics of my friends opposite. We have again, in dealing with this resolution, witnessed the same kind of a situation 

which invariably develops. A situation where there is a problem which in fact is under the jurisdiction of the federal 

government and the opposition are trying their best to say that it is our fault that the problem is here and that we should 

solve it. 

 

I never heard so many contradictory statements as have come out from the speakers across the way. They talk about a 

realistic plan. The hon. member from Qu‘Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. McFarlane) says we must take a realistic line, well, I 

wonder how realistic the members are being because when you read the amendment, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that 

there was little point in continuing past the word ―lines‖ in the amendment, because the remainder says ―which 

adversely affect any community in Saskatchewan‖. 

 

Now does anyone really believe that any line can be taken out without adversely affecting some community? You 

might as well stop right there. And when you talked about being realistic, my hon. friends opposite talk about the rail 

line rationalization committee which is going to be established – they are going to sort this thing out. Well, in doing so, 

do they really believe that somewhere along the line, if you are going to rationalize this system, that you are not going 

to lose some lines? Well then be realistic, and face the problem and let‘s deal with it. And let‘s quit trying to play 

politics with this kind of a situation. 

 

The gentlemen opposite said that this is some dirty horrible plan that the government has got to do away with the urban 

communities. We don‘t run the railroads. You can‘t blame us for this kind of a problem. You talk about a wishy-washy 

resolution, my hon. friends should be a little more up-to-date. What is the general thinking of the people in the area 

where this problem lies? If they had taken the trouble to attend some of the meetings which had been held, if they had 

taken the trouble to attend the big meeting, which was held in Regina in November of all the retention committees, if 

they had taken the trouble to check the report of that meeting and seen what the resolutions called for, they would have 

found that the resolution which was placed on the order paper is in line with the thinking of the people who are most 

closely concerned. 

 

I‘m intrigued too by some of the gentlemen getting up, one of them gets up and says it‘s a whale of a problem, it‘s 

going to have some fantastic effects on the people of the province, and I‘m inclined to agree with him that this entire 

program if proceeded with, will indeed have a terrific effect on the people of this province. Another gentleman gets up 

and says oh, it is not really that serious, it is only the Minister of Industry and Information and his staff, that are trying 

to magnify this issue and excite the people. Well, I wish they would make up their minds; one of them must be wrong. 

 

The hon. member from Qu‘Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. McFarlane) says in one breath he is assured that now that the 

federal government have proposed this legislation, that nothing is really going to happen to that line that he is so fond 

of in his constituency, and I hope he is right. But in the next breath he goes on to tell us all the things that we should do 

to deal with this 



March 5, 1964 

 

655 

problem and I would like to remind the hon. gentleman that if he had taken the trouble to find out, he would have found 

that everything that he suggested should be done and looked into, is already underway. It is only lately that the 

members of the opposition suddenly realized that this is an issue with the people of this province. Once again let‘s get 

on the band wagon; let‘s get the monkey off the back of the federal government; let‘s toss it on the back of the 

provincial government. I watched this, Mr. Speaker, in the last 12 years that I have been in this house. 

 

I have taken the trouble because I think there will be some value in really bringing to the attention of the members of 

this house exactly how this problem has developed, where it stands at the present time, and what in fact has and is 

being done in order to assist the people that are concerned to deal with this problem. Now since the MacPherson Royal 

Commission on Transportation began to examine this problem of transportation in Canada in 1959, abandonment of 38 

lines in Saskatchewan for a total of something like 1,931 miles of line involved. Of this total, four lines totalling 178 

miles have been abandoned by order of the Board of Transport Commissioners. The lines abandoned in Saskatchewan 

include the C.P.R. from Wolseley to Reston and the C.N.R. lines from Grainland to Dunblane. The application to 

abandon the C.N.R. from Grainland to Dunblane was agreed to because it would be flooded out by the damming of the 

South Saskatchewan River. Similarly, no opposition was expressed to the abandonment of the Rose-town Gunnworth 

line of the C.P.R. as no economic use was actually being made of it. This government assisted the local retention 

committees on both the Reston-Wolseley and the Neptune lines to present a case for their retention. Largely because 

the Wolseley-Reston line closely paralleled the C.N.R. line for most of its length, the Board of Transport 

Commissioners ordered that it should be abandoned. The local retention committee on the Neptune line were 

successful in retaining that part of the sub-division in extending Southall to Tribune. 

 

In 1961, the C.P.R. made application to abandon the Rockglen to Kildeer branch line. You may recall, Mr. Speaker, 

that a public hearing was held in Assiniboia in October of 1962. By the, of course, the full implication of the 

recommendations of the Royal Commission on Transportation in regard to branch lines was becoming abundantly clear 

to all concerned. The government then, this government, decided to accurately intervene on its own behalf and in the 

Assiniboia hearing as well as to assist the local retention committees which were established at the Assiniboia hearing. 

My colleague, the Minister of Agriculture on behalf of the government requested the Board of Transport 

Commissioners to adjourn the hearing pending a full statement of policy of the federal government on the 

recommendations of the Royal Commission on Transportation insofar as branch lines were concerned. You may recall, 

that the Board of Transport Commissioners refused our request and continue the hearing. We made our position quite 

well known. It was unalterably opposed to any suggestion of piecemeal consideration of branch lines. However, the 

Board of Transport Commissioners pointed out that under the present law, the law at that time, they had no alternative 

but they must entertain any applications of the railways to abandon any part of the railway plan or service. Consequent 

to this hearing Premier Lloyd again, you may recall, took the initiative and called a conference of the government of the 

three prairie provinces on December 20th, 1962. And simultaneously the main public organizations affected by 

proposed rail line abandonment, meeting both separately and together, a conference agreed on a four point program: 

One – an immediate stop to the present policy of piecemeal abandonment; two – a clear statement from the federal 

government as to its responsibility and policy; three – a study of the special interests of the agricultural economy in any 

program of rail rationalization; and four – recognition of the need for rail rationalization and the joint responsibility of 

all public organizations for a solution to rail line problems. 

 

Following this conference the federal government called the railways and the grain companies to a meeting in Ottawa 

on January 4, 1963. It was agreed at that meeting that the railways would request the Board of Transport 

Commissioners not to process any further applications pending the implementation of new railway legislation. 

 

This, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, was the first major victory by western Canada in its struggle against the massive 

program of branch line abandonment. A little over a year ago, in February, 1963, Premier Lloyd, Premier Manning of 

Alberta, and Premier Roblin of Manitoba, met with the federal cabinet and at that time they requested certain things: (a) 

that no piecemeal abandonment of branch lines be undertaken; and (b) that the social and economic cost of 

abandonment, which would fall on farmers and rural communities be fully ascertained before any abandonment 

proceedings were instituted. 

 



March 5, 1964 

 

 
656 

Again on June 3rd and 25th, 1963, Premier Lloyd and myself, accompanied by representatives of our main public 

organizations, interviewed the new federal government of Prime Minster Pearson. Our Premier, speaking on behalf of 

the provincial government and the people of Saskatchewan, spelled out in greater detail the social and economic costs 

which should be studied. The Premier pointed out that such studies should be undertaken by a committee of 

investigation, separate and apart from the Board of Transport Commissioners. In this respect, the Premier, of course, 

reflected the position taken by our major provincial organizations and I would suggest by the same group in the 

provinces of Manitoba and Alberta. 

 

According to the former Minister of Transport, Mr. McIlraith, who was the minister at the time we went to Ottawa, the 

new railway legislation has incorporated in it a proposal to set up, as was mentioned earlier this afternoon, a rail 

rationalization authority, which will undertake the necessary economic and social studies. If this is so, and we have no 

reason to doubt it at this stage, I would suggest to you that this will be the second major victory for western Canada in 

its struggle to retain rail line services. 

 

When the new railway legislation is actually brought down in the House of Commons, I can assure you that your 

government will continue to make further representation. We are concerned about the terms of reference of the rail 

rationalization authorities. In this respect, we support the resolution passed by the conference of local retention 

committees, held in Regina, as I mentioned a moment ago, on November 22nd, 1963. 

 

I know that some members on both sides of the house attended this tremendous meeting of representatives, 47 of the 48 

committees, and by observers of all of our main public organizations. I only regret that some of the gentlemen who now 

are so concerned with this problem didn‘t see fit to also be in attendance. I think they would have been much better 

versed on the whole problem if they had taken the trouble to attend that conference. 

 

I would like to quote from page 31 of the proceedings of that meeting which refers to the resolution which I mentioned 

a moment ago. This is it: 

 

Therefore be it resolved that any board of inquiry appointed by the government of Canada to study the 

re-organization of railway plant in western Canada, be specifically required to study the following economic and 

social costs of rail line abandonment. 

 

1. The cost of extra difference farmers will have to haul grain. 
2. The cost of re-organization of the market grid road system and provincial highways. 
3. Reduction of municipal taxes and the financial position of municipalities. 
4. Capital losses which may be suffered by businesses in towns, villages and hamlets as a consequence of a branch 

line being abandoned. 

5. Depreciation of land values. 
6. The necessity of compensation for municipal services, such as re-location of grid roads, which are directly 

consequent on abandonment. 

7. The impact of abandonment on schools, hospitals, old peoples homes and other social services or institutions. 
8. Whether or not mineral rights, or other advantages, held by railway companies, as a result of land grants given to 

build rail lines should revert to the crown, if, indeed, the branch lines are abandoned and this to be used for 

compensation. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, was the resolution which was passed by this mass gathering of rail line retention committees, and I 

suggest to you that it reflects the thinking of the people most closely concerned with this problem of line abandonment 

and I suggest further it is in line with the tone, the tenor of the resolution which was originally placed on the order 

paper for discussion. 

 



March 5, 1964 

 

657 

Now, why is it necessary for us to make such representation? As I mentioned a moment ago when this legislation is 

brought down we certainly intend to be on hand to have something to say about the implications of it. The Primer 

Minister has indicated to the Leader of the Opposition, that the social and economic costs will be studied. Mr. McIlraith 

stated this publicly a few weeks ago in an address in Saskatchewan, which the hon. member for Weyburn (Mr. 

Staveley) referred to when he was speaking. I don‘t know whether or not the Leader of the Opposition was really 

impressed with the seeming waffling of the former Minister of Transport but I suppose time will tell who was right and 

who was wrong. 

 

As far as the Saskatchewan government is concerned, Mr. Speaker, it has been our stand that eternal vigilance is the 

price of railways insofar as our province is concerned. We want, and will insist that the terms of reference of the rail 

rationalization authority be spelled out in the legislation. We want to know specifically what social and economic costs 

will be thrown into the scales when the abandonment of a particular branch line is being considered. 

 

I would like to illustrate this with some concrete data which we have produced in our transportation branch. As I 

mentioned, the transportation branch of the department is conducting, in co-operation with the local retention 

committee, and the municipalities, an extensive study of economic and social costs consequent on the abandonment of 

any rail branch line in Saskatchewan and I suggest again, the hon. member for Qu‘Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. McFarlane) 

could have had this information if he had wanted to take the trouble rather than to take an opportunity to get up and 

make a political speech. 

 

Now the first nine branch lines for which railway preliminary cost figures have been obtained, indicate this to us, and I 

want to mention that we have only been able so far to do the work on the first group of nine. We will before the end of 

this month have completed the work on all of the subdivisions in which there are lines they propose to abandon. 

 

Here are some figures which I suggest, Mr. Speaker, are interesting, if not, indeed, quite startling, and our research has 

indicated that the ten year average loss per annum claimed by the railway on these lines is approximately $1,300,000. 

The annual cost to the producers for extra distance that they will be required to haul grain if the lines are indeed 

abandoned, come to almost a like amount, $1,200,000, but to this you have to add, or you must take into consideration 

the reduction in rural municipal assessment that will be involved, will be almost $3,000,000, as a matter of fact, 

$2,980,000. Again, too, there will be a reduction in property values, calculated on a annual basis of some $750,000. In 

addition to these costs, of course, there are the costs of building new roads and upgrading of the existing roads. The 

loss in tax revenue to the urban municipalities also has to be assessed, as well as the impact of abandonment on 

services in the area of employment and the general depreciation of urban property values. Therefore, there are 

numerous other losses and inconveniences that may be suffered to a greater or lesser degree by the public concerned. 

Finally, there are the losses which could be incurred by the grain handling organizations. 

 

In that connection, Mr. Speaker, Mr. W.J. Parker, President of the Manitoba Wheat Pool, speaking in Winnipeg on 

Wednesday, February 26th, 1964, stated that a capital cost of $8,000,000 would be sustained if the three-fourths of 

existing elevator capacity on branch lines now being considered for abandonment in Manitoba had to be rebuilt. 

 

I would suggest to you that as Saskatchewan has, I believe, three times the number of elevators on branch lines now 

being considered for abandonment at the present time, that the capital cost in Saskatchewan could then quite easily 

exceed some $25,000,000. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, when one takes a look at figures of this kind, they should 

indeed, and I hope will indeed, give any government cause to pause and reflect before a program of branch line 

abandonment is actually undertaken. 

 

I mentioned a moment ago that by the end of March we expect that the transportation branch of the department will 

have more complete cost data on all of the 35 sub-divisions in Saskatchewan which are now being considered as 

candidates for abandonment. The provincial government and the local retention committee, which have been very 

active, will be in a position to arm ourselves with this kind of information, this kind of data, when we do, indeed, find 

an opportunity for further talks with the federal authorities. 

 



March 5, 1964 

 

 
658 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that our position is indeed very clear. It is this – that taking everything into consideration, if 

the cost of rail line abandonment to local governments and communities exceeds the operating losses claimed by the 

railways, then not a mile of line should be abandoned. Now I want to point out that this does not mean, Mr. Speaker, 

that we in fact oppose all rail line abandonment in Saskatchewan. Our rail transportation system is too important to our 

agricultural economy to play petty politics with it, and this is the obvious intent of the amendment that was moved by 

my hon. friend across the way. 

 

As the technology of agriculture and transportation changes, so will everything else gradually change in our rural 

communities. I want to make it abundantly clear that the provincial government is fully committed to do everything in 

its power to assure that any changes that are made will be made with the minimum dislocation and injury to the people 

of Saskatchewan. We do not, however, sit like King Canute, and order the tide of progress not to flow in. 

 

Some charges have been made by my friends opposite, mentioned a moment ago, that we are trying to conduct a scare 

campaign in this province, that these communities are going to lose rail service, that the organization of these local 

retention committees is unnecessary, because in reality nothing is really going to happen, and that if Saskatchewan 

government hadn‘t raised the question there would be no problem of rail line abandonment. 

 

Let me reiterate, Mr. Speaker, everyone in this province, I‘m sure, is fully aware of the fact. This government has 

absolutely no control over the railways in this province or anywhere else. This government has no control over the 

activities or the decisions of the Board of Transport Commissioners. All we can do is to provide our people and 

ourselves with the most factual data that we can in order to put up a first-class fight on behalf of the people who are 

going to be concerned with this problem in their particular area. 

 

I want to suggest to you that the attitude of the members opposite, that this kind of poppycock illustrates the rather 

juvenile and uniformed attitude of the opposition, and I regret, Mr. Speaker, that they are so uniformed insofar as this 

problem is concerned. 

 

I want to say this, that Saskatchewan is, indeed, much better prepared than any other province in Canada to handle this 

question of branch line abandonment. In the first place, not only is the government studying the problem in depth, but 

on every branch line on which the railways indicate that they may desire to abandon a section, the local municipality, 

the farmer, the business man, everyone, have organized themselves into committees to study their own particular 

situation, and they, with the help of the provincial government, will make the strongest kind of representation for the 

retention of rail service. 

 

Again, such representations will, indeed, because of the work that we do have and are doing, be based on facts, and not 

on wild imaginings, such as some of the proposals which have emanated from across the way. 

 

Take a look at what is happening in our neighbouring province, Manitoba, one which we usually get held up as a prime 

example. I would like to quote from the Winnipeg Tribune of February 24th, 1964, the headline reads ―The Province 

Will Fight Railways‖ 

 

The Manitoba government for the first time is officially going to oppose railway applications to abandon more than 

1,200 miles of branch line trackage in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if anybody is a little late, I would suggest that it is unfortunately our neighbour to the east. 

 

The people in Manitoba are in a somewhat different situation than we are here in Saskatchewan. In Manitoba the 

municipalities and the grain companies and other groups have had to organize their own branch line association and, 

indeed, have had to employ a firm of economic consultants at considerable expense to themselves to do the work which 

this government has been doing for the last years in this question of rail line abandonment. 

 



March 5, 1964 

 

659 

In Manitoba they now have 15 local committees active on some 1,200 miles of branch lines. Here in Saskatchewan we 

have 56 committees on 1,760 miles of branch lines. Our committees have done a tremendous job. Their co-operation, 

Mr. Speaker, has made it possible for our transportation branch to circulate some 7,000 questionnaires amongst the 

farming population concerned, of about 20,000 and because of the returns which we have received, we have been able 

to do the kind of research that has been providing us with the factual data which is absolutely essential if you are going 

to make a proper case for retention of any particular branch line when you appear before the Board of Railroad 

Transport Commissioners. 

 

I want to pay tribute to the people who serve on these retention committees. They are an alert, active, and enthusiastic 

group, a group that has done a tremendous job in the interests of their own communities and in so doing have done a 

great service to the province of Saskatchewan generally. 

 

We take the information which they produce, sent in to us by way of questionnaires and otherwise and we process this 

data as it comes in. From this we are able to assist them in the preparation and presentation of submissions to any 

federal authority on any matters in connection with their own particular branch line. 

 

Before I take my seat, Mr. Speaker, I want to just give a bit of information, which I think will again point up, just how 

serious this problem is and how it will, indeed, have a very serious effect on the people of this province in the areas 

which the lines are proposed to be abandoned. 

 

Now, I have some data here which we have worked out on a computer, which I think will be of interest to you, and I 

would like to take just the question of one sub-division, number one, and give you some figures. The information we 

have would appear that the present weighted average distance that a farmer may have to haul his agriculture products to 

market is about 7.4 miles at the present time. The future weighted average distance which a farmer will have to haul his 

grain is something like 31.8 miles. This is a 514 per cent increase in the cost of hauling his grain. The ratio of increase 

in a ten year average railway loss is about 284 per cent. The average yearly real estate loss is $174,282, the assessment 

loss amounts of $722,628 and the decrease in spending which is indicated by the studies which we have undertaken is 

around 50 per cent. 

 

Mr. R.A. McCarthy (Cannington): — The district number one – would you specify where that is, so we would have 

something to go on? 

 

Mr. Brown: — I think maybe I could tell you that. I‘m not sure, I will have to dig that out, but I can find it for you. 

 

Now I could go on and give you similar figures in comparison for the nine subs which are involved. I think maybe it 

would have more impact if I simply referred to one particular sub-division, and the hon. member for Gravelbourg (Mr. 

Coderre) will be interested in this, because it concerns his particular area. 

 

The trucking cost in the Gravelbourg sub-division, the distance at the present time works out to 5.2 miles. The future 

trucking distance works out to 14.1 miles. The cost per permit holder at present $71; future costs $274; total cost to the 

sub-division which has something like 197 farmers delivery just over 5,000,000 bushels of grain on a ten year average 

is this. The present – $91,715; in the future it will rise to $355,000. This, Mr. Speaker, represents an increase in cost to 

those people concerned of something like 287 per cent. 

 

There are real estate losses to be taken into consideration. The market value, present losses as compounded at six per 

cent over a 20 year period, a yearly loss is calculated by dividing this by 140, this is the assumed period when all farms 

will be sold at least once. The loss then works out on this basis: each permit holder would lose on an average some 

$1,883 on the value of his land if he wished to sell after the line had been abandoned. The assessed value: the R.M.‘s 

and villages on the Gravelbourg sub, would lose approximately $750,000 on assessments on farm lands alone if the line 

was abandoned. 

 



March 5, 1964 

 

 
660 

Now, there is a lot more of this kind of factual information, which we are producing at the present time, all of which, as 

I say, will be available to the local retention committees when they are appearing on their own behalf. The information 

will be available when we, along with representatives of the committees, find it necessary to appear before the federal 

authorities to ascertain just exactly what is involved in this new legislation which is to be brought down. 

 

All of us, the retention committee, and ourselves, naturally are waiting to read the fine print on this proposed railway 

legislation. If the federal authorities accept the advice that they have received from the people in Saskatchewan, and the 

other western provinces, and write it into the legislation, it will be very good indeed. If they don‘t, Mr. Speaker, I can 

assure you and this house, and the people of Saskatchewan, that parliament hill and the federal authorities will hear 

considerably about it from Saskatchewan people and the Saskatchewan government. 

 

Now there is much more that could be said along this matter, and I think I have taken up enough time of the house. I 

did want to present the complete picture, as closely as possible, to all members of the house, in order that they would be 

fully aware that this matter is being given top attention insofar as this government is concerned. I regret that my friends 

opposite by virtue of the amendment that they brought in are now trying to play politics with this particular matter. I 

regret that they couldn‘t get solidly behind this resolution, a resolution which is again, I suggest, in keeping with the 

thinking and the attitude of the people who serve on these rail line retention committees. I am afraid that we would be 

wasting a lot of time, Mr. Speaker, by simply passing the kind of a resolution which is proposed by the amendment; if 

we are to be realistic then I think we must accept the fact that a resolution along the lines which is urgently proposed is 

the sort of thing that will have more impact on the powers-that-be in Ottawa than anything else that we could produce. 

 

I don‘t know what I will say I will do about the amendment but I certainly intend to fully support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Franklin E. Foley (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity of adding my voice, and my 

expression of concern, to others of this house who have spoken on this resolution and the amendment thereto. 

 

Regarding the comments of the hon. Minister of Industry and Information, in which he complains about the amendment 

moved by this side of the house, I might say that the reasons for moving this amendment were very valid indeed, 

because the major part of the original motion, Mr. Speaker, has devoted itself to proposing the setting up of a federal 

agency along the lines mentioned by the hon. member for Weyburn (Mr. Staveley). A branch line rationalization 

authority was already in the process of formation, obviously rendering the first part of this motion superfluous. Then 

the main motion goes on to suggest that railway companies might rationalize their operations and thus forego any 

abandonment at all in the first part, and in the second part the main motion concerns itself with the allocation of mineral 

rights upon abandonment. When the hon. member for Gravelbourg (Mr. Coderre) described the main motion as being 

wishy-washy, I think he was very accurate, particularly in this last respect, because certainly the main motion, if one 

read it carefully, had a defeatist attitude about it. It seemed as if the mover had already accepted the principle of 

wide-scale abandonment as being inevitable and did not propose to launch any strong protest against. 

 

So I say that the amendment moved by the hon. member for Gravelbourg (Mr. Coderre) was a sincere amendment, and 

when the Minister of Industry and Information stooped to his usual tactics which we have become very familiar with in 

this house, of accusing us of playing politics and of having an uninformed attitude, in my opinion, this deteriorated the 

tone of the debate seriously. It is only because we on this side of the house, Mr. Speaker, are only too well-informed of 

the tactics and types of strategy employed by the members on your right, that the Minister protested so vigorously. I say 

that the amendment which I certainly will support, moved by the hon. member for Gravelbourg, was sincere and was an 

attempt by our side to suggest that we do take into consideration first and foremost, the welfare of the communities in 

the province. 

 



March 5, 1964 

 

661 

I might qualify my remarks on this motion, Mr. Speaker, by expressing my concern over two areas in the constituency 

of Turtleford, which are included in the plan of the federal railway company. And I refer to the Bolney sub-division 

from Spruce Lake junction to Frenchman Butte and the Amiens sub-division from the Medstead junction through 

Spiritwood to Shellbrook. These are two very important and valuable railway lines in the northwest and can only result 

in hardship to the people in these areas should the railway companies proceed with their announced intentions. 

 

With reference to the first sub-division from the Spruce Lake junction through to Frenchman Butte, I wish to emphasize 

the importance of retaining this important line until such time as we receive a bridge over the North Saskatchewan 

River. For several months of the year, as the hon. Minister of Highways knows our transportation of grain and cattle is 

severely curtailed by the river in this area. Now I don‘t wish to go into the many local problems raised by the proposed 

rail line abandonment here, since I realize the motion is pointed towards the general problems throughout the province, 

but I do feel that it is my duty as a member from the northwest to bring to the attention of this house the economic 

problems that would result if these important lines were abandoned. The Amiens sub-division is much lengthier, 

joining two very important railway routes from a very important agricultural and grain area. The people are very 

concerned as was shown by the excellent representation from both sub-divisions at the provincial conference, referred 

to a while ago by the Minister of Industry and Information. 

 

Now, just a few other comments, Mr. Speaker, with regard to the announced policy of the C.N.R. They suggest that the 

yardstick or the basis for abandonment should be whether or not the continued operation of the line is uneconomical, if 

there is no potential for improvement in the foreseeable future, and where there are adequate alternate transportation 

facilities available in the area. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, for any community in this province, to qualify in all three of these, I think would be very difficult. 

Certainly, if we go along with the B portion here, we then admit some lack of faith in the future of the province to 

suggest that there is no potential for improvement. The matter of alternate transportation facilities is something which 

will be very difficult for us to get around indeed. In many communities of this province, the rail line is the only means 

of all-weather transportation. When I refer to the Amiens sub-division, I hope the hon. member for Shellbrook (Mr. 

Thiessen) will support our amendment, since about half of this sub-division lies in the constituency of Shellbrook. I 

know, he will agree with me, that during the winter months, the movement of cattle and grain would be severely 

restricted if this sub-division were closed. 

 

Now, when we examine the number of applications filed with the Board of Transport Commissioners between January 

1st, 1962, and October 21st, 1963, we see that there has been 30 applications for abandonment in Saskatchewan as 

opposed to 19 in Manitoba and 11 in Ontario. If one is looking for some of the repercussions of the lack of population 

growth in Saskatchewan, this might well be one of them, since we have nearly twice the number of applications for 

abandonment in Saskatchewan as opposed to any other province in Canada. 

 

Now I was interested to read the proceedings of the provincial meeting held in November and to note that delegates 

from the Amiens sub-division from my own constituency moved one of the resolutions, number 8: 

 

That it be resolved that the Minister of Industry and Information be requested to appoint from members nominated by 

the local rail retention committee, the delegation to proceed to Ottawa. 

 

As far as I‘m concerned, the people of Saskatchewan have in the past and will, if given the proper opportunity in the 

future, stand shoulder to shoulder on behalf of their existing rail lines. That portion of the amendment which the 

Minister of Industry and Information would have stricken out, namely: 

 

That the federal government not allow the abandonment of any rail line or lines which might adversely affect any 

community in Saskatchewan. 

 



March 5, 1964 

 

 
662 

In my opinion, a very vital and very important part of the amendment, Mr. Speaker. Certainly if we are not concerned 

with the welfare of all of our communities, particularly our smaller communities, then what exactly are we concerned 

with in this and other motions in this house. When we consider the fact that many of our smaller hospitals in this 

province have been placed in jeopardy by this government, when we consider what has happened in many other aspects 

of centralization in Saskatchewan, surely, this house could on this particular amendment, stand together on behalf of 

the communities of Saskatchewan. 

 

On that basis I wish to congratulate previous members of this debate who have supported our amendment and I will 

support it when the question is put. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, before adjourning the debate, I just want to comment a 

bit on what the hon. member for Turtleford (Mr. Foley) said. He invited the hon. member from Shellbrook (Mr. 

Thiessen) to get up and state his position in support of the amendment. He obviously doesn‘t realize that the hon. 

member for Shellbrook introduced the original motion when he made his great appeal to the house to stand shoulder to 

shoulder. I would suggest to him that he had an opportunity when the motion was first submitted to the house, he had 

full opportunity at that time to stand shoulder to shoulder and support it. Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Mr. Foley: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. May I ask the hon. minister a question at this time? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — No, I don‘t think so. A motion to adjourn the debate is before the house and I can‘t take points of 

privilege when there is a motion before the house. I wonder if the members would let me pose the question before they 

interfere, I am not through posing yet. 

 

Motion to adjourn debate agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

Yeas – 28 
 

Messieurs 
 

Lloyd Thurston Semchuk 

Johnson Wood Perkins 

Brown Davies Thiessen 

Blakeney Nicholson Snyder 

Brockelbank Turnbull Stevens 

Walker Stone Dahlman 

Nollet Whelan Kluzak 

Cooper (Mrs.) Thibault Peterson 

Strum (Mrs.) Berezowsky Broten 

Meakes   

 

Nays – 19 
 

Messieurs 
 

Thatcher McFarlane Coderre 

Batten (Mrs.) Gardiner MacDougall 

McCarthy Staveley Snedker 

Barrie Foley Gallagher 

McDonald Boldt Erb 

Danielson Horsman Steuart 

Cameron   
 

Debate adjourned. 

 



March 5, 1964 

 

663 

SECOND READINGS 
 

HON. O.A. TURNBULL (Minister of Education) moved second reading of Bill No. 53, An Act to Amend The 

Secondary Education Act. 

 

He said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 53, proposes certain amendments to The Secondary Education Act, and the purpose of these 

amendments is to eliminate double taxation for high school purposes where separate school districts exist in secondary 

school districts. 

 

In outlining the principle and the way this bill attempts to resolve the question that is posed by the possibility of double 

taxation in these circumstances, I would ask the indulgence of the house for a few minutes to briefly sketch out the 

Saskatchewan school system. 

 

I believe it a fair thing to say that the question of separate schools is not of provincial making. Separate schools exist in 

Saskatchewan by virtue of the fact that the constitution of Canada and the federal legislation that establishes the 

province has clearly set for the principle that a religious minority, whether they be Protestant or Catholic, can separate 

from a school district and elect their own board and levy their own taxes and be subject only to those taxes. I think it is 

a fair thing to say then, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan at the time it became a province had two parallel publicly 

operated school systems and was identical to Alberta. 

 

You have the school system which can elect its board and this board has full powers of assessing and raising monies 

and has full academic jurisdiction from grade one to grade 12. From this system, the separate school system can divide, 

providing it is either Protestant or Catholic, and the separate school system has identical powers in respect to taxing. It 

can only tax the property of its supporters; it has full academic jurisdiction from grade one to grade 12 and has the full 

rights of collecting grants in exactly the same manner as the school system by application of the same formula. 

 

In 1907, the Scott Government of this province passed The Secondary Education Act. This gives rise to the third 

board-operated system. This system has academic jurisdiction only between the grades nine and 12. This system elects 

a board, but the board does not levy the tax. The board requisitions the city or town and the city or town council levies 

the tax. Because this is so, all residents within the town or city pay that tax. Now bear in mind, Mr. Speaker, that the 

emergence of the secondary school system in no way reduces the power of the separate school system. The separate 

school system still has full academic jurisdiction. I have a list of the schools where secondary schools are so organized. 

They have the right to teach to grade 12, I would like to read out the names. They are: Assiniboia, Estevan, North 

Battleford, Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, Saskatoon, Weyburn, Unity. These separate school systems operate high school 

rooms, they hire teachers, they collect grants, they levy taxes; but because they exist within secondary districts (or high 

school or collegiate districts to use the more proper term), they must also pay the collegiate tax of the high school tax. 

 

This situation does not obtain in the remainder of the separate school districts where no secondary or high school or 

collegiate district exists, and these are: Biggar, Lloydminster, Marquis, Meadow Lake, Melville, Radville, Rosetown, 

Spiritwood, Vonda, Watson, Wilkie, Wilcox, Wood River. The difference between this latter group and the one that I 

read formerly, Mr. Speaker, is that these do not exist within a high school or collegiate tax. 

 

We suggest that this is an unfair situation. The issue, I think, that is before this legislature and Saskatchewan is not 

whether separate schools have the right to exist for this has been clearly established; but whether or not we should treat 

them with fairness and equity when they exist within the high school or collegiate district or not. We think that the 

amendment that we propose will allow a decision to be made so that the separate school supporters, if they wish it, may 

avoid paying the collegiate tax. 

 

The method that we use to arrive at this position, is to allow a separate high school district to be established. We do it 

through permissive legislation, allowing the separate school supporters to decide whether or not they wish to do it. Mr. 

Speaker, we recognize that there may be some areas that do not wish to do this, and there is not compulsion on them. 
 



March 5, 1964 

 

 
664 

Another reason why we have chosen the separate high school district concept, is because we were approached many 

times to have a different method of declaring a separate high school supporter or a high school supporter, as compared 

with the method that is now used in being a separate school supporter, or a public school supporter, and I want to make 

perfectly clear to the house what the difference is. The declaration which determines whether you are a separate schools 

supporter or a public school supporter is determined by faith, not a personal declaration. And if evidence can be 

brought to show that a ratepayer is of a certain faith, then he is deemed to be the supporter of that system. But under 

these amendments, this matter of faith is not in question; it is a matter of personal declaration. We think this is a better 

and a more flexible method. True there are some problems with it, but we agree with those who have made the 

representation and therefore, we have written this into the amendments and it is the main reason, one of the main 

reasons, of the separate high school district emergence. 

 

I would like, Mr. Speaker, to just touch briefly on the method of establishing a separate high school district if persons 

so desire. We have endeavoured to set out as long a time period as possible for consultation and study between separate 

schools supporters and the general public, between the separate school board, and other school boards, with no 

automatic time factor imposed by the legislation in this particular period of time. The method, or the steps rather, would 

be that consideration first of all would be given by the separate school boards. They can petition the minister for the 

erection of such a separate high school district. 

 

Following this the minister would request that a plan be drawn in respect to the buildings that would be required, the 

staff that would be necessary, the extent of the programs; whether or not, the board is going to move into special 

education, retarded, vocational and technical and the financing of the plan, which is not the least of the problem. Bear 

in mind there is no time limit on this. Following the drawing of this plan, and after whatever length of time is required, 

the separate school board may file the plan with the minister. With the filing of this plan with the minister, we look on 

an automatic timing device, that calls for a poll to be taken in not less than 90 days and not more than 24 months. The 

poll is to be taken by the separate school board, and the poll would be for or against the establishment of a separate 

high school district. One month prior to the poll, the plan or an approved summary of the plan would have to be 

published, whether in a newspaper that normally circulates the area, or by some other approved method so that 

ratepayers by the time the polls are taken, would have had the benefit of whatever consultations and public discussion 

had been entered into, during the whole period of time. They would be made perfectly cognizant of what the plan was, 

what commitments they would be undertaking in respect to buildings and financing and the like. If a district is 

established, we then come to the declaration of the ratepayer as to whether or not he becomes a separate high school 

supporter and this is found in section 13. 

 

The method that we have chosen is that if the rate payer is a separate school supporter, he is automatically placed on 

the roll of the separate high school; if he is a public school supporter, he is automatically placed on the roll of the high 

school until such time as he declares contrary and there is a double cross-over, Mr. Speaker. The separate school 

supporter, if he wishes, can designate himself to be the supporter of the collegiate system, send his children to the 

collegiate system, and of course his taxes would go to that system without a declaration of faith. The Protestant, if he 

wishes, and many do, can send his children to separate schools and pay tax monies to that system. 

 

There is a problem of stability here. We recognize this but we do think that if this method were chosen and the systems 

were established, there would be comparatively little shifting in and out. However, we are not fully aware of the degree 

of shift that might take place in any one year, but we are willing to risk that. We think it will be small and it meets the 

demands for such flexibility of declaration. 

 

Where the ratepayers decide not to divide the high school districts, Mr. Speaker, we have written into sub-section (2) 

the possibility of the collegiate board designating a school which would in fact become a separate school in the high 

school academic area, operated by the collegiate system. Here we have written into law a bit of the concept that has 

already been possible and has already been legal. We have written in a slightly different fashion those agreements that 

have already been made between private schools and school boards. 

 

If either system is chosen, Mr. Speaker, the problem of double taxation is solved. We think then we will have moved a 

step towards resolving 



March 5, 1964 

 

665 

this question of inequity that now exists in 14 of the 16 high school or collegiate districts in Saskatchewan. 

 

There are, of course, a number of concerns in this type of legislation. I am suggesting to this house, Mr. Speaker, that in 

placing responsibility on the two publicly operated systems, we are taking a positive and good step in maintaining high 

standards of education without fragmenting the concept of public education and public responsibility. 

 

There is nothing, as we have said before, in this act that refers to private schools as such. The possibility of private 

schools making agreements with school boards remains untouched by this legislation. They have exactly the same 

rights in this respect they had prior to the consideration of these amendments. 

 

Another part of this bill has nothing to do with this proposal is found in section (2) of the bill, which has to do with the 

disorganization of a high school district. These two parts are not related. This section is written in, following a number 

of requests from city systems stating that they wish to consider setting up a single board of education, and we haven‘t 

been able to move as quickly as we would have liked in consideration of this type of legislation. We thought that by 

writing in this section, which deals with disorganization of a high school district we would let the people of 

Saskatchewan know that we are interested in moving in this direction. If any city districts are interested in moving in 

this direction and I could let you know that Saskatoon system has contacted us on it following this amendment, if it 

should pass this house, I‘m sure we will be sitting down to consider what other legislative steps may be necessary as 

further consultation indicates it. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, those are the main parts of this bill. I am confident that when the people of Saskatchewan fully 

understand the concept and fully understand the problem that has emerged as a result of secondary or high school 

collegiate districts, and separate districts, they will be prepared to go along with these amendments and I would not 

move second reading. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. W. Ross Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to compliment the minister on the 

way he presented his views on this legislation this afternoon. The Liberal party has no desire to place a such a matter as 

the issue now before us, in the filed of political controversy. Our position has been clearly stated on numerous 

occasions and particularly at our annual convention last November. 

 

Hon. members may recall that during the throne speech I outlined those views in some detail, and I see no purpose in 

repeating them this afternoon. The Liberal party believes that approved private high schools of all denominations 

should receive fair and equal treatment. We believe that such institutions are entitled to equitable financial assistance 

from this government. 

 

Upon taking office a Liberal government will provide such assistance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY: (Minster of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 48 – An Act to Amend The 

Hospital Standards Act. 

 

He said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a bill designed to amend The Hospital Standards Act, and the amendments deal with matters 

relating to hospital staff appointments. Matters with respect to hospital staff appointments have always caused 

problems in hospitals, not only in Saskatchewan, but elsewhere. The problems have almost always in Saskatchewan 

revolved around the medical competence of the doctor as judged by the application of the standards applied by the 

hospital, existing and well known and frequently applied standards. 
 



March 5, 1964 

 

 
666 

The possibility of hospital staff appointments revolving around other problems has always existed and in point of fact, I 

think that a fair assessment of the hospital staff appointment problems which have occurred in Saskatchewan in the past 

would acknowledge that on occasion other matters, other than competence, have become one of the considerations. 

Frequently there have been some personality clashes, particularly in smaller hospitals. 

 

The possibility of hospital staff appointment problems revolving around differences other than differences in medical 

competence, was recognized at the time of the Saskatoon Agreement. It was at that time recognized that other 

differences between medical men, differences of attitude of physicians to the medical care plan being inaugurated, 

might be the basis of difficulties with respect to the hospital staff appointments. 

 

With this in mind a particular provision was agreed to and incorporated in the Agreement, I think members are familiar 

with it, but I will just quote briefly from it to refresh our minds; a number of articles 8 to 14 deal with the matter, but 

rather than taking an extensive period of time, I would just refer to article 11, which deals for the most part with this 

subject. Article 11 reads: 

 

There must be no discrimination against any doctor in whatsoever way he practices. In particular there must be no 

discrimination against any doctor in the matter of hospital privileges and attachments, referrals from one physician to 

another, or other professional activities involving assistance and co-operation between physicians. 

The College endorses this view. It is no wish of the College that there should grow up divisions between physicians 

and it will exercise its full influence to prevent discrimination in matters of professional practice. Accordingly, the 

College undertakes that in advising on applications for hospital appointments applicants shall be judged solely on 

their merits. 

 

Following the Saskatoon agreement and the inauguration of the medical care plan which is provided for in The Medical 

Care Insurance Act as amended, there were persistent reports of difficulties with regard to medical staff appointments. 

There was a similarity with respect to the cases. Almost every case involved a doctor practising directly under the 

medical care insurance plan and a substantial number of the cases involved doctors associated with community clinics. 

 

The general question of medical staff appointments is a very serious matter, not only for physicians but also for their 

patients. It is generally recognized that a family doctor, a general practitioner, carrying on an ordinary practice of 

medicine in Canada – with the type of medical organization which we have in Canada, with the type of relations 

between doctors and their patients and doctors and their hospitals, and patients in their hospitals, with this set-up which 

we have – to carry on his best work must have access to a hospital. 

 

I could quote a good number of authorities in support of that proposition. There has been, not too long ago, a book 

published, entitled ―The General Practitioner‖ by Dr. Kenneth F. Clute, a study which was prepared at the instigation of 

the College of General Practice of Canada, and carried out at the University of Toronto. During the course of the very 

exhaustive study which is represented by this book, into the patterns of medical practice, particularly in Ontario and 

Nova Scotia, a number of conclusions were reached, and I would like to refer to one or two of them with respect to this 

matter of the relationship between a general practitioner and a hospital. 

 

In the foreword to the book a Doctor Victor Johnston, a director of the College of General Practice of Canada, reaches 

the conclusion that the College of General Practice has consistently maintained that the privilege of participation on the 

active staff of their neighbouring general hospitals, including teaching hospitals, is a fundamental privilege which 

assures able general practitioners a place on hospital committees and departments an enhances their competence as 

medical practitioners. This is a general statement. There have been a good number of others. There is in Dr. Clute‘s 

book an excerpt from the 1957 bulletin of the College of General Practice in which Dr. S. Robinson, an official of the 

Toronto Academy of Medicine, states the view that he believes that it is time that general practitioners sought 

recognition of certain fundamental rights and he goes on to say that another fundamental right is that of being enabled 

to perform any service or procedure in a hospital of which he has proven himself capable. 

 

Another is the right of the general practitioner for equal opportunity with the specialist to admit his patients to hospital. 

And he goes on – 



March 5, 1964 

 

667 

another is the right of the general practitioner for equal opportunity with the specialist to admit his patients to hospital. 

And he goes on – another is the right of the general practitioner to admit his patients to hospital in the district, even 

though it is not a hospital on whose staff he happens to be. There are similar points of view expressed on page 119 of 

Dr. Clute‘s book where he quotes the May, 1958, bulletin of the College of General Practice, and quotes a Doctor 

Morley A. Young, the then President of the Canadian Medical Association, to the effect: 

 

that every medical practitioner should have hospital privileges. 

 

Dr. Young goes on to say: 

 

Whenever hospital privileges are denied, someone has caused a step to be taken which lowers the standard of 

practice. 

 

In the November, 1958, bulletin of the College of General Practice, the following resolution is recorded: 

 

Be it further resolved that the Canadian Medical Association uses its full influence to discourage any arbitrary 

restrictions by hospitals against general practitioners as a group, or as individuals. 

 

There are a number of other quotations to this effect, all to the effect that practice as we know it in Canada is best 

facilitated by giving access to hospitals to the family doctor. 

 

There is a very forthright statement of this point of view quoted in page 122 of Dr. Clute‘s book where a Dr. J.A. 

McHugh, the Conservative member of the Ontario Legislature for Lanark, is quoted on this subject, and Dr. McHugh is 

very forthright in his views. Among others he says and I am quoting from page 122 of Dr. Clute‘s book: 

 

There is a condition existing in this province today, which I believe is unjust and completely intolerable. This is the 

fact that there are many hospitals in existence which will not allow a family doctor to become a member of their staff 

nor to treat any patient of theirs within the hospital. 

 

And he goes on to say: 

 

I would like to see legislation introduced which would require every hospital board at present not doing so, to take 

the family doctor on to their staffs. 

 

In other words, let the doctors into their hospitals. Wherever they cannot now do so, why should there be any medical 

caste system anywhere? Why should there be any discrimination in a democracy such as ours? 

 

Well, the general tenor of these remarks is to the effect that it is wise and prudent in most hospitals to allow general 

practitioners, and indeed all doctors to have access to those hospitals to carry on their practices to the extent of their 

medical abilities. 

 

A similar point of view is expressed in The Canadian Doctor for February, 1964. There is an editorial there which talks 

about the need for public re-education on the best way that a doctor can serve the public. Therein they state the point of 

view that for the public to believe that a doctor, an individual doctor, a person who is a doctor, can be available to them 

twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, is unrealistic. No man, no individual, can maintain that pace, and the 

public ought to be re-educated so that when certain crises arise, they will call their local hospital or call an ambulance 

to take them to their local hospital where the patient can be dealt with, rather than waiting for a particular practitioner if 

in the view of the patient the crisis is acute. 

 

They are again commenting on the developing pattern in medicine, and towards the end of the comment they go on to 

say: 

 

If, on the other hand, the patient is not ill enough to need immediate attention, he can safely wait to see his doctor 
during the daylight hours, either in his own house or in the doctor‘s office, or at the hospital. The increased use of the 

hospital obviously makes it essential that every doctor should have hospital facilities available to him. 

 



March 5, 1964 

 

 
668 

I think that I could outline for the house a great number of similar points of view, similar expressions of this point of 

view, and I think it is very widely accepted that in our system of medicine it is entirely appropriate for virtually every 

doctor to have access to hospitals where he may treat his patients again to the extent of his medical ability. 

 

In the light of persistent reports that reached us that there were difficulties with respect to hospital staff appointments, 

the government arranged to appoint a Royal Commission. There had previously been a Royal Commission dealing with 

this general topic and it was reactivated and the government was, as we believe, very fortunate in securing the services 

of Mr. Justice Mervyn Woods. I think all members will know that Judge Woods is a man of very wide experience in the 

life of Saskatchewan. He has been a practising lawyer in Saskatoon, and had an extensive clientele. He has been active 

in many community affairs and organizations, particularly active in the Canadian Legion and has been National 

President. He has been a Professor of Law at University of Saskatchewan. He is a Doctor of Jurisprudence; he is a 

member of the Court of Appeal of Saskatchewan; and he has altogether a very distinguished record of public service. 

 

In the course of discharging his duties he carried out very exhaustive investigations and hearings. There were 

something like 50 sitting days in which he heard testimony, the testimony, aggregating well over 5,000 pages. In fact he 

carried out a most exhaustive, a most careful, a most detailed inquiry into the question of hospital staff appointments in 

the history of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I think we shouldn‘t believe that questions with respect to hospital staff appointments are confined to 

Saskatchewan. There have been many other problems associated with hospital staff appointments in other places, and 

other methods of dealing with them have been evolved. These problems are very common in the southern United 

States, where the problems usually surround race; they are quite common in other parts of the United States; and they 

have been the subject of a good deal of litigation and some legislation in the United States. Other general problems of a 

similar nature, problems of relationships between physicians and hospital boards, have come to light in Canada. 

 

In the United States the general law of the United States offers some solutions not available in Canada. They have as 

part of their sub-stratum of law, a right of action wherever there is restraint of trade, and a good number of actions have 

been taken against hospital boards and against local medical societies where a doctor alleged that because of the actions 

of the local hospital medical board, or medical society, in his view they were acting in restraint of trade in a 

monopolistic way and these events have occurred in a way which would bar him from hospitals. 

 

In New York there has been litigation and there has more recently been legislation. I think a good number of members 

will have had called to their attention legislation passed in February of 1963, in New York, dealing specifically with 

discrimination in hospital staff appointments, and I would just quote briefly from it and then try to summarize the 

import of the bill. The bill is in the style of American Statues which is terse as compared with our own. The bill says: 

 

Discrimination in hospital staff appointments and privileges is prohibited. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory 

practice for the governing body of a hospital ―a‖ – to deny or withhold from a physician, staff membership or 

professional privileges in a hospital because of his participation in any medical group practice or non-profit health 

insurance plan authorized by the laws of the state. 

 

It shall equally be unlawful and a discriminatory practice: 

 

―b‖ to exclude or expel a physical from staff membership, or to curtail, terminate, or to diminish in any way a 

physician‘s professional privileges in a hospital because of his participation in medical group practice or non-profit 

health insurance plan . . . 

 



March 5, 1964 

 

669 

And the act goes on to set up procedures where it is alleged that this is occurring. The procedures are that a 

commissioner may be appointed and he may hold a hearing, and if upon the evidence at the hearing the hearing officer 

which is the name given to the deputy commissioner, shall find that a respondent – which is the hospital – has engaged 

in any unlawful discriminatory practice, the hearing officer shall state his findings of fact and the commissioner shall 

issue and cause to be service on such respondent an order requiring such respondent to cease and desist from such 

unlawful discriminatory practice. I think for one to appreciate this one has to appreciate that under the American system 

a commissioner is the nearest equivalent to the cabinet minister. He is normally an elected official and heard of a 

bureau or department of the government of a state. 

 

This is the solution which has been arrived at in New York. The Quebec solution to a somewhat similar problem is 

contained in the new Hospital Act of Quebec, 1962, and they are dealing here with disputes between hospital boards 

and the organized medical staff. This statute says that any dispute between the Board of Management, that is the Board 

of Governors in our parlance, and the executive committee of the medical board of a public hospital, respecting a 

medical or scientific matter including the appointment, reappointment, or dismissal of medical staff must be submitted 

to a joint committee consisting of an equal number of representatives of each party, and any dispute not settled by the 

joint committee must be submitted to a conciliation committee consisting of a chairman and two others appointed by 

the Ltd. Governor-in-Council. 

 

This so-called conciliation committee is to make a decision and the unanimous or the majority decision of such a 

committee shall be final and the board managing the hospital must give effect thereto. This is chapter 44 of the 1962 

statues of Quebec, 10 and 11 Elizabeth, as they state in their province. 

 

These have been some of the methods of dealing with these problems which occasionally arise as between individual 

doctors or groups of doctors, and boards of governors of hospitals. We will note that it has been common to get 

litigation in the United States and court orders ordering hospitals to place doctors on staff. We have in New York 

legislation on the point, and we have in Quebec legislation providing for an arbitration board on not dissimilar points, – 

in particular, an arbitration board which can rule out the appointment, reappointment or dismissal of members of the 

medical staff. 

 

With this background, and with the exhaustive hearings which he carried on, Judge Woods reached certain 

conclusions. I think these again are well known to members of the house and I will not read Judge Woods‘ conclusion 

except only to say that they really can be summarized as being three: he recommended that there be an appeal board, a 

board to be established dealing with refusals, deferrals, or delays in granting of hospital privileges; he recommended 

that the findings of the board be binding on all parties; he recommended further that reasons in writing be given by the 

medical staff or any committee or persons acting on behalf of the board when hospital privileges or hospital staff 

appointments are denied. He further recommended that where a hospital is using a sponsorship system, an alternative 

system should be available so that sponsorship would not be a bar to admission to hospital staff appointments. Mr. 

Speaker, the bill with respect to the amendments to The Hospital Standards Act follows very closely the 

recommendations of Mr. Justice Woods. 

 

I will take some time now to review portions of the bill so that members of the house may be able to relate portions of 

the bill to the Woods Commission Report, if they so wish. 

 

The bill itself, in section 2, contains a series of definitions. Some of these are new definitions and others of them are 

definitions which were in the act previously. The definitions of ―institution‖, ―minister‖, ―participating hospital‖ were 

previously in the act, the definition of ―patient‖ was in the act, in a very slightly different form. I will in my remarks 

refer to not the sections in the amending act, but the section numbers as they will appear if and when they were enacted. 

I will then refer to section 13A and say that this deals with the granting of temporary hospital privileges to physicians. 

Judge Woods deals with this in the course of his report on page 19, and here we have followed the general suggestion 

which he has put forward, and in particular, we have followed quite closely the suggested medical staff bylaws, rules 

and regulations which are published by the Canadian Council on Hospital Accreditation. 

 

They have in their suggested bylaws in section 6, some bylaws with respect to emergency and temporary privileges and 
these have been followed fairly closely in section 13A. 

 



March 5, 1964 

 

 
670 

Section 13B is an attempt to set out criteria which shall be used in deciding whether physicians should be appointed or 

reappointed to the staff and emphasis, of course, was placed upon the professional competence, the training, the 

experience and the character of the physicians. Then it is recognized that there may well be some other considerations 

which would not fall squarely under these heads and an attempt has been made to respect the codes which may deal 

with other criteria. An attempt has been made to respect the codes which religious hospitals may impose on 

practitioners who practise within their walls or at least in respect to the practice that they carry on within their walls. An 

attempt has been made to deal with the University Act, and in sub-section 7, a number of things which are not to be 

considered with respect to hospital staff appointment are enumerated; here we have matters of race, creed, religion, 

color and this is fairly closely copied from the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights. We have other provisions with respect to 

sponsorship. I would point out to hon. members that the act does not do anyway with sponsorship, it merely provides 

that alternative methods must be found where an applicant is unable to find a sponsor – an alternate method of 

supervision in the manner again suggested by Judge Woods. 

 

The other sections here are relatively self-explanatory. A rather cryptic reference to the medical profession on page five 

is to deal with improper methods of remuneration and is not an attempt to make valid or make proper any methods of 

payment which are now considered to be improper under The Medical Profession Act. 

 

Section 13B, the next large section, tries to set out time limits within which a physician may expect to get answers from 

a hospital board. May I say that if the hospital takes longer than the time limit prescribed, this does not give the 

physician any claim against the hospital, it only means that the physician has what might be called a prima facie case of 

delay and the appeal board is then able to look at the problem. 

 

Section 13E deals with written reasons and there has been an attempt in this section to protect hospital boards and 

members of medical staffs against actions for defamation which could conceivably be against a board or a medical staff 

committee for giving an honest but erroneous opinion on the medical competence of a physician. This was one of the 

points raised with me and with others of us who met with representatives of the Saskatchewan Hospital Association, 

and I believe that this point has been effectively managed. 

 

Another point raised by the Saskatchewan Hospital Association in the course of our consultations with them was a 

desire expressed on their part that some procedures may be found where appeal board provisions might not apply to 

hospitals until they might be needed. They felt that the problems were only arising in a relative handful of hospitals and 

they are at big hospitals and that probably some way could be found of rendering the appeal board provision not 

applicable to a hospital until the need was apparently upon us. 

 

Section 13F is an attempt to say that the appeal board provisions will not apply until the hospital has designated. The 

minister must designate a hospital if a aboard asks that it be designated, and the minister must designate it if a physician 

asks that it be designated and it appears to the minister that the physician is a person who would be able to make an 

application to the appeal board, and that he is a physician at that particular hospital he has made application and so on. 

 

In each case provision is made for consultation with the Saskatchewan Hospital Association, the purpose of this being 

to enable the hospital association firstly to be informed and secondly to have one further opportunity to use any good 

offices which they may be able to use in the solution of the apparent problem. 

 

Section 13G deals with the appointment of the appeal board and it will be noted that provision is made for the chairman 

to be a member of the judiciary in the manner recommended by Mr. Justice Woods. It is provided that the majority of 

the appeal board of seven shall be physicians; it is provided for physicians to be appointed. Mr. Justice Woods 

suggested that at least half of the majority shall be appointed on the nomination of the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons, and this is provided for. The possibility of delays because members of the appeal board could not be 

available has been approached by providing for alternate members and it will be noted that in effect three alternates will 

be provided. They will alternate for the appropriate members of the board as designated by the chairman. 

 



March 5, 1964 

 

671 

There a number of procedural sections dealing with the operations of the board. Section 13H attempts to set out in 

some detail the circumstances under which a physician may appeal to the appeal board, and again they follow quite 

closely the recommendations of Mr. Justice Woods, although they do deal with re-appointments as well as initial 

appointments. It will be recalled that Mr. Justice Woods in the course of his hearings dealt only with cases of first 

appointments, because these were the only cases referred to him. The appeal board is given the usual power to retain 

staff. Perusal of the act will note that a number of powers which might in some statutes be left with the board as such 

have been in this act placed with the chairman, by reason of the fact that he is a member of the judiciary, and he can 

perhaps discharge some of these tasks in a way which would be more acceptable than if the board as a whole decided. 

As an instance of that, I would refer to section 13J, where we provide that the hearings of the board shall be in public, 

except where the chairman of the board otherwise directs. Here I think we can rely upon the chairman to use his good 

judgment on whether or not the circumstances are such that the hearings should be in public. The decision of the appeal 

board is binding. 

 

Further sections deal with procedural matters such as costs, and the service of the documents. I would refer hon. 

members to section 13N, because this is a little bit about the other sections of the act. This provides that the board of 

governors of a general hospital may make what amounts to an informal application to the appeal board for advice, and 

in this case the appeal board may call for such information as may be useful to them, in assisting the board with the 

problem posed by the board. 

 

This was an attempt to deal with the recommendations of Mr. Justice Woods, contained on page 103 of his report, 

where he suggested that a similar right, meaning a right of application to the appeal board, should be open to the 

governing body of the hospital before acting upon a recommendation or making a final decision. It seemed to us 

appropriate that where the board is essentially seeking advice the procedure ought to be somewhat less formal than 

where they are carrying on what is essentially their duty. 

 

Section 13 O is the usual section saying that no existing legal rights are being done away with by this act. 

 

The new section 19 is a section which attempts to remove any doubts as to whether or not the Department of Public 

Health can make available to the public copies of medical staff bylaws which are filed with the department. There has 

for some years been a requirement that medical staff bylaws be filed with the department. Some people had been of the 

view that these then became documents which the department is free to make available to the public, acting as a 

registrar like the Registrar of Joint Stock Companies or the Registrar of Co-ops or as the case may be. Others have felt 

that these were filed for the internal use of the department and not to be made public. The act resolves the question in 

favour of the fact that medical staff bylaws are public documents and in this regard I think quite properly so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have gone into some detail in outlining the nature of the act and background leading up to the act. 

Members will be aware that after Mr. Justice Woods‘ report was received, rather extensive consultations were 

undertaken both informally and later on a rather more formal basis with the Saskatchewan Hospital Association and 

representations were received from a substantial number of other bodies. I think the press reports outlined these and I 

won‘t take the time of the house to outline the views of the various groups. It suffices to say that some wished that Mr. 

Justice Woods had gone further, some supported his views wholeheartedly. 

 

The Saskatchewan Hospital Association supported one recommendation, had reservations with respect to the second 

and rather substantial reservations with respect to the third. The College of Physicians and Surgeons express their 

reservations with respect substantially to all of his recommendations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bill is designed to deal with the report of Mr. Justice Woods and to implement the recommendations 

that he has put forward. The problem which he investigated is essentially a problem of citizens‘ rights. Our hospitals 

are publicly supported hospitals and they are part of a publicly supported health system. I believe that all members 

would agree that they are meant to be used for the benefit of the general public. I view them in a not dissimilar way to 

our legal system. It seems to me that as we created a health system to serve our needs, the needs of the whole 

community with respect to health matters, we created a legal system to deal with legal matters. We have doctors, we 

have lawyers, and I know viewing it from a lawyer‘s point of view, I would think that I should have the right to practise 
at the bar, and that right ought not to be curtailed for any reasons which is not associated with my legal competency or 

my moral standing. If I am legally competent and not guilty of moral turpitude, it seems to me that I should have the 

right to 



March 5, 1964 

 

 
672 

practise at the bar. It also seems to me that it would be wrong for any fellow practitioner to attempt to curtail my rights 

for any reason not associated with my legal competence or moral standing. 

 

I think it would be wrong, and morally wrong, for any legal practitioner or any fellow member of the bar to attempt to 

curtail my right to practise in a way which would affect my ability to serve my clients and his. It seems to me that if he 

would try to deny me the use of the courts, deny me the use of going to court and using the public facilities that are 

there, the judges that are appointed and paid for, the library which is there, or any reasons other than my incompetence 

or moral turpitude, then he is in effect denying my clients‘ rights to use the public legal system which is established not 

for my benefit, not for my fellow practitioner‘s benefit, but for the client‘s benefit. 

 

I think equally so that some analogies can be drawn in the health field. I am not saying the analogy is perfect, I am just 

saying there is an analogy there, and that it seems to me that generally speaking patients ought to have the right to have 

access to hospitals, being treated there by the medically qualified physicians of their choice. 

 

It seems to me that this is a right which inheres in citizens by reason of the fact that they as taxpayers have built the 

hospitals and paid to operate them. It seems to me also that Judge Woods in the course of his analysis found that there 

was, at least in his view and in some cases, a denial of this right. Where there is a denial of such a right for reasons not 

associated with medical competence or moral standing, there is in my view a wrong, and where there is a wrong, in my 

view there should be a remedy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my belief that this bill provides the remedy. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mrs. Batten: — I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly recessed from 5:30 to 7:30 p.m. 

 

Hon. W. G. DAVIES (Minister of Public Works) moved second reading of Bill No. 51, An Act to Amend The Public 

Service Act. 

 

He said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, the principle aimed at this bill is to clarify the position and to offer some additional protection to an 

employee in the Public Service, who becomes a candidate for election to the Legislative Assembly of this province. 

The proposal in the bill is to amend section 53 of The Public Service Act, so as to overcome any situation that may 

perhaps adversely affect a person who does become a candidate under the circumstances contemplated. 

 

I felt that as matters now stand a Public Service employee who is a candidate for election to the legislature may, unless 

he has resigned, prior to being elected, expose himself to a penalty of being unseated. Manifestly a public employee 

who does become a candidate can‘t know whether he will be elected or not before election day at least. It would seem 

to be rather unjust that he would have to have filed his resignation before the election results where known. 

 

Now, the amendment proposes to state that such a candidate will have been deemed to have resigned his office or his 

place of profit, or employment, as stated in the act before Election Day, if he is successful in getting elected. A number 

of obvious exceptions are included in this amendment to cover such variables as re-counts, the setting aside of the 

election, and so forth. 

 

So, in a nutshell I think as I have said, the amendment seeks to offer an additional amount of security for a Public 

Service employee who does seek office in the provincial legislature, and thereupon becomes successful at the polls. 
 

I think with this explanation, Mr. Speaker, I would move second reading of this bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 



March 5, 1964 

 

673 

HON. O.A. TURNBULL (Minister of Education) moved second reading of Bill No. 52 An Act to Amend The School 

Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 52 provides for a number of amendments to The School Act. They fall generally into three areas, 

one has to do with the establishment of the divisional system, which is to group grades 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 

and 12 into divisions. It appears in this section because where the division is 7, 8 and 9, we list under (2) which is an 

amendment of paragraph four, section two, we amended this section in such a way so that this division can qualify for 

high school grants. The reverse had been true. If the high school did reach down and pick up seven and eight and make 

it a junior high school it would qualify for high school grants. Now this does the reverse, in this respect, for this school 

system. 

 

There is a matter of administration in this paragraph three, section three, amended, which has to do with the regulations 

of the department and this has to do, as you see, with remuneration. It is requested by the audit. 

 

We have had certain activities taking place that are listed here, special committees, boards of reference, conferences 

and the like, which have been handled under section five of The School Act, which is rather broad and an omnibus type 

of section re powers of the minister. The audit suggested that we ought to write in something a bit more specific, thus 

this one rises. 

 

There is a bit on the numbers of school board members, trustees, which is an amendment to section 102. This has 

relation to the consolidations that are taking place, and increases the number from five to seven. 

 

On section six, it is related to the other section I dealt with, which was the amendment to section three. An amendment 

to section three provides for the money for the divisional system; section 114 provides for the structure of the divisional 

system. Another section deals with the powers of trustees which has to do with payments of gratuities to employees, 

other than a teacher on retirement on account of age, which is permissive. You will note the (b) part of that section has, 

(I think, section 125) has to do with absence with pay for person other than teachers, where granting level of absence is 

thought to be desirable. This has to do, in the main, with school secretaries who do leave to take up-grading at the 

university and the like and it will allow school boards, if they wish to, to grant leave of absence and grant pay. 

 

There is another small section there, section 179, an amendment, which allows equal payment of debentures, and the 

last bit, section 229, refers again to the part of the divisional system and is necessary in order that where school boards 

wish to shift to this structure, they may so do. 

 

I would, therefore, move second reading. 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): — I have a question before the minister takes his seat. I was just going to ask the 

minister if it is the intention of the department to put in to effect the new system this fall, compulsory in all schools, or 

will it be on an optional basis. 

 

Mr. Turnbull: — On an optional basis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

HON. E.I. WOOD (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 55, An Act to Implement the 

Provisions of the Municipal Development and Loan Act (Canada). 

 

He said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, the hon. members will no doubt be cognizant of The Municipal Development and Loan Act (Canada) 

which was passed last summer, whereby monies are made available to the municipalities throughout Canada, in regard 

to capital works which they would not otherwise be doing, in order that they might improve the unemployment 

situation throughout Canada. There has been a good deal in the papers about this and I don‘t think it is necessary for 
me to discuss it at this time. 

 



March 5, 1964 

 

 
674 

When this first came up we had to look at our law to see whether we were authorized to act as mediators in this, to 

accept money from the federal government and loan it to the municipalities as is proposed under this act. We felt that 

we did have the necessary legal requirements in some relief acts back from the thirties whereby the government was 

empowered to make loans to the municipalities, and we felt that up to this point we have been acting on firm legal 

basis. At any rate we felt that it wasn‘t worthwhile calling a special session prior to this in order to make sure that we 

were on a sound legal basis, but we felt that in dealing with this act through the ensuing years, that it might be better 

that we make certain that we have the proper legal basis for doing what we wish to do under this act in agreement with 

the federal government in making these funds available to the municipalities. 

 

This act is very simple and straightforward, I believe. It simply provides permission for the Department of Municipal 

Affairs to borrow these monies from the federal government and to loan them to the municipalities. I don‘t think there 

is anything controversial about it that I have noticed and I would now move second reading. 

 

Mr. R.A. McCarthy (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, will the minister permit a question before he sits down? 

 

Mr. Wood: — Certainly. 

 

Mr. McCarthy (Cannington): — Are you renting it out at the same rate of interest as you get from the dominion 

government? 

 

Mr. Wood: — Yes, we would be lending it at the same rate. I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that we have agreed we 

would do this. We would get the money from the federal government and we will be making the contracts directly with 

the municipalities and we will, of course, have to have the approval of the federal government in regard to each one. 

 

As the hon. members know the loans can only be made up to two-thirds of the amount of the project that is being 

undertaken by the municipality. The municipal development loan can be two-thirds of the project that is undertaken and 

of this the federal government is prepared to forgive 25 per cent. This full 25 per cent of forgiveness will be passed on 

to the municipality and the money will be passed on at exactly the same rate as what we obtain it. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Minister of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 49, An Act respecting the 

Establishment and Operation of a Hospital Centre for the Residents of Southern Saskatchewan. 

 

He said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a bill to incorporate or establish a board which will have the responsibility of examining into and 

probably presiding over the construction and operation of a hospital centre for southern Saskatchewan. 

 

The genesis of this bill dates back some considerable time. There had been in the city of Regina some major hospital 

development in the late 1940‘s and early 1950‘s in the form of a substantial addition to the Regina General Hospital, 

the so called Alexandra Wing, of 263 beds, with a small addition in 1955 of isolation beds. There was similarly an 

addition on the Grey Nuns‘ Hospital of some 156 beds, and then in the middle and later ‗50‘s the geriatric centre came 

into use. While these beds created in the geriatric centre were not general hospital beds, they assisted in relieving 

pressure on some of the general hospital beds in the two major hospitals in this area. 

 

However, the city of Regina and the population of the province that uses Regina as a hospital centre continued to grow 

and during the mid and later 



March 5, 1964 

 

675 

1950‘s the need for a more comprehensive review of hospital facilities in Regina was felt. In 1958 the Regina and 

District Medical Society dealt with this matter and appointed a committee to study the needs for further hospital beds in 

Regina. The committee proceeded with its work and felt that a more formal and more elaborate survey should be 

undertaken. This committee of the Regina and District Medical Society felt that the study should be undertaken by the 

city of Regina, and accordingly recommended that the Regina and District Medical Society approach the city of Regina 

to proceed with a study of the hospital bed needs in Regina. The committee of the Regina and District Medical Society 

was of the opinion that a thorough study covering the whole area was necessary and desirable and they believed that 

anything short of proper assessment of the whole situation would be real folly. 

 

This effort did not bear much fruit, at least I am not aware of any positive action taken by the Regina City Council with 

respect to an area-wide survey of hospital bed needs in Regina. However, the Regina General Hospital did undertake 

an analysis of the needs of that institution and they, with the consent of the Department of Public Health, did proceed to 

retain consultants and evolve a plan for expanding the facilities of the Regina General Hospital. 

 

Prior to the receipt of the report of the consultants engaged by the Regina General Hospital, or prior to the latest report 

of the consultants retained by the Regina General Hospital, the government was in receipt of a number of reports from 

advisory bodies which had been appointed, either by it, or by agencies created by it. In particular the government 

received in 1962 the report of the Advisory Planning Committee on Medical Care, that is the President Thompson 

committee, which dealt with a wide range of health topics in Saskatchewan. For the purpose of this discussion I merely 

wish to refer to two or three of the recommendations made by the Thompson committee. They took the position that the 

approach of the government with respect to the treatment of psychiatric diseases was a desirable one, that is that the 

province should move to the creation of smaller psychiatric institutions associated with general hospitals. In general, as 

I read the report, they endorsed the type of institution which is presently under construction and about to be opened at 

Yorkton; that is a psychiatric institution of 150 or 200, or perhaps 300 beds, depending upon the population of the area 

to be served, in association with the general hospital, but with a sufficient degree of isolation so that the psychiatric 

patients, or the patients suffering from psychiatric disorders could use the outdoors as part of the therapy area. 

 

I quote the Thompson committee: 

 

The provincial government should proceed at once with the gradual implementation of a modified form of the 

Saskatchewan plan for community-based, decentralized services to the mentally ill and mentally retarded. 

 

My point here is simply to say that they endorsed the idea of having smaller psychiatric institutions in association with 

the general hospitals, and institutions approximately of the type of the Yorkton institution. 

 

In dealing with tuberculosis they envisage the day when the Sanatorium at For San might operate on a more restricted 

basis and when Sanatorium units might be associated with general hospitals, and in their report, page 140, they 

envisage the possibility at some time in the future of a tuberculosis in-patient unit being established at Regina in 

association with the General hospital. 

 

The next and the major piece of advice which the government received was in the form of the report of the hospital 

survey committee. This committee as members will know, is a committee appointed by the Health Services Planning 

Commission. Members will also recall that the Health Services Planning Commission is a broadly based advisory 

group advising the government on a general range of health problems. It has representatives of SARM, SUMA, 

Registered Nurses, College of Physicians and Surgeons, College of Dental Surgeons, the Saskatchewan Hospital 

Association, the Federation of Labour and a substantial number of other widely representative community groups, or 

professional groups interested in the health field. 

 

Well, this Health Services Planning Commission appointed a hospital survey committee to do a survey of the hospital 

needs of Saskatchewan. A survey of the hospital needs of Saskatchewan had been done in 1951. That survey had 

recommended that a re-survey be done sometime during the 1950‘s; time passed on and the problem wasn‘t attacked 

until 1961 when, I believe, the committee was appointed, or 1960. It did most of the work in 1961, and reported to the 

Health Services Planning Commission in 1962. That commission studies the report and prepared an analysis, or 
perhaps I should say a commentary 



March 5, 1964 

 

 
676 

of the hospital survey report, and passed it along to the government in November of 1962. There were in the report of 

the hospital survey committee a number of recommendations which had a good deal of relevance for the Regina 

situation. 

 

In particular they reported, page 242, that 

 

At the present time the Regina General Hospital has received approval from the Minister of Public Health for a 

construction and renovation program which would provide an integrated hospital unit having a rated capacity of 750 

active treatment beds. 

 

The hospital survey committee feels there is further merit in reviewing the advantages and disadvantages of all 

criteria affecting construction and expansion of facilities on the existing Regina General site. 

 

After giving this matter considerable thought the hospital survey committee is of the opinion that there may be a 

distinct advantage in considering the construction of a third hospital in the city of Regina, rather than expanding large 

sums of money to expand facilities on the existing sites of both the Regina General and the Grey Nuns. 

 

Then the committee goes on to say that they do not exclude the possibility of construction or renovation of the Regina 

General; they recommended, and here I am quoting from page 160 of the hospital survey report: 

 

It is recommended that a thorough study of the use of existing beds and facilities in the general hospitals and related 

institutions in both the cities of Regina and Saskatoon be undertaken to determine how available beds are being 

utilized. The provision of the additional beds that will be required in both cities, within the overall total 

recommended by the committee, should be guided by the results of this study. 

 

In effect, therefore, they were recommending, Mr. Speaker, that the possibility of a third hospital in Regina be 

considered, and that a thorough study of bed needs in Regina and Saskatoon should be made. 

 

They further recommended that base hospital services be a provincial responsibility and that one hospital in Saskatoon 

and one in Regina be designated as base hospitals. They further recommended that a provincial owned base hospital be 

constructed in Regina. This then was the nub of their recommendations. Having received these recommendations, 

having received the other recommendations which I earlier referred to from the Thompson Committee (suggesting the 

desirability of a general hospital complex which would combined easily with a psychiatric unit of the type we have at 

Yorkton and combined possibly with a tuberculosis unit), the possibility of constructing a third hospital on a quite 

different site from the two existing hospitals presented itself with some force. Accordingly, we advised the Regina 

General Hospital that we would ask them not to proceed further with their planning at this stage; that if they had 

incurred expenses on planning we would meet their bill; we then set out to pursue the recommendations contained in 

the Hospital Survey report. We obtained the services of two hospital consultants working together and in this regard I 

think we were very fortunate indeed. 

 

We arranged to obtain the services of Doctor G. Harvey Agnew and Doctor Gerhard Hartman. Doctor Agnew is of the 

firm of Agnew, Peckham and Associates of Toronto, and Doctor Hartman is of Iowa city, U.S.A. 

 

Dr. Harvey Agnew has been regarded for many years as probably the foremost authority in Canada in the field of 

hospital planning. From 1927 to 1931 he served as the executive official of the Canadian Medical Association Hospital 

Advisory Service. From 1931 to 1950 he was engaged as the executive official of the organization representing 

hospitals in Canada, being organized originally as the Canadian Hospital Council and subsequently becoming known 

as the Canadian Hospital Association. In 1939 he was president of the American Hospital Association. He is a former 

professor of hospital administration of the University of Toronto, and now carries on his profession as a full-time 



March 5, 1964 

 

677 

hospital consultant. He has been engaged as consultant for such places as Metro Toronto. He has done work in Halifax, 

he has done work in Saskatoon for the university hospital, and for a substantial number of other institutes across 

Canada. 

 

Doctor Gerhard Hartman is a younger man. He is professor of hospital administration at the University of Iowa and 

director of the University Hospital at Iowa City which is associated with the University of Iowa. 

 

They were asked to proceed as rapidly as possible with part one of their studies. Part one dealt with whether or not we 

should proceed with a third hospital or alternatively with the Regina General Hospital renovations. In November, 1963, 

they made available to us part one of their report and in brief, the consultants recommended that a hospital centre be 

created in Regina, in which various types of specialized services would be provided. 

 

I do not know whether hon. members would be interested in perusing the report of Doctors Hartman and Agnew, but 

the report spells out their concept of a hospital centre. They envisage a centre which would be designed to provide 

highly specialized services, which would have the very specialized operating rooms, laboratories, and similar 

specialized facilities which might be needed in one hospital in a base centre. They recommended that these be included 

in this specialty unit and that a number of beds be provided as well. They envisaged that there would be associated with 

this all of the other types of care which one would associate with a large hospital complex. They envisaged that there 

would be as part of the complex, and in physical juxtaposition with the specialty centre, a general hospital of the type 

that we have always known. 

 

They wished the complex to be built in a way which would allow the psychiatric unit of the type to which I earlier 

referred to be built sometime in the future in association with this complex. They wished that the complex would be 

such as to enable it to be expanded, to enable it to provide facilities for the tuberculosis unit to which I referred earlier, 

and generally to be expandable to meet a number of other potential health needs. 

 

They envisaged that at some time in the future this hospital complex would be providing a very substantial number of 

the ordinary hospital beds needed by the city of Regina. They envisaged I think that these would be part of the 

complex, but that the general hospital as we have known it might be operated by the same board which operates the 

specialty centre, or it might be a union hospital or it might be new facilities for the Regina General Hospital. They felt 

that all these methods of administration were open, and they were able to point out for us instances, particularly in the 

United States, where hospital complexes existed which had a number of units which were administered in part by 

different boards, but which combined to give an extended range of services to patients. 

 

Our thinking, therefore, is that we should proceed along the lines outlined by Doctor Hartman and Agnew. They are 

currently engaged in a further study to inform us just what facilities should be in this specialty centre, just how many 

beds there should be, and just how many beds the city of Regina will need for its present needs and for its future needs. 

In the meantime, without waiting for their final report, I think we are in a position to proceed to do detailed planning 

for the specialty centre, which as I say will be designed to accommodate other types of institutions, general hospital, a 

psychiatric unit and otherwise as might be advised. 

 

We are accordingly introducing this bill and the bill itself does no more than create a proper identity to proceed with 

the work which I have outlined. The bill itself does not make mandatory the construction of the hospital which I have 

outlined. I felt that the house was entitled to get general background material so that all subjects and al matters which 

some might consider relevant in consideration of this bill could be raised. 

 

I would like, Mr. Speaker, to take a little time to review the bill itself so that members might know precisely what is 

proposed. 

 

In general, the bill is patterned very closely after The University Hospital Act, and the thought is to create an institution 

which would be organizationally very similar to the University Hospital. I hasten to add that it is not intended that this 

hospital would engage in the undergraduate education of medical students. No duplication of facilities of the College of 

Medicine at the university is intended, but, of course, the hospital if it comes into being would work in the 
post-graduate education of medical students as do most hospitals. They provide facilities for interns and for residence. I 

would then refer you in particular to the act. 

 



March 5, 1964 

 

 
678 

The board which is created is very similar to the board created by The University Hospital Act. There are some 

differences. I won‘t have an opportunity to point out all the differences, but I did wish to call to the attention of the 

members that if they did want to compare it, to get some idea of what we had in mind, The University Hospital Act is 

the best model. It is envisaged that two of the board members would be appointed by the recommendation of the Board 

of Governors, one to be appointed as a representative of the College of Medicine and one other representative of the 

University. We would be anxious to obtain any assistance that we could from the College of Medicine in the course of 

planning facilities such as this and I would also be anxious to obtain any assistance which we could from the university 

generally. 

 

A hospital such as this would be a natural training ground for paramedical professions for degree nurses; for 

occupational therapists; for laboratory technicians; for medical record librarians; for various other technicians, X-ray 

and ECG; and generally for that large and growing group of specialized personnel which our modern medical needs 

require in order to offer a full range of services. Many of these people are trained at our existing hospitals, many others 

are trained at the university. In all likelihood the hospital which is envisaged by this act would engage in similar 

activities. The assistance of the university would be of great benefit in planning this sort of activity. 

 

I would like to refer to the powers of the board which are found in section 7. The board is charged with the 

responsibility of examining the factors to be considered in establishing and operating a hospital centre at or near the 

city of Regina for the benefit of the residents of southern Saskatchewan, and subject to the approval of the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council charged with the responsibility of establishing a hospital centre at or near the city of Regina to be 

known as the South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre. 

 

You will see that the board is to consider what sort of an institution needs to be build and, with the approval of the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council, proceed with the construction and operation of such a hospital. 

 

The other provisions of the act are relatively routine in their nature having regard to the corporate body which we are 

seeking to create, but I would particularly draw your attention to section 9, sub-section E. We propose to give the board 

power here to enter into an agreement with any person or board or commission or department of the government of 

Saskatchewan or of Canada, or a municipality or a board of a health region, or any other hospital, for the joint 

provision of hospital services or purposes incidental to the administration of the hospital. What is envisaged here is the 

possibility of contractual arrangements between such a hospital centre and the Regina Grey Nuns‘ Hospital and the 

Regina General Hospital, either located at its present site or on some new site, which contractual arrangements would 

define the relationship between the hospital centre and the other hospitals. It is quite likely that some services would be 

provided on a common basis by one or two other institution, and the power to make these contracts of this nature we 

consider desirable. 

 

There is a general feeling, I think among hospital administrators that as cities grow and as one needs to provide very 

elaborate hospital facilities which are getting more and more specialized, it is not possible to have each hospital in an 

area offer a full and complete range of services. Some of them must specialize in cancer, some of them must specialize 

in heart surgery, some of them must specialize in brain surgery and some of them must specialize in other types of 

highly specialized areas. 

 

We have, of course, recognized that principal in Saskatchewan for many many years. We have confined our facilities 

for the treatment of cancer of a highly specialized nature to two locations, one at the Grey Nuns‘ Hospital and one at 

the University Hospital. We have confined some of our highly specialized facilities to the University Hospital at 

Saskatoon. We have confined some of the others to other institutions. I think that the only artificial kidney as I recall it 

is in St. Paul‘s Hospital. We have attempted to husband our resources, and this sort of tendency is going to have to 

increase rather than decrease, simply as a function of the increasing degree of specialization of medical science and the 

increasing expense of installing facilities and the increasing scarcity of the personnel to operate the facilities. 

Accordingly, it is necessary to cluster some of these things round one or other institution where there are three or four 

hospitals in an area. The purpose of section 9E 



March 5, 1964 

 

679 

is to facilitate contractual arrangements along that line. 

 

The other provisions of the act are very similar indeed to The University Hospital Act in the general powers of the 

board to operate the hospital, to buy and sell land, to borrow money and generally to carry on those functions which a 

hospital board in the ordinary discharge of its duties would carry on. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, outlines the content of the bill and outlines the background of the bill. It is my belief that the 

concept evolved by Doctors Agnew and Hartman will one which will be of great benefit to the citizens of 

Saskatchewan and particularly to the citizens of southern Saskatchewan. 

 

We have reached the point in the evolution of our province where another hospital of the nature of the University 

Hospital is desirable. It is desirable not only for medical reasons but it is desirable for organizational resources. 

 

There are, I think, substantial logical reasons to be advanced in support of the proposition that a couple of base 

hospitals ought to be financed by all of the people of Saskatchewan, and not by the citizens of any particular 

community, when the hospitals are providing facilities for residents of a very wide area. It is entirely likely that the 

people who use this hospital will be from points outside of Regina, in greater numbers than they are residents of 

Regina. In fact it is entirely likely that the minority of the patients of this centre would be residents of the city of 

Regina. Accordingly, it seems only reasonable that the facilities be paid for by all of the citizens of the province. It also 

is, reasonable and desirable that they be organized; that the university as a provincial institution be brought into the 

planning phases, particularly since these institutions play such a major part in the education of medical personnel as 

well as the provision of medical services. 

 

I was saying, Mr. Speaker, that I believe that this concept will be one which will be a very potential benefit, not only to 

the citizens of Regina, but also to citizens of all southern Saskatchewan. I believe that we have a real opportunity to 

make a very substantial forward stride in our hospital facilities in Saskatchewan. We are in the happy position, in one 

sense of the word, of having to start a long way back. We need to make a major expenditure on the hospital facilities in 

Regina. Whether or not we go ahead with this concept, a substantial expenditure will have to be made on hospital 

facilities in Regina. Being committed by the facts to such a substantial expenditure is, of course, not too palatable to the 

treasurer and is a disadvantage in a sense that it is going to cost a good deal of money, but it is a really advantage in a 

sense that we can take a fresh view and spend our money in a way that will give the most lasting advantage to the 

citizens of the province. I think we have this opportunity start afresh to build an institution which would be expandable. 

It would allow us to try out the concepts evolving in respect to mental health, try out some of the ideas with respect to 

tuberculosis care, try some of the ideas with respect to rehabilitation of chronic cases and generally to try out the many 

ideas which have been put forward by some of the advisory committees which have been labouring in this province in 

the last few years in a way which will cost the minimum amount of money and give us the maximum opportunity for 

success. Not too many cities have the advantage or disadvantage of having to take a major step forward in hospital 

construction at one time and while having to put out the funds, at the same time having the opportunity to take a fresh 

look at hospital facilities for a whole large area. We have got it here in the report of Hartman and Agnew, a lively and I 

think a workable concept, one which will not be expensive in the long run and one which will give us the very best 

value for our dollar and for our expenditure of trained personnel. 

 

Because I believe that this opportunity is opened to us, and because I believe that we should see as a community of 

Saskatchewan, I, Mr. Speaker, would take great pleasure in moving second reading of Bill No. 49. 

 

Mr. Gardiner (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, I‘m sure all hon. members appreciate the lengthy review that has been 

presented by the minister in moving second reading of this bill. It is one that probably is of great interest, not only to 

the residents of the city of Regina, but to all the people of southern Saskatchewan. However, I would like to point out 

this evening that in bringing in this bill at this time, that the government has waited and has held back and has upset the 

medical care of the people of this city and this part of the province for the past six years and has brought the position of 

the hospital bed supply in this part of Saskatchewan to a very dangerous level. The act that we now find before 



March 5, 1964 

 

 
680 

us is one that I think that each of us, in the province must consider very carefully and that we must examine very 

carefully because of some of the new ideas that it does establish in this field of regular medical care in this province, 

and in the field of general hospital care. Because of the lengthy explanation that has been given here this evening, 

because of the information that we have received from the minister, I think that all members in the legislature would 

like to have an opportunity to take a second look at this act and for that reason I am going to ask permission to adjourn 

the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 p.m. 


