



















































Hansard: February 21, 1964


305 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
SIXTH SESSION – FOURTEENTH LEGISLATURE 

12th day 

 

Friday, February 21st, 1964 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Allan L. Stevens (Rosetown): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with I would like on your 
behalf, and on behalf of all other hon. members of this house, to extend a welcome to a group of high school students who are 
in the west gallery. They are the entire high school enrolment from the village of Milden and are accompanied by their 
teachers, Mr. McDonald, Mr. Peterson, Mr. Pesko, Mr. Arsenault and Miss McCallum. I am sure all members of this house 
would wish to join with me in wishing that this high school group will have a very pleasant, interesting, and informative day 
here in the capital city and that they will return this evening with a much better understanding of how our great system of 
democracy works after watching the legislature of Saskatchewan in session. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

MESSAGE FROM HIS HONOUR THE LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR 
 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, I have a message from his Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — His Honour the Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain sums required for the services of the 
province for the twelve months ending March 31st, 1964, and recommends the same to the consideration of the assembly. 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by Mr. Lloyd, that His Honour’s message, the estimates and 
supplementary estimates be referred to the Committee of Supply. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, it is my honour and privilege at this time to rise to move 
the traditional Motion of Supply. This is the second occasion for me to submit the annual budget to the assembly and it is 
again my good fortune to be able to present a bright, economic, and financial picture. All of us in Saskatchewan can be truly 
thankful for the favourable conditions we are enjoying. 
 
In beginning this budget message today with the review of the economic background, I should like first to take note of recent 
developments at the national and international levels. Although our province has now achieved a more diversified and stable 
economic base, our economy still remains sensitive to events in the world beyond our boundaries. 
 
In this context two international trends of economic significance to Canada stood out in 1963. First, economic growth in the 
United States, Japan and western Europe was greater than had been expected. In the United States, an expected economic 
decline did not materialize. Instead, although the growth rate was less than the previous year, gross national production in that 
country increased by five per cent. The generally favourable conditions in Canada’s chief trading partners, together with 
devaluation of the Canadian dollar led to a significant expansion of the country’s exports. 
 



 

February 21st, 1964 
 

 
306 

The second international trend of significance to Canada was the improvement of world commodity prices. Since a large part 
of our exports consists of raw materials, this has been of major benefit to our country. The most noteworthy aspect for 
Western Canada has been the strengthening of world wheat prices which stemmed from the dramatic improvement in the 
international supply-demand picture. 
 
These favourable external trends and the bumper grain crops in the prairie region have given us a substantial boost to the 
Canadian economy. As a result of gross national production is now estimated at about 42.8 billions of dollars for 1963, an 
increase of 2.4 billion dollars or some 6 per cent over 1962. Approximately $200,000,000 of the increase is directly 
accounted for by the higher than average grain yields. 
 
The large wheat sales to the Soviet Union are also rapidly transforming much of the bumper crop into cash income. The 
movement of grain and resulting cash flows are stimulating the Canadian economy from the Atlantic to the Pacific. It would 
be difficult to measure the full impact of the combination of bountiful yields and the wheat sales arising out of poor crops in 
China and the Soviet Union. It is regrettable that our good fortune should, in some cases, be the result of the misfortune of 
others. But these events surely underline in a very dramatic way the vital importance of developing permanent arrangements 
by which the food-producing capacity of the western prairies can be put to the service of the hungry and needy in every part 
of the world. 
 
It is also worth noting that, largely as a result of expanded wheat sales, Canada’s deficit on foreign trade in goods and services 
fell to about $400,000,000 in 1963, the lowest since 1952. The improved balance of payments situation has made it possible 
for the monetary authorities to follow a policy of generally easier money, and this in turn, has greatly facilitated the high rate 
of expansion in the national economy. 
 
This favourable economic picture is not to suggest that all of Canada’s economic problems have been solved. Unemployment 
still looms large in Canada. While unemployment last year was somewhat lower than in 1962, it still averaged 5.6 per cent of 
the labor force. Regional income disparities remained and chronic poverty exists side by side with buoyant economic 
conditions. Canada must do better in utilizing its resources both human and material and in making the benefits of economic 
growth available to all regions and to all citizens. 
 
Against this 1963 background, what does 1964 hold? The general consensus is that Canada’s economic growth will continue 
into 1964, but that economic problems will remain and may even be accentuated. 
 
There are several factors that seem likely to maintain a moderate rate of growth for Canada this year. First, there is the general 
expectation that the international economic climate will be favourable. Secondly, business investment seems likely to rise 
moderately. Thirdly, both consumer and government expenditures on goods and services are expected to increase. 
 
All of these factors taken together should sustain the continued expansion of production in the Canadian economy. The 
general view is that the gross national product in 1964 should reach $45,000,000,000. This would be about five per cent more 
than in 1963, a rate of growth that may be somewhat below that of the United States. Unemployment, however, is not 
expected to fall below 1963 levels. 
 
I now turn to review what has happened in Saskatchewan and what is likely to happen in the immediate future. 
 
I think everyone will concede that 1963 was a very good year in Saskatchewan. Many people have said, ―Saskatchewan has 
never looked better‖. 
 
First of all there was the crop. The yields were the best ever. Wheat yields are now estimated to have reached an average of 
almost 28 bushels per acre for a total of about 500,000,000 bushels which is coming close to two crops in one. Due mainly to 
grain production, the gross value of total agricultural output reached a record of $1,055,000,000 in 1963, as compared to 
$852,000,000 in 1962. 
 



 

February 21st, 1964 
 

 
307 

In assessing the Saskatchewan economy for 1963, we must then give full honours to the weather conditions and the skill of 
Saskatchewan farmers that made this good crop possible. 
 
We must also allow full credit for other favourable developments in the province. Records were achieved throughout the non-
agricultural sector as well. The value of mineral production reached a new high of $280,000,000, up by almost 17 per cent 
from 1962. Construction activity also set a new record of $431,000,000, 7 per cent above 1962. Total private and public 
investment is estimated at the record level of $744,000,000. The value of factory shipments, too, has continued its long-term 
rise, reaching a new peak of about $393,000,000. Electric power production has continued to grow at the spectacular rate 
which has been maintained in Saskatchewan since 1950. In total, the gross value of commodities produced in Saskatchewan is 
estimated at some $2,170,000,000 in 1963, more than 14 per cent above the 1962 value. 
 
All of this has been reflected in increased economic activity in the province. Personal income reached $1,800,000,000, 
another new record. This is almost $1,930 per capita, substantially above the national average. Retail sales in 1963 exceeded 
$1,000,000,000 for the first time. Unemployment is estimated to have fallen to an annual average of 3.4 per cent, significantly 
below the national level of 5.6 per cent. 
 
I believe we can also look with optimism to the future. Naturally, we cannot expect that 1964 will bring a repeat of the 1963 
grain crop, but moisture conditions appear to be favourable, and it seems reasonable to forecast at least an average crop. On 
the basis of normal yields we can expect that the gross value of agricultural production will reach about $665,000,000. 
Obviously a better than average crop could greatly improve this position. 
 
We must remember, moreover, that much of the cash effect of the 1963 crop will be felt in 1964. This year, farm cash income 
in Saskatchewan could approach about $900,000,000 or 25 per cent above 1963 levels. We may look forward then to 
continued vigorous stimulus from this section of our economy. 
 
My expectation is that almost all other sectors of the Saskatchewan economy will set new records in 1964. It seems clear that 
increases in both petroleum and potash production will enable the mining industry to reach new levels. Construction activity 
should be somewhat above the 1963 peak. Manufacturing will show higher levels of production. Retail sales should exceed 
the billion dollar mark recorded in 1963. Employment should continue to rise, as the economy continues to diversity upon the 
strong base of resources development. 
 
Indeed, on every hand, I see evidence of optimism on the part of Saskatchewan people and of renewed faith in the vitality of 
our economy. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — We must also from time to time take a long-run look at the economic prospects for the province. My 
conclusion here is that the tide of history is on Saskatchewan’s side. This province has always had an abundance of natural 
resources but the distance from the large centers of world population has been a hindrance to development. But more and 
more as the supply of resource materials closer to the principal markets is depleted, this distance from large centers becomes 
less significant. 
 
Potash may be taken as an illustration. There is an increased requirement for fertilizer, of which potash is an important 
component. The principal existing reserve of potash in the United States is being depleted. Therefore, potash development in 
Saskatchewan in the future will be spectacular. Spokesmen of the industry have suggested that by the end of this decade 
potash production may reach a level of 9,000,000 tons annually, or 75 per cent of present total world production. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — The long-run potential of other resources would seem to be promising as well. The petroleum 
production should mount steadily. I am personally convinced that many more discoveries of oil will be made in this province. 
Further developments in metal mining and in forestry can be expected. The large reserves of Saskatchewan coal will be 
utilized more and more. The Saskatchewan River system will be fully developed for hydro-electric power and at the same 
time will provide water for recreation, for irrigation, and for domestic and industrial uses. 
 



 

February 21st, 1964 
 

 
308 

The future for our agricultural resources in the long-run is equally bright. Increasing world demands for food will place more 
and more of a premium on world soil resources. This will put this province with its vast acreage in a most favorable position. 
Farm production in Saskatchewan should increase as the processes of science and technology are applied ever more 
effectively. The productivity of agriculture has increased more than that of any other sector in the postwar period. I expect this 
to continue. At the same time, as the provincial economic base expands, Saskatchewan agriculture will also become more 
diversified to meet not only the new demands for food but also the rising demands of industry. 
 
Other processes of change can bee seen at work in the Saskatchewan economy. From 1956 to 1961 the growth of urban 
population in Saskatchewan was the second highest of any province in Canada. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Saskatoon and Regina, for instance, are now the third and fourth fastest growing of the major cities in 
Canada. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Urbanization is likely to continue although perhaps at a somewhat slower rate. As this proceeds it 
increases the potential for industrial development. Larger concentrated local markets and larger resources of skilled labor will 
provide a substantial base from which Saskatchewan farmers can serve the prairie market and, indeed, national and 
international markets. I believe we have seen the beginning of this with the establishment of a steel plant, a cement plant, and 
the chemical and fertilizer plants. The continued improvement of highways and roads, the expansion of education and training 
institutions on every hand, new power dams, the extension of community and utility facilities generally, the meeting of new 
housing requirements, all of these can be expected to maintain a high level of construction in the province. The service 
industries should continue their rapid rate of expansion and personal income levels should continue to rise. 
 
Some may say that this is too optimistic a view of the future. I do not believe it is. 
 
I turn now to an examination of the fiscal position of the province. Following two small deficits, the government recorded a 
budgetary surplus of $9,900,000 for the fiscal year 1962-63. The public accounts, which were tabled earlier in the session, 
reveal revenues of $195,400,000 and expenditures of $185,500,000. In the 1961-62 fiscal year, revenues were $149,000,000 
and expenditures $152,300,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I announced last year the elimination of Saskatchewan’s net debt. This province is one of only three which have 
no net debt. Hon. members opposite, of course, take great delight in pointing only to the province’s gross debt, without taking 
into consideration the financial assets which offset that debt. Yet surely they know that any businessman measures his net 
worth by totalling his liabilities and subtracting his realizable assets. Using this measure, which is identical to that of the 
Government of Canada, our net assets at March 31st, 1963, stood at $23,400,000. 
 
In the current year I expect a budgetary surplus of about $7,000,000. All of the major revenue sources will exceed our 
estimates. Record mineral production and active exploration are pushing mineral resource revenues above the original 
estimate by some $1,000,000. Consumption taxes, which are sensitive to cash disposable income, will be up – the Education 
and Health Tax by over $6,000,000, the Gasoline Tax by $2,000,000, and liquor profits by $1,000,000. Revenues from the 
federal-provincial tax sharing arrangements may reach $51,400,000, instead of the estimated $49,400,000, because the 
national economy has grown more than was forecast a year ago. 
 
Some expenditures have been increased, as well. The house will be asked to approve supplementary estimates of over 
$12,500,000. We propose, first of all, to augment the Student Aid Fund by $2,000,000, so that qualified students need not 
miss the opportunity for higher education because of lack of funds. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 



 

February 21st, 1964 
 

 
309 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Hon. members will be asked to vote an additional $3,000,000 to the university to finance an expanded 
capital program at both the Saskatoon and Regina campuses. Since the university is planning on a $12,500,000 development 
program next year, it would have to rely on a high level of borrowing if this additional grant were not approved by the 
legislature. 
 
The government has also allocated funds to permit an acceleration of provincial and municipal capital projects in the current 
year. The supplementary estimates include an additional $1,350,000 for highway construction. Over $1,000,000 is being 
provided for additional capital programs of the Department Natural Resources — primarily for recreational development and 
northern roads. An amount of almost $850,000 is included for more municipal water assistance grants, and a further $183,000 
(net) for municipal winter works incentive programs. Capital projects of the Department of Public Works are to be advanced 
by some $550,000. An additional $870,000 has been allocated to school grants for capital purposes. 
 
We considered that it was good management to make these funds available, once it became apparent that we were going to be 
in a favorable financial position. It will mean that these capital improvements will be of benefit to our citizens sooner than had 
been expected. It has also made possible an increase in winter employment, conservatively estimated at 152,000 man days. 
 
A variety of smaller items will complete the supplementary spending program for the current year. The remaining surplus will 
be used to reduce borrowing fro capital expenditures in 1964-65. 
 
As for the public enterprises, their 1963 results also reflect the level of growth and development experienced in the province 
last year. Their total business volume rose by eight per cent continuing the rate of growth established in 1962. It is significant 
that the revenue to the Power Corporation from industrial electrical customers increased by nearly 30 per cent. 
 
The wage and salary bill of the corporations amounted to $31,600,000, and on the average there were 6,200 workers 
employed during the year. This amounted to a three per cent increase in employment by these corporations. 
 
Net surpluses for all the corporations totalled almost $11,000,000 — a new record figure. Both the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation and the Saskatchewan Government Telephones reported significantly higher earnings. Despite losses incurred by 
Estevan Clay Products and Saskair, the net earnings for the Government of Saskatchewan Finance Office group of enterprises 
totalled over $1,353,000. This is the third highest return on record. And Mr. Speaker, I would like to go on record without 
reading the table, the summary of results of operations of crown corporations for the fiscal years ending in 1963. 
 

SUMMARY OF RESULTS OF OPERATIONS OF CROWN CORPORATIONS 

FOR THE FINANCIAL YEARS ENDING IN 1963 
 

 Advances at 
Year-end 

Surplus of 
Deficit 

Saskatchewan Fur Marketing Service $      100,000 $        8,145  
Saskatchewan Sodium Sulphate Division      1,085,000       491,570  
Estevan Clay Products         751,436       195,795* 
Saskatchewan Timber Board      3,877,000       406,932 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office            —-       334,738 
Saskatchewan Guarantee and Fidelity Company         365,688       146,515 
Saskatchewan Government Printing Company         275,000         73,012 
Saskair         600,000         55,491* 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company      1,450,000       144,253 
   
           Sub-total      8,504,124     1,353,879 
Saskatchewan Government Telephones    97,396,790     4,158,271 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation   420,444,951     5,454,199 
 $526,345,865 $10,966,349 
 
* Deficit 
 



 

February 21st, 1964 
 

 
310 

As for capital financing in 1963, we borrowed $57,500,000, a decrease of $15,000,000 from the previous year. These funds 
were obtained from the following markets: 
 
$25,000,000 from the United States long-term bond market; 
$15,000,000 from the Canadian long-term bond market; 
$10,500,000 from the Saskatchewan Savings bond market; 
$5,000,000 from the sale of long-term bonds to various government funds; and 
$2,000,000 from the sale of a treasury bill to the Government of Canada (to finance 1/8th of this year’s expenditure on the 
South Saskatchewan River Dam). 
 
With your permission, Mr. Speaker, I should like to include a list of the 1963 debenture issues in the record. 
 

DEBENTURES 1963 
 

Date Maturity Coupon  Payable Amount 
     
Jan. 1, 1963 Jan. 1, 1983 5   % U.S. $25,000,000 
Mar. 15, 1963 Mar. 15, 1973 5 Canada   10,488,700 
June 1, 1963 June 1, 1978 5¼ Canada     5,000,000 
July 15, 1963 July 15, 1982 5¼ Canada   15,000,000 
 
I would also like to remind members that the fourth issue of Saskatchewan Savings Bonds will go on sale on Monday, March 
2nd. Once again this affords Saskatchewan people an opportunity to invest in the development of their own province, as they 
have done with confidence over the past three years. 
 
Before turning to the budget for 1964-65, I would like to speak briefly about federal-provincial relations. In November, there 
was a federal-provincial conference on fiscal arrangements and a variety of other topics. While some important first 
arrangements and a variety of mutual concern such as public assistance programs, the administration of Indian affairs, and the 
machinery for federal-provincial consultation, we were greatly disappointed in the proposed tax-sharing arrangements for 
1964-65. We had been led to believe, by the statements and even ―pledges‖ of members of the present federal government, 
that the principle of equalization would be strengthened. Specifically, we had been led to expect the federal government was 
going to assure every province an equal return, on a per capita basis, from income and estates taxes. In technical parlance this 
concept has come to be described as ―equalization to the top province‖. In fact, the formula proposed by Ottawa falls far short 
of this province. 
 
The federal government proposes – first of all, to equalize the yields from income and estate taxes, not to the top province, 
but to the average of the top two. This, of course, means that the per capita returns in nine provinces will not reach the level 
enjoyed by the wealthiest province, – secondly, the present inequitable handling of resources revenue will be changed but not 
improved. Fifty per cent of the amount by which provincial resources revenues exceed the national average is to be deducted 
from the equalization payment. This is a wholly arbitrary deduction, one which is lacking both in reason and in equity, – 
thirdly, the federal government is proposing to increase the provincial share of the estate tax from 50 per cent to 75 per cent. 
However, it is not intended to equalize the yield from this additional 25 per cent. Since by far the largest proportion of big 
estates are located in the wealthiest provinces, even though they frequently have accumulated due to business activities 
throughout the whole of Canada, this change will be of benefit only to the wealthier provinces. 
 
In effect, therefore, the federal government is departing even further from the original principles of equalization which it had 
pledged to reinstate. In Saskatchewan, as the Premier has stated, ―we measure our – not just disappointment – but 
disillusionment in millions‖. We will be making every effort at forthcoming federal-provincial conferences to persuade 
Ottawa to reinstate the equalization principles which the Saskatchewan government has advocated for so long. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like now to submit the budget for 1964-65 – the 20th budget presented by a CCF government. My 
colleagues and I reflected, as we prepared this budget, that it represents both the past and the future of the province. In it is to 
be found something of Saskatchewan’s achievements during the past two decades; in it are to be found some of 
Saskatchewan’s hopes for the future. 
 



 

February 21st, 1964 
 

 
311 

The figures tell a part of this story. Revenues have risen markedly along with our rapidly expanding economy. They are 
expected to reach $214,800,000 next year, up from this year’s revised estimate of about $206,000,000. This is after having 
deducted the $5,000,000 tax reduction which was announced last fall. Expenditures have been set at $214,400,000, which will 
leave a small surplus of $444,000. This level will maintain the programs which were pioneered in the past and will provide for 
new services for the future. All of these are services designed to underwrite further economic growth and to provide 
additional opportunities for individual and community development. 
 
I tried last year, Mr. Speaker, to describe the central objective of the budgets of this government. May I repeat what I said: we 
are seeking to achieve through the programs of positive government, ―a dignified, a better and more varied life for the 
individual‖. It will be evident to all of us, I am sure, that as we succeed in achieving this goal, we will succeed also in finding 
and in reaching new horizons for the community as a whole. Individual self-fulfillment cannot be achieved in a static or a 
stagnant community; to reach out to new horizons of social and economic development is to create the conditions of 
individual self-expression. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — This it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, is the pride of our province; the willingness to experiment, the 
willingness to reach for new horizons. The story of Saskatchewan is, in a sense, the story of firsts; the first to establish 
producer co-operatives, the first to experiment with public developmental utilities, the first to introduce more popular control 
into political parties and governments, the first to establish public hospital insurance, the first to establish public medical care 
insurance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there have been times – the older of us will remember them well – when these dynamics of our society seemed 
to have been destroyed. We emerged from the depression and from the war years, with dilapidated capital facilities, with little 
prospect for economic and industrial growth, and, what was worse, with little hope for the future. For a decade after that we 
had to preoccupy ourselves with overcoming these problems. 
 
We in this province had to develop new and modern hospital facilities. We had to reconstruct our roads and schools. We had 
to find ways of bringing modern facilities to a depressed Saskatchewan; electric power, telephones, natural gas and modern 
amenities. We had to discover what were our resources, and to stimulate an interest in our economic potential. We had to 
persuade capital to come to Saskatchewan; to find people to drill oil wells, to sink potash shafts, and to establish new 
industries. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Such was the work of the 1940’s and the early 1950’s. It was in the next decade that the people of 
Saskatchewan rediscovered their province. We found that we did possess a rich resource endowment. We found that we could 
increase greatly our agricultural productivity. We found that we were capable of industrial growth. We found that we could 
finance a first class educational system, a first class road network, and first class community facilities. Above all we 
rediscovered our optimism. Out of this, Mr. Speaker, we began to reassert the pride of this province; we began to reach again 
for new horizons. No one can visit this province without sensing this restored confidence, this renewed dynamic. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — We in the government have tried to play our part in these developments. In successive budgets, my 
predecessors and I have attempted to define the role the government was seeking to play, and to relate our policies to the 
needs of the province. This year, Mr. Speaker, I am presenting a budget which we believe to be in the spirit of the new 
Saskatchewan: a budget for new horizons. 
 



 

February 21st, 1964 
 

 
312 

The first area I wish to examine, Mr. Speaker, is that of economic development. I believe that we have before us now, more 
than ever before, the prospects for a continued and growing prosperity. This outlook can be attributed both to improvements 
in our traditional primary activity, agriculture, and to significant development in the areas of resource use and industrial 
production. 
 
The strength of our agricultural industry has been dramatically demonstrated in the current year, when production exceeded 
one billion dollars for the first time. Good weather is not the only factor contributing to such results. Our farmers have 
achieved a consistent improvement in farming methods, so that we now speak in terms of an average wheat crop of 18 bushels 
to the acre when formerly we spoke of 15. There has also been an increasing diversification of the farming industry, as 
illustrated by the rise in cattle population from 1,200,000 to 2,100,000 in a ten year period. Factors such as these, bring more 
stability and security not only to farmers but to the whole provincial economy. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the government’s agricultural programs have also made an important contribution to this success. 
The agricultural representatives, the many information and extension programs, the government-sponsored research projects 
at the Saskatchewan Research Council and the university, all have aided the farmers in their search for better methods of 
farming. Drainage, irrigation, clearing and breaking programs have made more lands available fro more production. The 
community pasture program, which is now being greatly expanded, makes possible still higher levels of livestock production. 
Policies for sharing in the costs of acquiring breeding stock, insecticides, emergency fodder supplies, all facilitate more 
production and diversification. 
 
Nevertheless, we must continue to seek for means of achieving further improvement. The government has been particularly 
concerned about the problems of the smaller farmer, caused in large, by changing farm conditions. In particular, the increase 
in farm costs relative to farm prices has meant that small holdings can no longer offer their owner an adequate standard of 
living. At the same time, increasing mechanization has meant that one farmer can cultivate more acres and so make up for the 
decreased profit per acre. Consequently, farms increase in size, with the result that some people are displaced. The hardships 
caused by such adjustments can be made easier through appropriate educational and welfare programs. One way to reduce this 
displacement to a minimum is to make possible an increase in the intensity of farming through diversification. 
 
Many of the existing agricultural programs contribute to more intensive farming, as I have already said. This budget also 
contains provision for further important steps to be taken under the proposed Agricultural Adjustment and Development Act. 
 
As hon. members may know, this new act is intended to provide a comprehensive framework for the best use of marginal or 
submarginal land. The technical and the administrative skills of university scientists and department officials are to be brought 
together to advise upon the long-term management and investment in this land. This is a necessary adjunct to the greatly 
expanded program of community pastures and soil conservation projects now in full swing throughout the province. It is also 
proposed under the act to launch a pilot program to help farmers on small units in designated rural development areas to 
expand their farm enterprises to economic size. The Federal Farm Credit Corporation and The Farm Improvement Act 
provide the major sources of farm credit. But there is at least one urgent need for credit which is not supplied by these 
programs, that of rehabilitation credit. Our act is designed to search out ways of filling this gap, it will make it possible for the 
province to loan or guarantee loans, on favorable terms to low-income farmers for expanding livestock enterprises, 
constructing necessary building, bringing unused lands into cultivation, and accumulating necessary working capital. 
 
With all this emphasis on the intensive farming operations, we have not lost sight of the possibility of extending the area of 
agricultural production. This budget contains provision for the commencement of a feasibility study of the Saskatchewan 
River Delta area north-east of Nipawin, and north of Hudson Bay. Providing the conclusions of this study are favorable, we 
will have the opportunity of opening up for agricultural development hundreds of thousands of acres of rich delta land. 
 
While I have been dealing largely with the economic aspects of the agricultural sector, I would not want to omit mention of 
those programs which are designed primarily to enhance rural life. I refer to the family farm improvement program, which has 
already brought modern plumbing to approximately 11,400 farm homes; the municipal sewer and water 



 

February 21st, 1964 
 

 
313 

program under which almost $3,000,000 in assistance will have been given to over 160 towns and villages by the end of 
March. The rural electrification program, which has made electric power available to about 90 per cent of Saskatchewan 
farms; and the assistance to rural telephone companies, which is improving telephone services in rural areas. I think also of 
the market grid roads which have received enthusiastic acceptance. Some 9500 miles of the proposed, 12,000 mile network 
have now been built, and this budget makes provisions for loans to accelerate the completion of the network. 
 
This is the agricultural ―horizon‖ which we in Saskatchewan are moving toward – the family farm as a richly productive part 
of the provincial economy and as a comfortable and satisfying way of life. 
 
While agricultural land has always been Saskatchewan’s most productive resource, our other natural resources are adding to 
the prosperity and variety of life in this province to an increasing extent. In 1963, the value of mineral production reached 
$280,000,000 – over $40,000,000 in excess of the previous all time high. 
 
The most exciting development today, of course, is the potash industry. Multi-million dollar plants are operating or being 
established at Esterhazy, Saskatoon, and Belle Plaine, with a fourth to start at Lanigan in the near future. Exploration is 
continuing and additional developments are certain. This industry has now joined with oil and uranium to put Saskatchewan 
on the map as a major mineral producer. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — There is also good reason for optimism about the petroleum industry. Oil production in 1963, reached 
an estimated value of $166,000,000. Exploration activity has picked up considerably. Bonus bids are expected to reach 
$5,500,000 in 1963-64, some $1,400,000 over last year. The number of new wells completed in 1963 reached 571 – 
producing wells, Mr. Speaker – the highest level since 1957. Of particular significance is the discovery of oil at a deeper level 
than had hitherto been explored. 
 
In the past year we have witnessed the start of another resource industry – helium – and production continues in other 
established resource areas: sodium sulphate, coal, timber, uranium salt, fish, fur. Meanwhile, exploration work and feasibility 
studies are being carried out by various companies, and if we are to be guided by past developments, there is every reason to 
expect that the next decade will bring more major resource developments. 
 
This encouraging degree of development is a product of effective co-operation between private industry and government. Our 
resource departments have developed management policies which ensure a desirable level of conservation and utilization of 
long range benefit to industry and to Saskatchewan citizens alike. They have also supplied services such as geological 
mapping, core storage, statistical compilations, and resources inventories, which are necessary if private companies are to 
invest in exploration and development. The results of research projects carried out by the resource departments and the 
Saskatchewan Research Council are also available to industry. 
 
In addition to these programs the government gives more direct assistance to industry, when circumstances warrant. We have 
incentive programs to stimulate mineral explorations in the north, and to encourage drilling for oil. We are also continuing our 
program of constructing resource access roads in the north. The budget contains provision to commence two major new roads, 
one from the Churchill River, north of La Ronge, to Reindeer Lake and one from Squaw Rapids to Cumberland House. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — I want to give particular mention to one very important resource – water. We have seen significant 
accomplishments in the handling of this resource. The Squaw Rapids Dam and reservoir is now being utilized. The South 
Saskatchewan Damn will, of course, provide a major new water supply in the near future. Many smaller dams, irrigation 
works, and drainage ditches have been constructed by the Department of Agriculture in the past few years. Ground water 
surveys have been carried out, or are under way, to determine the availability of supplies under ground. 
 



 

February 21st, 1964 
 

 
314 

However, demands on this limited resource are growing to the extent that increasingly careful management and planning will 
be required in the future. It is with this goal in mind that this budget provides for the formation of a new agency, the 
Saskatchewan Water Resources Commission. This agency will incorporate the present South Saskatchewan River 
Development Commission and will assume responsibility for planning for future needs and for an equitable allocation of the 
existing water resources between competing uses. 
 
It is through careful management programs like this that the government is doing its part to encourage private companies to 
invest in the development of Saskatchewan’s resources. I believe that we in Saskatchewan now have before us a bright 
horizon, indeed, the full realization of the potentials of all our resources. This feeling of optimism was the key note of the 
resources conference at Saskatoon last month. Here is what the editor of the North Battleford News Optimist had to say: 
 

There appears to be more real faith in Saskatchewan’s future, than at any time within my memory. As a people, we have at 
last shaken ourselves free of the shadow of the Dirty Thirties. 

 
I suppose if I were hunting for things which have influenced Saskatchewan most since settlement began here at the turn of 
the century I would have to settle for weather, depression and war. Until 1945, one seemed to grow out of the other as 
naturally as sugar comes from molasses 

 
Earlier this week at Saskatoon I heard resources experts discussing the good and bad points, and I came away with a warm 
feeling that our future is brighter than ever before. Indeed Saskatchewan has been blessed with adequate resources for her 
people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — We in this province have also charted the course to new horizons in the third major sector in our 
economy – industrial production. For years, Saskatchewan has been pioneering in new ways to attract industry. As early as 
1947, we started the Industrial Development Fund, and some 75 industries and businesses have got their start with loans from 
this source. It is a matter of some interest, Mr. Speaker, to note that it is only during the last five years that most provinces 
have got around to adopting an incentive program similar to the one originated in Saskatchewan, 17 years ago. 
 
We have also used provincial guarantees to encourage new industry, despite resistance from hon. members opposite. Some of 
our largest industries got started this way: Saskatchewan Cement, the Co-operative Refinery addition, the Interprovincial Steel 
and Pipe Corporation, which in turn gave impetus to the formation of other industries. 
 
In 1963, we saw a continued increase in industrial development in Saskatchewan. Of particular interest are the large new 
chemical and fertilizer industries, which have been commenced or announced. This past year also saw the commencement of 
another Saskatchewan milestone, one established by the legislature at the last session. I refer to the Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation, in which we consolidated and reinforced the programs we had developed in previous years. 
SEDCO, you will recall, makes grants to industries to assist in research, in the training of the labour force and in the 
acquisition of equipment for new and expanded plant capacities. It makes loans to aid in the establishment of new industry, 
and may also assist in the provision of industrial sites and buildings. 
 
We are gratified with the excellent reception that this new agency is being accorded. Legislation will be introduced at this 
session to extend its activities further. The budget provides for an advance of an additional $2,000,000 to SEDCO in 1964-65. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 



 

February 21st, 1964 
 

 
315 

Mr. Brockelbank: — In the past year the new Industry Advisory Council – a joint industry-government venture for 
promoting industrial development – also came into being. The Council has already been of considerable assistance to the 
Minister of Industry and Information, and its role in the organization of the Resources Conference was of particular value. 
 
I wish to thank the businessmen of Saskatchewan for participating with such enthusiasm and success in these new ventures. 
 
The budget provides for other activities in the field of economic development, including the services of the Department of 
Industry and Information in the area of industrial research and consultation, trade information, transportation research, and 
training for businessmen. Provision is also made for a Women’s Bureau in the Department of Labour. This new unit will give 
special attention to the development of vocational skills among women and girls, to the widening of their employment 
opportunities to the maintenance of the satisfactory working conditions and wage levels, and to the overall contribution which 
they can undoubtedly make to economic growth and expansion in our province. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — In summary then, this combination of new industries and of new means for stimulating more industrial 
development offers to Saskatchewan a prospect of increasing prosperity. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan has 
achieved remarkable progress in the field of industrial development in recent years in spite of some geographical 
disadvantages and there is promise of much more to come. This success can be attributed to effective teamwork of private 
companies, co-operative enterprise and government. I realize that the hon. members opposite are slow to concede that this 
progress has occurred. I invite them to open their eyes, to look about them, to read the newspapers, and to become better 
informed on what is happening in Saskatchewan today. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Direct services to stimulate economic development such as I have been describing are only one part of 
the program. The government does much more than this to create an environment in which economic development will be 
encouraged. I refer to the provincial services and utilities – electric power, gas, telephones, roads – without which modern 
industrial and resource developments would not be possible. The production of power is a vital function of the government 
and it is a rapidly growing one. In 1953, the Saskatchewan Power corporation produced approximately 400,000,000 kilowatt 
hours of power; ten years later, in 1963, production approached two billion kilowatt hours, about five times as much. Nearly 
1,000 communities and over 60,000 farms are now served with electric power, compared to about 145 communities and 200 
farms two decades ago. Over 150 communities and several important industries are now served by the natural gas system 
which had hardly begun a decade ago. We can point out with pride to Saskatchewan’s gigantic new power developments at 
Estevan, Saskatoon and Squaw Rapids. We can point also to the South Saskatchewan River Dam project, where work on the 
power plant will commence in 1964. These developments will meet the formidable new requirements for power which are 
caused by our rapidly expanding economy. I am particularly gratified also that this year we will fulfill our 1960 election 
pledge to extend natural gas to an additional 100 communities during this term of office; . . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . not only that, Mr. Speaker, we plan to go beyond the target figure. 
 
I need hardly say that Saskatchewan could not have attracted many of its new industries if it had not been able to assure 
prospective companies that an adequate, economical, and reliable source of power was available. At the same time, our 
citizens have the advantage of all the refinements of modern living associated with electric power; and they have in natural 
gas, a clean and economical fuel. Public ownership and long term planning have made it possible to provide these services at 
a relatively low cost, despite the widely dispersed nature of our population. 
 
Another crown corporation, Saskatchewan Government Telephones, facilitates economic development through the provision 
of a modern communications network. This, too, is a rapidly growing utility. In 1953, there were about 105,000 telephones on 
the system; ten years later, 



 

February 21st, 1964 
 

 
316 

this had more than doubled, reaching 215,000. The number of community dial offices has increased from 18 to 88 in the same 
period, and the budget provides $2,500,000 to establish 29 more in 1964. The new microwave facilities and the introduction 
of direct distant dialing also illustrates the point that Saskatchewan Government Telephones is second to none in keeping up 
with the latest technical advance. 
 
Efficient transportation systems are also necessary for economic development. Saskatchewan used to be notorious for its 
highways – rough when dry, muddy when wet. However, this is no longer the case. Despite the fact that this province has 
more road mileage than any other province in Canada, and a much higher per capita mileage, our road system now compares 
favorably with any other. Few people would have believed even just ten years ago, that Saskatchewan would have nearly 
4,000 miles of dust-free highways by this time. But we do have this now, Mr. Speaker, and I am willing to predict that within 
the next decade we will have 8,000 miles of dust-free highways in Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — The 1964-65 budget for the Department of Highways and Transportation has been set at $26,700,000, 
an increase of almost $4,000,000 over the current year. This is the highest net provincial budget for the Highway system in 
Saskatchewan’s history. It includes provision to increase our dust-free network by 540 miles, to over 50 per cent of the 
highway system. 
 
The budget also provides for a substantial start on a new objective – the improvement of traffic routes through urban centers. 
We plan to increase substantially the scope of our urban assistance policy. The new policy will include assistance for ring 
roads and alternate highway routes through urban centers and for arterial routes which carry high volumes of provincial traffic 
in these centers. We are also proposing for the first time to make grants to help pave or oil main streets in smaller centers. An 
Amount of $2,000,000 is in the budget for these purposes in 1964-65. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — This steadily improving highway system we are aiming for, together with the all weather grid road 
network and the expanding northern development road complex, will effectively meet the transportation requirements of our 
expanding economy. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, the province could not achieve this very substantial expansion of power, communication and 
transportation facilities without borrowing some money. I am continually perplexed at the attitude of the opposition to the 
gross debt. Surely the hon. members are aware that without some investment in public utilities we could never attract the 
industrial development they are always talking about. Surely a party which purports to stand for private enterprise has 
sufficient business acumen to realize that it is the usual thing to borrow money to finance capital development, and that the 
financial community would not advance these funds so readily if Saskatchewan really were living beyond its means – and yet, 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. members opposite continue to complain about the money we borrow. 
 
No, we are not ashamed of our program for expanded public utilities and services. Our assets exceed the total of our gross 
debt and our investments are paying rich dividends. Indeed, this is one of Saskatchewan’s brightest new horizons, for we 
intend to keep the public utilities up to date and growing to meet the needs of a dynamic, modern economy. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — I have dwelt on economic development at some length, Mr. Speaker, because it is so much a condition 
of the new Saskatchewan. However, we must never lose sight of the real purpose of this development – the enrichment of the 
individual and the community. As Premier Lloyd said at the resources conference last month; 
 

What is the real purpose of better resources development? It is not good enough to pile material on material. We want 
resource development to provide equitable opportunity, to guarantee care for the ill and comfort for the old. 

 



 

February 21st, 1964 
 

 
317 

Quoting Adlai Stevenson, the Premier went on to say; 
 

We want to be able to act on the conviction that gross poverty, curable illness, racial indignity, mental disease, and 
suffering in old age are a disgrace amidst the surrounding luxuries, privileges and indulgence of such a wealthy society as 
ours. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — This is at once the reason for wanting economic growth and the real horizon toward which this 
government is reaching. 
 
Many of the new horizons for the individual, indeed for the community of Saskatchewan, can only be captured by co-
operative action. The people of this province have always known this. What this government has done is simply to extend into 
new fields this willingness to use government as a vehicle for achieving individual self-fulfillment and community 
development. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Education is one of the most important areas of social development. Saskatchewan has made major 
innovations during the past two decades. The reorganization of the school system was the first step. The larger school units, 
which were opposed by the Liberal Party, have substantially improved the quality of public education. Increased grants have 
made possible the expansion of the facilities at the University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, and the establishment of a second 
campus in Regina. I am pleased to note that thanks in no small part to the initiative this government took last year, the 
Veterinary College will be established at Saskatoon. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Facilities for special education for the handicapped have been improved. A program of continuing 
education for the adult population has been established, and a big new program of vocational education ahs been initiated. 
 
These are some of the accomplishments of the past, Mr. Speaker, but I want more to speak of our plans for the future. The 
budge contains, first of all, over $5,000,000 for increased school grants. This will bring the total provision for grants to 
$42,040,000, equivalent to over 30 mills of the total municipal tax assessment. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — The University plans a record capital development program of next year of $12,500,000. Of this 
$4,500,000 will be financed directly from provincial grants to be supplemented, if necessary, by provincially guaranteed 
loans. The budget also provides a $6,678,000 operating grant to the university, an increase of almost $1,500,000. This 
increase ill bring the provincial operating grant to a level of $644 for each student, compared to $516 ten years ago. In 
addition to providing educational facilities, we must eliminate the possibility that some students may be deprived of an 
education because of lack of funds. It is for this reason that I have already stated you will be asked to vote $2,000,000 to 
increase the Student Aid Fund, up to a total permanent endowment of $5,000,000. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — In the rapidly expanding area of vocational development, the budget proposes substantial further 
expenditure to meet new needs. Last year the new technical collegiate in Prince Albert, and the Central Saskatchewan 
Technical Institute in Saskatoon were opened. This year, we propose construction of a further phase of the Saskatoon 
institution, and the start on construction of two additional regional vocational schools. With capital assistance from Ottawa, 
$2,000,000 is budgeted for these purposes. At the same time, we are clearly moving into an era where occupational skills and 
competence are increasingly essential in employment, and where the advancing pace of technology and automation is 
revealing both new opportunities and new problems. 
 



 

February 21st, 1964 
 

 
318 

The budget, therefore, provides funds for a comprehensive study of emerging needs for vocational education and technical 
training in Saskatchewan, for planning and consultations with all concerned on a long range program to meet these needs, and 
for determining the most appropriate administrative structure to implement the program in the years ahead. 
 
In these various ways, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan will continue to improve upon the high quality educational system which 
has been established, and will adapt it to the needs of a changing society. 
 
It is in the field of public health that Saskatchewan is particularly noted for innovation and accomplishment. When the CCF 
took office in 1944, we promised fully integrated programs of preventive health and curative health. Much of this has been 
accomplished through health regions, hospitalization, medical care and other measures. A preventive health program is 
centred in the health regions, which were organized during our first term of office. Regina and Saskatoon are not part of 
organized regions, but we are making grants to them for health purposes. The budget provides for a 50 per cent increase in 
these grants to them for health purposes. The budget provides for a 50 per cent increase in these grants. 
 
The curative health program began with free treatment for mental illness and cancer. Saskatchewan’s cancer clinics are now 
known for the quality of their treatment; indeed they have earned an international reputation. The mental health program has 
produced impressive results as demonstrated by the much shorter average lengths of stay at the hospitals. The new hospital at 
Yorkton and the community mental health clinics are applying the most up-to-date methods to combat this health problem. 
 
In 1947, the hospitalization plan was introduced, and it is now copied across Canada. Associated with this, Saskatchewan 
communities, with the help of the government grants, have expanded the number of hospitals in the province and improved 
their quality. The construction of the University Hospital and the college of Medicine at Saskatoon were significant steps in 
ensuring that the best care would be available to this province. Saskatchewan must continue to plan to meet expanding needs 
and to provide up-to-date-facilities. This budget contains provision for planning a new provincial hospital in Regina. 
 
In 1962, the most recent major step towards our objective was taken with the commencement of the first universal medical 
care plan on this continent. This plan is now working well and the benefits of having universal prepaid medical care insurance 
are becoming increasingly apparent. I am pleased that we are able to reduce the personal premiums for hospital and medical 
care for a family to one dollar a week. As a result of this step, we are relying even more on the revenue sources which reflect 
ability to pay. This is a major principle behind every social advance, that those who are fortunate in a co-operative society 
should give aid to those who are less fortunate. All Saskatchewan citizens are now in the position where no matter what their 
financial situation may be, they may receive hospital and medical care when they need it. 
 
The budget for Public Health in 1964-65 amounts to $57,000,000, up $8,500,000 from last year. It includes a $17,200,000 
payment to the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan, a payment of almost $17,000,000 to the Medical Care Insurance 
Commission, and an expenditure of $12,700,000 on psychiatric services. These are undoubtedly substantial sums, Mr. 
Speaker, but who would stand up and say that these expenditures should not be made? Who would say that we should 
abandon our goal of good health and freedom from worry for all? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — The fundamental principal upon which all programs for social development must start is this – no 
person should be deprived of the basic necessities of life. Therefore, one of the primary objectives of the CCF administration 
has been to establish a sound group of programs to ensure that adequate assistance to the unfortunate is available. 
 
Our programs in social welfare are well known to hon. members. They include social aid based on need; allowances for the 
blind, disabled, and other handicapped persons; assistance for the aged, including the geriatric centres and grants for housing 
and nursing homes; a child 



 

February 21st, 1964 
 

 
319 

welfare program which provides homes and care for neglected children; correctional institutions for those who break the law; 
and a variety of other programs designed to look after the needs of the unfortunate. 
 
The budget for all of these programs in 1964-65 amounts to $19,000,000, an increase of $1,300,000 over the current year’s 
provision. This will ensure that we maintain this basic protection for our citizens. Let me speak of some new objectives which 
we will be working toward in the next year. 
 
The New Democratic Party and the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation, Saskatchewan Section of that Party, have long 
been advocating a Canada Pension plan. Such a plan – contributory and portable – would improve the security of all citizens. 
We were, therefore, pleased when the federal government stated its firm intention to introduce such a plan. However, the 
federal government now seems to be yielding to the pressures of certain interest groups and the original proposal is being 
considerably weakened. The size of pension benefits is being reduced from 30 per cent of average lifetime pensionable 
earnings, as in the original proposal, to 20 per cent. Also, the full effects of the plan are now going to be delayed so that 
pension benefits will not become available at age 65 until five years after the start of the plan. I can assure hon. members that 
as far as this government is concerned, we will continue to press for the adoption of the federal plan as originally proposed 
and as soon as possible. 
 
A second venture on which we wish to embark is to consolidate and make more efficient the categories of federal-provincial 
welfare assistance which presently exist. We have long been pressing for an integration of these plans, so that aid may be 
uniformly granted to all who require it, on the basis of need. The federal government has agreed to consider this matter and it 
is to be studied by the federal-provincial conference. We will continue to work for this improvement. 
 
We intend, also, to increase our efforts in the field of rehabilitation of social aid cases. It is not enough to give aid to the 
unfortunate; we must also attempt to assist them to live productive lives once again. The budget provides for an experimental 
project in rehabilitation designed to enable recipients of social aid to become self-supporting. 
 
This emphasis will also appear in the programs for the elderly. It is important, of course, that pleasant living accommodation 
be made available to our older citizens. Some 5,000 people are now located in provincial geriatric centres or local nursing 
homes, and the budget provides for an increased amount for grants to homes for the aged in 1964-65. The report of the public 
survey committee on Ageing and Long-Term Illness, however, stressed the importance of helping elderly people to maintain 
independent lives in their own homes. We propose, therefore, to provide for a division of services for the aged, which will 
work with voluntary agencies and local communities in developing programs to meet this need. We also plan a pilot project 
for out-patient services for elderly people at the new Swift Current Geriatric Centre. 
 
A further objective of social development requiring new emphasis is the raising of the level of welfare and prosperity among 
the people of northern Saskatchewan. Many advances have already been achieved in the north, I might mention the resource 
conservation programs, the co-operatively-owned fish processing plants and trading stores, the new schools and hospitals, the 
air services and northern roads, and radio, telephone and power facilities. However, living conditions in many northern 
communities are not up to a satisfactory standard, and the proportion of people on social aid is much higher than in the south. 
Population increases, due in large part to the establishment of health and welfare services, have placed heavier demands on 
the old resources of fish and fur, and this adds to the problem of finding a satisfactory livelihood for all. This budget, 
therefore, contains provision for new programs in the north. 
 
A basic need is to secure better housing. We propose a system of grants, loans and technical assistance for this purpose. The 
home construction program will rely also upon the participation and nominal investment by the residents themselves, for it is 
desirable that they find pride and satisfaction in the accomplishment of new goals. It is also essential that new opportunities 
for employment be made available. Provision is made for a substantial work and wages program, and new job placement 
service is to be initiated. Finally, a credit program is proposed to help with the financing of new enterprises. A Northern 



 

February 21st, 1964 
 

 
320 

Development and Housing Fund is to be established with an initial capital of $250,000. This fund will make loans for 
housing, for new small-scale industries, and for individuals needing capital equipment for fishing, fur-farming and other 
business activities in this frontier region. 
 
Saskatchewan’s new horizon in welfare is therefore clear. We have achieved a basic level of security against hardships and 
want. We will seek to build this, to make new advances in rehabilitation, and to widen opportunities for individual self-
improvement. 
 
An advanced society is one that has achieved satisfactory levels of economic progress, one which ensures that all its citizens 
are receiving the basic necessities of life, one which offers to all its members the best in health care and educational 
opportunity. A society which has achieved this, can afford to look to still another horizon – a more abundant, a richer life. We 
in Saskatchewan now have this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, and we are making considerable strides in taking advantage of it. 
 
In the field of cultural activity, the province is undertaking several new ventures. To mark the jubilee and centennial, the 
government will grant funds to assist with projects carried out by Saskatchewan communities. An amount of $1,425,000, 
equivalent to a grant of $1.50 per capita for the provincial population, will be made available for centres other than the three 
largest cities. One third of this amount, or $475,000, is in the budget for 1964-65. It will be voted to the Saskatchewan 
Diamond Jubilee and Canada Centennial Committee which will be entrusted with the task of dispensing these funds to assist 
appropriate projects. A further $175,000 is being granted to the committee for projects which will itself undertake. 
 
The government plans, also, to share the cost of new cultural developments in the largest cities. Two new auditoria are 
planned, one in Regina, to serve the south and one in Saskatoon for the northern half of the province. A Saskatchewan 
Zoological Park is to be developed in Moose Jaw. An amount of $150,000 is included in next year’s budget for a start on 
these projects. 
 
In addition, we plan to continue our support of other cultural activities – The Arts Board, Wascana Centre, the regional library 
program, the provincial museums. We have also made provision for planning a new ―centre for continuous learning‖ in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Outdoor recreation is one of the more popular and rewarding uses of leisure time. Saskatchewan is endowed with many 
natural features having recreational value which have been underrated in past years. It is most desirable that our citizens 
should be enabled to relax and enjoy the natural advantages of Saskatchewan, and we are very encouraged by what the 
Department of Natural Resources has accomplished with its parks programs. Saskatchewan now has 14 provincial parks, and 
30 regional parks which have been established by co-operating municipalities with provincial assistance. The two operating 
trans-Canada campsites have been well received, and we plan to bring two more – at Moosomin and Maple Creek – into 
operation next summer. We have, as well, approximately 250 camp and picnic sites located along the province’s highways. 
More provincial parks are in the planning stage, particularly in the reservoir area of the South Saskatchewan River, and 
additional regional parks are being planned by local groups. It is apparent, Mr. Speaker, that our recreation program is 
popular with the Saskatchewan people, and is attracting an increasing number of tourists from other parts of the continent. 
Last year there were about 1,300,000 visitors to those provincial parks in which records were kept. This public interest fully 
justifies the investment in these facilities, and we will continue to improve and expand the park system in 1964-65. The 
budget contains almost $2,500,000 for the park and recreation program next year. 
 
This is another horizon which has been opened up to the new Saskatchewan. We have now, through cultural and recreational 
activities and through the availability of modern amenities, new opportunities for a fuller and more meaningful life. 
 
I want to say a word, too, Mr. Speaker, about the public service of Saskatchewan. The many programs I have been describing 
can only achieve our objectives if we have an efficient and dedicated public service to carry them out. I believe that 
Saskatchewan has such a public service and that it is in the best interests of the province to do everything we can to keep it 
that way. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 



 

February 21st, 1964 
 

 
321 

Mr. Brockelbank: — We have always sought to maintain the efficiency and effectiveness of the public service. That is why, 
in 1946, we established the Budget Bureau which was one of the first government agencies in Canada to carry out 
organization methods work. That is why we set up the Saskatchewan Public Administration Foundation, last year, to 
encourage research and educational projects relating to public service. That is why three departments have been undertaking 
major reorganizations in the past year, because the maintenance of efficiency is a continuous process. 
 
The location of government services is also a matter of constant attention. It is inevitable, of course, that many government 
operations will have to locate in the capital city, in the interests of efficiency. However, it is desirable to keep the public 
service as close to the people as possible. We therefore attempt to locate as many operations as we can in other provincial 
centres. There have been some intimations made that our services are becoming more centralized. A recent study indicates 
that this is definitely not the case. While our public service has increased in size in recent years, to accommodate new 
programs, we find that the rate of increase in Regina has been less than half the rate in other centres. This budget contains a 
significant illustration of our intent to give maximum services at the local level; we are providing for a new provincial office 
building in Moose Jaw. We are looking at other centres in which new buildings should be provided. 
 
I want to conclude, Mr. Speaker, by saying something about the rights of the individual. We have always tried to ensure that 
in the search for the general good we do no individual wrong. Indeed, it is a matter of pride that Saskatchewan has led Canada 
in the protection of the rights of the individual. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Let me point out some of the things which have been or are being done. Early in our administration, we 
introduced the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights Act to guarantee the basic rights of every citizen. The Fair Employment Practices 
Act was designed to outlaw discrimination against any individual. Saskatchewan was the first province in which the right to 
sue the Crown was established. In 1963, the legislature passed The Regulations Act, to ensure that administrative regulations 
would be subject to the legislature’s scrutiny. This government provides assistance for legal counsel for indigents, and this is 
being extended in 1964-65. A new Expropriations Act is being introduced this session to make more certain that property 
owners are fairly treated when it becomes necessary to use their property for public purposes. And we are including in the 
budget for next year provision for a special legislative committee to consider the possibility that a Commissioner for Citizens 
Rights should be established in Saskatchewan. Such an office, similar to the ombudsman of the Scandinavian countries, would 
provide citizens with an avenue of appeal from administrative decisions which they consider to be unjust. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, this is the twentieth consecutive budget which has been presented to this house by 
members of my party. Likewise this is the twentieth fiscal year with a CCF government in this province. Eighteen of those 
fiscal years will have ended with surpluses totalling $108,000,000. Two ended with deficits totalling $5,800,000. Net 
surpluses of $155,000,000 has been eliminated and in place thereof we expect a surplus of net assets of $30,000,000. 
 
An economic and social revolution has taken place in this province during those twenty years and it is true that ―Saskatchewan 
never looked better‖. But that is no reason for us to become complacent or self-satisfied. Looking into the next 20 years I can 
see more new horizons for Saskatchewan – further development of our province, more improvements in public facilities and 
better living conditions. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — These new horizons have emerged because of the accomplishments of the past. They are attainable as 
long as we have a government which is prepared, in partnership with the people of this 



 

February 21st, 1964 
 

 
322 

province, to innovate and to strive for an ever improving way of life. These things are the pride of this province – the 
boldness, the optimism, the robustness of our people. Take these away and Saskatchewan becomes just another small and 
unimportant jurisdiction in Canada. We on this side of the house are prepared to accept the challenge of the new horizons; we 
invite hon. members opposite to do so, too, by supporting this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move that you do now leave the chair. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): — That water tastes better than a lot of what I have heard this afternoon. Mr. Speaker, 
you were not in chamber just a few moments before the Provincial Treasurer rose to present the budget speech this session, 
when he was good enough to meet me in the centre of the chamber and to present me with a copy of the budget that he 
delivered this afternoon. I want to thank him for having given me a copy just a minute or so before the budget was delivered, 
and I want to extend my congratulations to him in the able manner in which the budget was presented this afternoon. 
 
I realize that for any Provincial Treasurer to present a budget in the manner in which the one was presented this afternoon 
means that there have been many hours of work, perhaps hundreds of hours of work, gone into the preparation of the budget, 
not only by the Provincial Treasurer, but by many people in his department, many people in other departments of government, 
and many of those whom the people who sit opposite claim we are going to fire. Many people spent hours in the preparation 
of this particular budget. 
 
I think this is true, Mr. Speaker, of all budgets that are presented in all legislatures and in all parliaments, there have been 
many hours of work put into the preparation of the budget by people who have served this province well in the past and I 
expect will serve this province well in the future, whether it is under this government or under some other government. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. McDonald: — I think you realize, Mr. Speaker, that it is difficult for any person to rise in his place and criticize a 
document of this length, when one has only had it in his possession for one hour and thirty minutes. 
 
However, I was pleased to see that the surplus form last year was going to be somewhere in the neighborhood of $10,000,000. 
This is roughly the same surplus this province enjoyed last year, but I could not help but feel that at least one former 
Provincial Treasurer would probably turn over in his deck chair some place in the Caribbean, when he realized that his 
successor couldn’t estimate the revenues of this province to within $20,000,000 in two years. Mr. Speaker, I doubt if this 
government is accepting some of the good advice that has been made available to them in the past by some civil servants in 
the province of Saskatchewan, because never in the history of the province of Saskatchewan, has a Provincial Treasurer been 
out $20,000,000 in 24 months, on the revenues available to the government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have complained about high taxes. They have taken $20,000,000 away from the taxpayers of the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan, more than even they estimated they would. Taxes in the province of Saskatchewan have hit an 
all time high. They are becoming unbearable for many of our citizens. We have people in Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker, 
and I am sure the Minister of Social Welfare knows and if he does not he should get on his horse and get out into the country 
and see it, for every time a taxpayer goes into a store and pays the five per cent tax, he is paying it with money that ought to 
be pt into food and clothes. And if the Minister of Social Welfare does not know where to find these people, I invite him to 
get into my car, at my expense, and I will drive him into the communities and take him to visit the homes where this exists. 
 
I would also be prepared to take the Minister of Public Health along on this journey, and the Provincial Treasurer and the 
Premier. If Saskatchewan were the utopia that we have been led to believe by the 



 

February 21st, 1964 
 

 
323 

speeches that have been presented to us today. Mr. Speaker, would there be anyone in this house criticizing the fact that 
Saskatchewan is growing slower than any other province in the dominion of Canada. We have a growth rate in our population 
of 1.2 per cent, the smallest in Canada. There may be 34 CCF or NDP members over on the other side of the house who are 
convinced that we live in utopia, but apparently there are 18,000,000 Canadians who are not convinced of this, apparently 
there are 190,000,000 Americans who are not convinced of it, and apparently there are millions upon millions of people in the 
other populated nations of the world that are not convinced that Saskatchewan is utopia. 
 
The smallest rate of growth of any province in Canada. Do you know what this means, Mr. Speaker? The slowest rate of 
growth of any territory in the world, right here in Saskatchewan. Population growth is smaller in Saskatchewan here today 
than any other state or province in the world. And the Provincial Treasurer is trying to convince us that it is utopia. Well you 
know we have a definition of utopia – and we have a definition of prosperity – and you know the people that reach the 
greatest prosperity in Saskatchewan today sit on the benches across the way. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. McDonald: — The utopia referred to today is available, providing you are an NDP cabinet minister. Mr. Speaker, to the 
average citizen of Saskatchewan this is not true. And again I challenge my hon. friends. If they say that haven’t poverty in 
their constituency, then they are blind. Poverty does exist, there are people in this province today that are in desperate need of 
some assistance and there is no assistance available. 
 
What about people who are partially disabled? What provision had this government made in 20 years to take care of the 
partially disabled? We have a pension program in Canada which is supposed to take care of those people that are totally 
disabled, but the definition of a totally disabled person in Canada in my opinion is a disgrace. I am not blaming this 
government for it. But in order to draw a total disability pension, you almost have to be flat on your back, but it seems to me 
that a definition of total disability ought to be that if you have no earning capacity you are totally disabled. There is nothing in 
this budget to make any provision to look after these people unless they are prepared to go on social aid. Is it any wonder, 
whether the minister wants to admit it or not, there is as much stigma in social aid today as there was 30 years ago, and there 
are many deserving citizens that are not prepared to even make application for social aid. This humanitarian government, 
what have they done about it? They close their eyes and say it does not exist. Now they have attempted to take care, and again 
we have some extension of this service, to take care of those people who need medical assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is one other group of people who are in far worse circumstances than most people were when they had to 
pay their own doctor bills. The drug bills in this province and in Canada as a whole take far more of the average person’s 
income than doctor bills. I do not think there is a member in this house who would not agree with me when I say on many 
occasions when one is required to visit a doctor or physician, the doctor or physician bill might run $5 or $6, but he goes to 
the drug store and it costs him $15 or $16 to get medicine. There is no provision in this budget to do anything about this. 
 
What about education? It is true, Mr. Speaker, that his budget makes provision for increased expenditures for educational 
purposes. But, Mr. Speaker, increasing the expenditure in itself will not solve the education problem that confronts the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan. One of the major problems that confront us today is the fact that most of those students that 
are receiving the benefits of higher education are moving elsewhere in Canada to find worthwhile and gainful employment, 
and we are losing their services to our province. Is there a member in this house, on either side of the house, that has not some 
member of their own family that has had to move to some other part of Canada or the United States to be gainfully employed? 
If there is such a member here, then he is the exception. Mr. Speaker, there is a bigger percentage of Saskatchewan university 
students having to go out of the province to be gainfully employed than ever before. Add increasing the amount of money the 
province is prepared to pay, is not going to solve this problem. There is only one way it can be solved and that is by a 
different attitude of government towards graduates of our universities, our technical schools and even our public and high 
school systems. 
 



 

February 21st, 1964 
 

 
324 

We must be prepared to implement programs that will make it possible for Saskatchewan citizens after they are educated to be 
gainfully employed in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, there are many things that I would like to add to what I have said today, but at least I will 
devote my time from now until Monday at 2:30 endeavoring to prepare a reply to the budget address. But again I want to 
bring to the attention of the members of this house, the position that I am now placed in, and I have been in this position for 
some four years. Today is Friday, tomorrow Saturday, and the following day will be Sunday. Those are the days that I must 
prepare my reply to this budget address. Every government office will be closed on Saturday and Sunday. The library is 
closed. Even if I want a secretary to type my notes, I have to pay her. Mr. Speaker, to do this job adequately, one should have 
facilities available to him for at least 48 hours. How can one get any information in this house on a Saturday or a Sunday? I 
want to repeat, even the library is closed. Maybe some members opposite do not use the library, I do, but you can’t use it if it 
is closed. And I would hope that different arrangements can be made so that whoever is charged with this responsibility in the 
future will have at least the facilities that are available on the average working day of the week. And I can assure you, Mr. 
Speaker, that this is the last year I will be the financial critic. I fully expect that we will be sitting over there after the next 
provincial election. 
 
I beg leave to adjourn the debate, Mr. Speaker,. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
HON. E. KRAMER, (Minister of Natural Resources) moved second reading of Bill No. 11 – An Act to provide for the 
Establishment of the Saskatchewan Parks Advisory Council. 
 
He said: 
 
I would like to draw the attention of this house to the fact that during the last few years we have seen a changing and 
increasing demand for the facilities that go with leisure time, with more prosperity, and with greater facility of travel. The 
Department of Natural Resources, as the Provincial Treasurer said a few moments ago, embarked on several programs 
providing recreational facilities to the people of Saskatchewan. They have done this through the establishment of new parks, 
through the rebuilding and expansion of older ones, but there has been as well a new development which has received 
tremendous co-operation from rural and urban municipalities of the province of Saskatchewan, and this was The Regional 
Park Act which was introduced and passed in 1960. 
 
Again, here we found that people were prepared, more than prepared, to establish facilities for recreation in communities that 
had never known any of those facilities in the past. And because this development has been so rapid, because the future of the 
developments is going to continue to be even more rapid, the demand is going to increase rather than decrease. This proven 
by the fact that 30 regional parks were established in a little more than three years, and that there are 10 more approved and 
possibly another 10 more in the process of application, as well as the tremendous increase in the demand and the plans for the 
development of parks in the new area that will develop in the South Saskatchewan River Dam, three areas there. We feel that 
we should have some way of keeping our finger on the pulse of preference among the public, therefore, we are introducing an 
act which will invite members of the public from various organizations in the prove to take part in the future planning and the 
giving of advice to the development of recreation facilities in Saskatchewan. 
 
Too many times in the past we have embarked on programs, not only in Saskatchewan but throughout Canada, to find that 
public preferences 



 

February 21st, 1964 
 

 
325 

have changed, and these facilities, especially on small local levels, have deteriorated and become obsolete. 
 
We feel that if we have the advice of people who are constantly in tough with the public and public organizations, that we can 
find and receive advice that will be up to date. 
 
Therefore, we will ask in this act for representation from such organizations as the Saskatchewan Teachers Federation, the 
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan Farmers’ Union, Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, Association of Regional 
Park Authorities (which is a new organization that has developed in the last three years again, because of the development of 
regional parks, they are doing very good work), the Saskatchewan Natural History Society, Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities, Saskatchewan Urban Municipal Association, Saskatchewan History and Folklore Society, Consumers 
Association of Canada, and the Saskatchewan Tourist Association. Now from these groups we feel that we can rely on good 
advice from representation that will provide and keep us in constant tough with the needs and the demands of the public. This 
will be an advisory council. It will not be a council with any administrative powers. 
 
We feel that this is necessary and that the emphasis that has been placed on this kind of development is necessary because of 
the tremendous increase in tempo, the tremendous acceptance and actual demand for this development, $4,500,000 in the last 
three or four years spent by my department on recreational facilities alone, demand that we do take care that these 
developments are undertaken with the best advice possible. This kind of program enjoys priority because it makes for 
individual happiness. It will attract industry and attract skilled employees as well as attract tourists. Therefore, I move second 
reading of this bill. 
 

Mr. Ross A. McCarthy (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I am very interested in this bill and I would like to make a few 
remarks on it if I may. I, of course, am more familiar with the parks where I live, with which I have been connected for 40 or 
50 years, but if the action of the government has been to come in other places as it has been in that part, I assure you that you 
are years late in appointing your advisory committee. Now I am not blaming the present minister, he is only new in the office, 
but I think the most charitable thing I can say about the previous minister was that he did not know anything about the 
provincial parks and how they should be run, and that some of his advisors were very ill advised in some of the things that 
have happened down at Kenosee. 
 
Now, of course, we have a peculiar situation down there in that . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! I think the member has got to stay to the principle of the bill and not to the principle of your parks 
in your area. 
 

Mr. McCarthy: — Well, it comes in I think, I was going to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that as far as that park is concerned, part of 
it is under rural municipal control and the other part is under government control, but they have a cottage owners association 
in the one half of this, the other half is under municipal control and I would certainly think that both organizations should be 
consulted in an advisory capacity as far as that is concerned. Well now, I have in my hand here, a brochure or whatever you 
call it, put out in connection with these lakes and I notice that they do not, in the Kenosee, mention anything about the fishing 
or the boating. We have not any fishing or boating in the Kenosee Lake today, and it was and always has been very noted for 
this. We have not any fishing, you cannot blame the government for it exactly, but you certainly can blame them for the lack 
of doing something about it. As anybody knows, the lake was taken over by perch a number of years ago, and the people who 
know, tell me that the history of it is, that when the perch gets so thick, they crowd one another and become small, and there is 
not enough fishing for it, that’s the position we are in now. But the position of the boating is a direct . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I still think that the member is straying away from the principle of the bill, that it would be better to discuss 
this on estimates. 
 



 

February 21st, 1964 
 

 
326 

Mr. McCarthy: — Well, as you wish, Mr. Speaker, I think that it has to do. I said as I started that I knew they were late with 
this, in appointing this, and I still think that they need some help down there, and the best place they can get it is from the 
organization that I have suggested, and I want to tell why. I would like to continue this for a minute or two, to future 
management of that park, if you don’t allow it, I will abide by your ruling, but I would like to go on a few minutes more. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Abiding close to the principle of this bill. 
 

Mr. McCarthy: — Well, the principle of this bill, Mr. Speaker, is that they need some advisory help and I agree, and I think 
that the advisory help that would be most beneficial down there, would be from the cottage owners association, and the rural 
municipality which is responsible for that particular end of it. And what they have done down there, as I understand the 
department is responsible for the shore line of any lake, what they have done down there is to make us take all our boat houses 
off that end, but they neglected to put any facilities or any beaches there. They seem to think that because it is privately 
owned, that all the money should be spent up at the other end. We have a gentleman there that is running quite a big resort, 
and he fixed up a beach and they would not even give him any sand to put on it. He wanted the sand and he was prepared to 
put it on himself, which he did so, and they would not give him the sand out of the government pits. and there is very great 
need, we cannot take any boats out, for the simple reason that we haven’t any boat houses, they are all gone. They have a 
monstrosity down there, they call a marina, that cannot be used. They needed an adviser a few years ago, they needed 
somebody to advise them on that, it’s done on piles, but is should be floating because that lake varies from eight to ten feet in 
depth and because of the high water is unusable. And I want to say to the new Minister of Natural Resources, I hope he will 
take a broader view, not so narrow political view as did his predecessor. If he wants to spend the time to come down there, I 
will go around with him, I can point out to him what the people there want and what should be done. As I said before, there is 
neither boating or fishing on that lake, because they took all the boat houses out and no place to park a boat, the marina is a 
monstrosity that cannot be used; the fish population of the lake is getting worse and worse, there are small perch that are 
hardly worth fishing for. And all you have to do is to come down there in any day and see the difference in the population. 
Another thing, skiing is a very important thing on those lakes today. Well it is almost a physical impossibility to launch a boat, 
you need three or four husky fellows with you and then you’ve got to take it out, there is no place to tie it up. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Once again, I would remind this member to discuss the details on the estimates during committee, we are 
getting away from the principle. 
 

Mr. McCarthy: — I can assure you and the house and the new minister that the conditions are very very unsatisfactory, some 
of them aren’t the direct result of the government, it is almost lack of action, and the others, probably most serious, are the 
result of direct action by this government and as I said I think that they need advisors. They need them badly and they should 
have been appointed a long time ago. I am very much in favor of this bill and I think it anticipates the needs of our public and 
many people including ministers of the crown. There has been a general trend in the last few years towards bringing about 
recreation, and we would like to see the best kind of recreation in Saskatchewan. It seems to me that we could all agree that 
no one knows everything about everything, and certainly no individual whether he is an individual in this house would know 
how best to establish parks and to maintain management, and I would even go so far as that probably the department of 
government could not do that, but by setting up such a body as it is intended to set up under this act, I think that no only can 
we anticipate what the public desires, and not only can we carry out the trends that we know exist in the province, but there 
will be a body that people can go to and a body to co-ordinate, say between different governments such as local governments 
and park committees and the province to establish the best 



 

February 21st, 1964 
 

 
327 

kind of parks and recreational areas in the province of Saskatchewan. Certainly, no one is going to vote against this and I just 
wanted to express my feeling on the matter. I think it is a tremendous bill and very, very timely, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Kramer: — I just want to thank the hon. member from Cannington for his remarks and I appreciate especially his offer 
to accompany me around and point out where we are making our mistakes. I am sure that next July or August, I will pick him 
up and we will go around – I will be very glad to look the situation over. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 
 
HON. E. KRAMER, (Minister of Natural Resources) moved second reading of Bill No. 12 – An Act to amend The 
Department of Natural Resources Act. 
 
He said: 
 
There is nothing controversial here, it simply outlines a few things, or clarifies a few things that the legal people tell us we 
need in order to provide certain monies, very similar to the bill moved by Mr. Nollet yesterday, which allows his department 
to provide certain grants. This bill will allow us to provide grants or to participate in the federal resource ministers council, 
for instance, where we provided some $7,000 along with all the rest of the provinces and the government of Canada. Our 
share was $7,000 and it varied up to $11,000 to $12,000 from Ontario and Quebec and so forth. Some questions have arisen 
which indicate these minor changes in the act, these changes will clarify our position. with these remarks I move second 
reading. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 
 
HON. E. KRAMER, (Minister of Natural Resources) moved second reading of Bill No. 13 – An Act to provide for the 
Prevention and Suppression of Prairie and Forest Fires. 
 
He said: 
 
In spite of its volume, this bill does not do anything too controversial. It provides mainly to bring the archaic language of this 
act up-to-date, this occurs in several places in the old act, it has not been changed for many years, it refers to horses and 
equipment that are no longer in use, as well as a lot of duplication in the act. There has been some conflict between the south 
and the north, this is The Prairie and Forest Fires Act; you will notice, the controversy develops on occasion with the 
municipalities regarding whose responsibility the fires is; whether is should be provincial, government or municipal 
responsibility. Some of these questions we hope are now cleared up and will avoid further confusion. We are going to call 
everyone that is appointed as fire warden or is responsible for fire protection, Rangers, we are changing that word ―Warden‖ 
in some places to ―Rangers‖, consistently calling them ―Fire Ranger‖ wherever they appear. I think that is about all that I can 
think of for the committee’s benefit. There are minor changes in working which can be discussed when they come up at third 
reading in committee. These suggested changes are needed in order to meet modern demands. Therefore, I move second 
reading, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 
 
HON. E. KRAMER, (Minister of Natural Resources) moved second reading of Bill No. 14 – An Act respecting Regional 
Parks. 
 
He said: 
 
These are indicated, Mr. Speaker, because of the progress that has been made in the development. all these changes are 
straightforward, I do not think there is a great deal that I can say about them, as we have discussed these changes with the 
Regional Park 



 

February 21st, 1964 
 

 
328 

Association. at their annual meeting and I believe that I am prepared to answer any questions in committee, unless someone 
wants to say something on the second reading. Mr. Speaker, I therefore, move second reading. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 
 
HON. R. A. WALKER, (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 19 – An Act to amend The Automobile 
Accident Insurance Act, 1963. 
 
He said: 
 
I would like to say just by way of explanation that the bill makes several amendments to the Automobile Accident Insurance 
Act, and the first of the amendments is of a rather minor nature. As you know, the amount of money for funeral benefits is 
limited $250 at the present time. It is proposed that this amount be increased to $300 maximum amount. Secondly, there is 
some provision in the Act whereby the insurer must pay to a person under the public liability provisions of the insurance 
policy and where the insured is excluded from benefit by reason of a violation of a statutory condition. As you know an 
insured has no benefit under the public liability provisions where he is unlicensed, where he is driving while drunk or where 
he is not qualified to drive, or certain other exclusions provided for in the statutory conditions. yet the insurance company is 
obligated to pay the injured person up to the minimum limits which I believe is $35,000. In these cases the insurance company 
is now entitled to recover from the insured motorist the monies so paid. 
 
The proposed amendment is to simplify the procedures whereby the company may recover this money from the insured 
motorist. At the present time, the insurance company has no recourse but to stand back and see the insured motorist sued and 
then take advantage of the financial responsibility provisions to obtain reimbursement. It is proposed here that where the 
insured motorist agrees that the company may pay and that he will accept liability, that it will be unnecessary for the motorist 
to be sued before the financial responsibility provisions go into effect. This makes it unnecessary for the insurance company 
to force the claimant to sue the insured right through to a judgment. It merely facilitates the arrangements between the insured 
and the insurance company in those cases. 
 
The next section, section 4, provides for the introduction of a uniform liability card which is proposed to be introduced in all 
the provinces of Canada. This uniform liability card imposes an obligation on all insurers to conform to the insurance laws 
and to provide a certain minimum limit of insurance as it exists in all the other provinces. This will eliminate powers of 
attorney and pink slips and that sort of thing, that used to have to be done by Saskatchewan motorists when they went abroad. 
The pink slip will now be part of the motor vehicle registration, it will be on the back of it. 
 
Section 5 and 6 provides that where the person has a claim against a motorist who is unlicensed or uninsured, that The 
Accident Insurance Act will give protection under that section. It corresponds to the unsatisfied judgment funds which exist in 
the other provinces. There were certain classes of cases, certain very restricted classes where vehicles stolen were being 
driven by the thief or where the vehicle belongs in another province, where the benefits were not available. Now it is proposed 
to extend the benefits up to the $35,000 inclusive for any injuries or losses suffered by anyone as a result of this class of 
vehicle, so that there will not be any exclusions from the coverage now. It represents a small extension in the coverage under 
the act, includes a small group that has not up to now been covered. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with these words, I would move that this bill be read a second time. 
 

Mr. McCarthy: — Mr. Speaker, could I ask the Attorney General a question? 
 

Mr. Speaker: — You should have asked the question before, but I will let you ask the question now. 
 



 

February 21st, 1964 
 

 
329 

Mr. McCarthy: — Does this only apply to people who are driving cars, shall we say, that haven’t a license? It doesn’t cover 
anything that any situation nor a person who has a license gets into, or does it? 
 

Mr. Walker: — This will provide for the case where the vehicle is not licenses, at the present time, as I understand it, all 
cases are covered where the vehicle is licensed. There is no problem where the vehicle is licensed. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 
 
HON. R. A. WALKER, (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 24 – An Act to amend The Land Titles Act, 
1960. 
 
He Said: 
 
It merely provides machinery for issuing titles to crown land. At the present time, the crown land is not the subject of a title, 
and it makes it difficult to deal between the federal town and the provincial town to transfer land. Really the Land Title 
procedures don’t really provide for it, and by passing these two sections it simply simplifies the procedural relationship 
between the federal and the provincial government when land is transferred between the two governments. It is really an 
internal matter and does not affect the public in any way. With those few words, Mr. Speaker, I would move that this bill be 
read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:31 p.m. 
 
 


