



















































Hansard: February 27, 1964


415 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
SIXTH SESSION – FOURTEENTH LEGISLATURE 

16th day 

 

Thursday, February 27th, 1964 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT OF DEATH OF MR. F.V. VON PILIS 
 

Hon. O.A. Turnbull (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to bring to the 
attention of the house the sudden tragic death of a good friend of my own, and I am sure of many of the members, Mr. Bob 
Von Pilis, who died suddenly while attending a public meeting in Lloydminster yesterday. 
 
Mr. Von Pilis was not native born to Canada, or Saskatchewan, but he had through his work become a Canadian and a 
champion of the rights of many groups in Saskatchewan, as well, during the period of time in which he lived in this province. 
He was a man of outstanding character, fearlessly dedicated to his convictions, a man I think of very high principles, and I 
deem it a privilege to count him as a personal friend. I am sure the house would want to join with me in extending sympathy 
and condolences to his family. 
 

Mr. W. Ross Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — I should certainly like to join with the minister in his condolences. I, 
too, knew Mr. Von Pilis and my colleagues, if from time to time we did not share some of the views he held, but we knew that 
he held them very sincerely and I think he will be missed by the farmers, by the farm union and by the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

QUESTION RE JAPANESE TRANSIT BUSSES 
 

Mr. Franklin E. Foley (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are called, I would like to make reference 
to a press report this morning that the Japanese Consul in Winnipeg, is seeking a site for a Japanese transit bus assembly point 
in Canada. The article states that Winnipeg has made a trial run of the busses and that Edmonton purchased one several 
months ago to make a detailed study. 
 
I would like to ask the minister of industry if Saskatchewan has made any overtures for this new possible potential company. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! Once again I must point out to the members that questions cannot be based on newspaper reports 
that way. I realize some of them might be interesting but they are out of order when they base questions on newspaper reports. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Cliff Thurston (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw your attention, also the attention of the house, to the 
charming group of students occupying the front row in the speaker’s gallery. They are the grade 11 and 12 students from 
Vibank accompanied by Mother Berchmana and Mother Catherine, and their drivers, Mr. Deis and Mr. Heisler. I want to say 
that they may lack in quantity, but I am sure they make up in quality. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that I speak for all members 
when we say we welcome this young group here today, we hope that their stay has been enjoyable and also educational, and I 
am sure that we wish them all a safe journey home. 
 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
416 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded, I, too, would like to draw 
the attention of the house to a very large group of children from the Victoria School in Saskatoon, along with their teachers, 
Mr. Barrie and Mr. Moschel. I am sure the members will join with me in expressing our delight in having them here today and 
hope their stay will be an enjoyable one and also informative. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. H. Ray Dahlman (Bengough): — I also have the honor of having visitors from my constituency. They are public school 
pupils from Mossbank School and they are here today, we have had two groups the past two days from Mossbank public 
school. We are certainly pleased to have them here and we hope that your stay here will be most enjoyable and that your trip 
home will be safe. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the Budget Motion moved by the Hon. Mr. Brockelbank. 
 

Hon. C.G. Willis (Minister of Highways and Transportation): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak in the budget debate I 
would first of all extend my congratulations to the hon. Provincial Treasurer. This is his second budget and once again I take 
pleasure in complimenting hi, as I did last year, on the occasion of the first budget he presented, in regard to both the 
substance of the address and the presentation of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1938, the Provincial Treasurer entered this house as a member for the first time. During the past year he 
celebrated his 25th year as a member of this assembly. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Willis: — Elected six times, he has served as a member of the former Tisdale constituency for three sessions, from 
19380 to 1952, and from 1952 to the present as a member for the Kelsey constituency, which is immediately east of my 
constituency of Melfort-Tisdale. During his term in this house he served as opposition leader from 1941 to 1944, and 
following the election of the CCF as a Minister of the Crown from 1944 to the present, a period of 20 years of continuous 
service as Minister of the Crown. 
 
He has served as head of four different departments of government since 1944. Two of which were new departments and he 
their first minister. In the years since 1938, the Provincial Treasurer has enjoyed the confidence and respect of his fellow 
members, whether on this side of the chamber or on the other, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Willis: — He has won not only the confidence of his constituents, but also their friendship and trust. The felling of his 
constituents towards him was shown by the honors heaped on him last summer, on the occasion of this 25th anniversary as a 
member, at his nominating convention and at various meetings throughout the constituency. 
 
Friendly and helpful in his relation to others, his friends are legion. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that in the coming election all in 
this 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
417 

house wish him well, and hope he will be back to serve his 7th term . . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Willis: — . . .to reach his 30th year as a member and to complete his 24th year as a Minister of the Crown. 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — Sounds like a swan song . . . 
 

Mr. Willis: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. Provincial Treasurer is well qualified as a result of his years in public life in this 
province to speak with authority, when he says in his budget address, speaking of the period 1944 to 1964, and I quote: 
 

An economic and social revolution has taken place in this province during these twenty years. And it is true that 
Saskatchewan never looked better. 

 
When he says that ―Saskatchewan used to be notorious for its highways, rough when dry and muddy when wet‖, he speaks 
from actual experience, for he has lived in this province for the greater part of his life. I have heard both the present Minister 
of Social Welfare and him speak of the difficulties of getting to the nominating convention back in the spring of 1937, when 
the present Provincial Treasurer was first nominated. From their telling of it, Mr. Speaker, they would have made better time 
if they had left their model T at home and walked. Of all the members of this legislature, the Provincial Treasurer is perhaps 
better qualified than anyone else to judge when he says ―Saskatchewan never looked better‖. 
 
As Minister of Municipal Affairs, from 1944 to 1953, he worked to improve conditions in municipal government. As minister 
he was responsible for equalization grants, based on a formula and paid to very municipality each and every year. To 
municipalities used to receiving pittances as grants and that only in one year out of four, annual equalization grants were in 
themselves a revolution of sorts. 
 
Although he was not municipal minister in 1956 he played a major role in bringing about the rural grid system, with 
construction grants to rural municipalities based on the actual cost of these roads. This system of municipal grid roads has 
proven one of the most important advances in rural living. As we near the completion of the original goal of 12,000 miles of 
all-weather municipal roads, rural residents are realizing more and more the advantages of over-all planning of road 
construction, coupled with generous financial assistance from the provincial government. 
 
As Minister of Natural Resources and Industrial Development from 1948 to 1952 the present Provincial Treasurer realized 
more and more the truth of the statement made April 19th, 1944, by former premier Patterson, to a special committee of the 
House of Commons, when then Liberal Premier said, ―Saskatchewan from the point of view of industrial development is in a 
poorer position than any other province in the dominion of Canada with the possible exception of Prince Edward Island‖. 
 
In attempting to diversify the economy of the province the CCF government found it necessary to overcome the many 
obstacles in the way of industrial development, inherited from a Liberal government of the past. Reliable roads, so necessary 
for industrial development, did not exist. Mr. Speaker, these had to be built. Power for industry was lacking – generating 
plants and transmission lines had to be provided. In addition Saskatchewan had a reputation for poverty and drought – this 
had to be overcome. 
 
Those were busy days for both the Minister of Municipal Affairs and his colleagues, as they worked to lay the foundation of 
an economic and social revolution in this province. Prominent in their plans for development in Saskatchewan was the setting 
up of crown corporations – government sponsored businesses, designed to use Saskatchewan resources in providing jobs for 
our citizens and to act as a stimulus to attract other industries. And, Mr. Speaker, thee crown corporations, in an overall sense, 
have been dramatically successful in spite of all the sabotage from those who sit on the other side of the house. 
 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
418 

The Provincial Treasurer reports in his address net surpluses for all the crown corporations totalled almost $11,000,000, a 
new record figure. Those of Saskatchewan Power Corporation and Government Telephones reported significantly higher 
earnings. Despite losses incurred by Estevan Clay Products and Saskair, the net earnings for the government finance office 
group of enterprises totalled over $1,300,000. A million isn’t bad for businesses which are branded as failures by those who 
sit opposite. Besides the $11,000, surplus, the effect of the crown corporations, on the overall economy of the province, 
throughout the years has been outstanding. The Provincial Treasurer reports that the wage and salary bill of the corporations 
amounted to $31,600,000 and on the average there were 6,200 workers employed during 1963. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, other industries were encouraged to enter Saskatchewan because of the programs and progress of this 
province’s crown corporations. Because of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, because of the rural electrification program 
of the Power Corporation, a wire factory established in Weyburn, a transformer plant was set up in Regina, a welding firm 
began manufacturing welders for the farm market, a market for power poles stimulated our forest industries, water and sewer 
programs became possible for our farms, electrical and plumbing businesses in our urban centres flourished, an industry 
producing plastic pipe established in Weyburn – the Saskatchewan River has been and is being harnessed for power, thereby 
providing work for countless hundreds at both Squaw Rapids and the South Saskatchewan project site. 
 
These, and more which could be mentioned, Mr. Speaker, are the result of only one of our crown corporations which the 
members opposite brand as failures. I cannot understand people, Mr. Speaker, who get personal satisfaction attempting to 
discredit advances in their own province, and they must get only personal satisfaction for they do not receive political 
advantage. The people of the province resent this constant downgrading of Saskatchewan enterprises indulged in by the 
opposition members opposite. 
 
The third department the present Provincial Treasurer headed was that of Mineral Resources from 1952 to 1962. So important 
had mineral development in Saskatchewan become by 1952, that it was necessary to get up a separate department of 
government, and as a direct result of encouragement by the minister and by this government, Mr. Speaker, mineral production 
in Saskatchewan has been phenomenal since this government took office 20 years ago. And again, Mr. Speaker, in spite of 
sabotage by the opposition. In 1945 Saskatchewan produced 16,508 barrels of oil, an average of 45 barrels per day, last year 
72,000,000 barrels were produced with the average close to 200,000 barrels a day. Potash and helium are now in production, 
with promises of even greater total mineral production in the future. Saskatchewan presently is the fourth-ranking Canadian 
mineral producing province behind Ontario, Alberta and Quebec. Today mineral production accounts for some $28,000,000 
in revenue to the province of Saskatchewan, as compared to only $120,000 to the provincial government only 20 years ago. 
Perhaps the opposition members, Mr. Speaker, would claim this as a case of over-taxation, and I believe they do, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In 1962 the present Provincial Treasurer took over as minister in charge of the finances of this province. Mr. Premier, you 
made a good choice, for not only has Saskatchewan never looked better, but her financial structure has never been as sound as 
it is today. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Willis: — Opposition members are loud in their criticism of the surplus which has been accumulated. I wonder, Mr. 
Speaker, what their reaction would have been if a deficit had resulted from say a crop failure. Without a doubt, they would 
have happily shouted ―blue ruin‖ and joyfully proclaimed that the province was facing bankruptcy as a result of government 
policies. Even today with Saskatchewan experiencing her greatest prosperity they cry stagnation, but I notice, Mr. Speaker, 
the word stagnation comes out a little more subdued than in former years. Let us look at what the opposition calls stagnation, 
Mr. Speaker. Thanks to a bountiful providence and competent, efficient farmers, the gross value of agricultural commodities 
production reached an all time high of $1,055,000,000 in 1963. But in the same year, Mr. Speaker, the gross value of non-
agricultural commodity production reached a high of $1,114,000,000, a record too. 
 
I must emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that in this past year Saskatchewan produced a record crop and at the same time we had a 
record non-agricultural production of even greater value than our agricultural production. What 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
419 

makes the performance of our non-agricultural production so outstanding this year, Mr. Speaker, is that in 1963 Saskatchewan 
produced the equivalent of two crops in one year and yet the value of non-agricultural production was still greater than that of 
our agricultural production, and yet those opposite cry stagnation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while agricultural production figures for each of the years between 1948 and 1963 were going up and down 
reflecting weather and other hazards, non-agricultural values were mainly increasing year by year at a steady rate. Our 
economy is booming, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan indeed never looked better. Thanks not only to a bountiful harvest, but also 
to the advances made by the non-agricultural sector of our economy. For the five years from 1948 to 1952 agricultural 
commodity production accounted for 60 per cent of the gross commodity production in Saskatchewan, while non-agricultural 
production accounted for only 40 per cent, but for the five-year period from 1959 to 1963, agricultural production accounted 
for 40 per cent while non-agricultural production accounted for 60 per cent, Mr. Speaker. What makes the experience of 1959 
to 1963 even more outstanding is that both 1962 and 1963 had record grain crops. Surely, Mr. Speaker, a reasonable person 
would not term this stagnation. 
 
And again in congratulating the Provincial Treasurer for the fine budget before this house now, I would compliment him on 
his vision of Saskatchewan for the future when he says ―looking into the next 20 years I can see more new horizons for 
Saskatchewan. Further development of our province, more improvements, more public facilities, and better living conditions‖, 
– because I think this budget too, Mr. Speaker, I would quote here as I did last year the closing paragraph from the Provincial 
Treasurer’s address of 1963 when he said: 
 

This is a budget that provides for new horizons in economic development of our province. It provides new opportunities for 
our young people, help for the unfortunate, care for the sick, comfort for the aged, and increase opportunities for good 
living for all. A budget not in cold dollars only, but also of friendship, warmth and light. 

 
In congratulating you, Mr. Provincial Treasurer, on your 26 years of service as a member of this legislative assembly, I would 
say that yours has been an outstanding career of service to the people of Saskatchewan. In the years ahead may your efforts 
and the efforts of the CCF government result in a continually expanding economy with continuing betterment of the living 
conditions of all the people of Saskatchewan and may your future budgets all result in surpluses. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Willis: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition basing its appeals to the electors in the coming election on lack of progress in 
Saskatchewan, has missed the boat. The Liberals failed in their attempt to prevent diversification of our economy, and their 
claims of stagnation register only disgust with the voters. Yesterday, even the member for Athabaska (Mr. Guy) tried to 
convince the people of Saskatchewan that nothing had been done by this government in the north. He must, Mr. Speaker, be a 
Johnny-Come-Lately to that part of the province when he complained about roads in his area. Surely he knows about No. 2 
highway, extending through La Ronge to Churchill. If he does not, I should tell him that this government is extending this 
road north and east from the Churchill this year. 
 
He probably has not been up the Buffalo Narrows road on the west side of the province which is being extended to La Loche, 
a distance of about 200 miles from Green Lake. The Hanson Lake Road to Creighton and Flin Flon is certainly appreciated by 
other residents of the eastern part of the province. Besides these Ostoquen Road extends north of Hudson Bay to connect with 
the Pas. Four major roads, Mr. Speaker, of more than 550 miles in length in the north by this government and still the member 
for Athabaska (Mr. Guy) claims lack of road development. And in addition to these the Department of Natural Resources is 
working on a road connecting Squaw Rapids with Cumberland House and a road from Jan Lake to Sandy Bay. In his criticism 
of road development and other developments taking place in the north, one gets the impression, Mr. Speaker, that the member 
for Athabaska is more concerned about his political future than he is about the development of the north of this province. 
 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
420 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Willis: — But then, Mr. Speaker, one can say that the members opposite as a whole have shown more concern for 
achieving office than about the welfare of the people of this province. If there is any doubt on this, Mr. Speaker, it is shown 
clearly in a recent article in Canada Month, where the Leader of the Opposition is quoted as saying: 
 

We have lived under socialism for 20 years, we know the regimentation, the stagnation, the lack of development, which 
socialism brings about. 

 
The unadulterated nonsense, Mr. Speaker, is designed to mislead the people, not only of Saskatchewan, but of Canada. This is 
a magazine which has a nationwide circulation, and here the Leader of the Opposition would even stoop to belittle his own 
province, if by doing so he thought he might achieve political advantage. In the same article, Mr. Speaker, the author claims 
that if the Liberals are retuned to office the present Leader of the Opposition and I quote: 
 
 Would try to bring back Liberalism as it was before MacKenzie King stretched it out of all recognition. 
 

An Hon. Members: — You are going back . . . 
 

Mr. Willis: — This is a startling statement, Mr. Speaker. The party opposite loudly proclaims itself as a part of reform. Could 
it be that the reform that the Leader of the Opposition sees is to move back 40 years in their interpretation of Liberal policy? It 
is time, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition spelled out their interpretation of themselves as a party of reform. 
 
In the year which is drawing to a close, Mr. Speaker, the Department of Highways had a budget of $22,950,000. A good 
construction year and our expanding economy resulted in supplementary spending of $1,500,000, making our total estimated 
expenditure for this year $23,600,000. Highways in the 1964-65 budget have been allotted $26,600,000 or an increase of 
more than $3,000,000 over 1963-64. 
 
The last Liberal government in this province allotted only $2,800,000 for highways. This amount was approximately 8 per 
cent of the total budget of $20,000,000 in 1944. This 8 per cent for highways in 1994 compares to approximately 12 per cent 
of the 1964-65 budget allotted to us the coming year. To digress for a moment, Mr. Speaker, before anybody listening gets the 
wrong impression, I would say the reason the Liberals’ 1944 total budget was so small, was not because they felt strongly 
about over-taxation at that time, the reason was that Saskatchewan had prior to 1944, an acute case of stagnation. 
 
And to return to highways, Mr. Speaker, the first step of this government when assuming office was to plan a highway system 
which would ensure reliable year-round travel. This has been accomplished by grading or regrading, over the 20 years this 
government has been in office, more than 9,200 miles of provincial highways. While this in itself is a fine achievement, it is in 
the provision of dust-free highways, that the most spectacular advances have been made in these years. By 1950, there were 
603 miles of highway – dust-free in Saskatchewan. By 1960, this had become 2,280 miles. Today, we have almost 4,000 
miles of dust-free highways. Up to two years ago, Mr. Speaker, the major portion of our highway budget was spent on 
regrading. In 1962 for the first time, more of my department’s budget was spent on dust-freeing, on oil treatment and on 
paving, than on grading. Two years ago, my department dust-freed more than 500 miles of highway. Today I am announcing a 
program for dust freeing 838 miles of highway. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Willis: — As a result of our 1963 program, the net mileage of dust-free highways in our system increased by 817 miles. 
The 1964 program with a greater emphasis on paving than on oiling, will increase our total dust-free mileage by only 600 
miles. In two years, Mr. Speaker, this present year and the next, we will have increased our dust-free mileage by 1,417 miles.



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
421 

By the end of this year’s program, we plan on having 4,530 miles of dust-free surface in Saskatchewan. In 1944, Mr. Speaker, 
this government started out to improve highways in order to encourage diversification of our economy. Twenty years later, 
buoyant economic conditions in our province make it possible to carry out a program of dust-freeing more than 800 miles of 
highway. 
 
As a result of our 1963 program, many dust-free through routes were competed. A motorist can now travel directly between 
most major centres in Saskatchewan without leaving a black top surface. By oiling No. 14 highway, we have completed a 
second trans-continental dust-free route from Manitoba to Alberta, through Yorkton, Saskatoon, North Battleford, and 
Lloydminster, and as a result of paving No. 7 highway, we can claim a third trans-provincial route, through Yorkton, 
Saskatoon, Rosetown, Kindersley and Alsask. This past year we added one dust-free connection with the United States, with 
the oil treating of No. 35 to the border. This year we will complete another United States connection on the west of the 
province, by oil treating No. 37 south of Climax. 
 
We will extend oiling south to Val Marie on No. 4 highway, while from Val Marie south No. 4, will be graded in preparation 
for oiling another year. 
 
No. 2 highway, presently dust-free from Waskesiu to Pickthall, south of Assiniboia, will be oil treated in 1964 from Pickthall 
to Rockglen. This will leave only 33 miles of No. 2 highway south from Rockglen to the United States border for future 
oiling. The dust-freeing of these highway links with the United States should go a long way in encouraging United States 
tourists to enter Saskatchewan. Such tourists should appreciate also the many dust-free highways leading north to our fabulous 
fishing grounds. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Willis: — In 1963, also, important dust-free connections were made with Manitoba and Alberta by the oiling of No. 13 
highway from Redvers east, and by the paving of No. 18 from oxbow east, and by the dust-freeing of No. 7 highway to 
Kindersley to the Alberta border at Alsask. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you can gather from our accomplishments in the past few years, it is our intention to dust-free our highway 
system as quickly as possible. At the current rate of dust-freeing, it should not be too many years before this aim is 
substantially realized. 
 
As announced by the Provincial Treasurer, there will be a major extension of our urban assistance policy this year. The 
provincial government assistance to city, towns and villages has, until now, been limited to streets which formed links in the 
provincial highway system. Assistance here, formerly 50 per cent will in future by 75 per cent for urban centres under 15,000 
population. A major extension to the urban assistance program will be the provision of assistance for oiling and paving o 
arterial streets in larger centres and on the main street, in smaller centres of 1,000 population and under. The assistance here 
too, will be 50 per cent. Funds to be extended on this policy will total $2,000,000 for the coming year, which is an increase of 
$1,000,000 over the present year. Information is going out to the municipalities present, detailing the assistance to be 
provided. It will be of interest to note, Mr. Speaker, that we have added a total of 493 miles to the highway system from 1960 
to the present. This is made up of 211 miles of provincial highways, 51 miles of park access roads, and 229 of development 
roads in the north. The total mileage of the highway system now is 8,616 miles. We will be adding another 256 miles this year 
when we take into system the Hanson Lake road, the Cookson Road and the Good Spirit Provincial Park access road. This 
will increase our provincial highway mileage to 8,872 miles at the end of 1965. 
 
I would take this opportunity too, of expressing my disappointment that no concrete steps have been taken by the federal 
government toward developing a national highway policy in co-operation with the province. Since 1957, the year 
Saskatchewan finished its section of the Trans-Canada, we have urged that the federal government embarked upon another 
assistance program. After the experience of the Trans-Canada highway agreement, it is not necessary to dwell on the benefits 
which would accrue from further federal participation with the provinces in highway construction. Suffice to say that roads 
today are vital to the economic development of Canada as a whole. In 1867, the year of confederation, roads were mainly of 
local importance. Since confederation, in the past 100 years, tremendous changes have been made in transportation, with 
highways assuming the major role in transportation of goods and services. For the maximum development of the whole 
Canadian economy, it is essential that there be federal participation in the coming development and improvement of the 
country’s road system in all parts of Canada. 
 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
422 

Roads and the associated industry of motor vehicle manufacture, repair and servicing along with servicing of travellers 
constitute a major source of federal tax revenue. Federal revenue from the federal sales tax and federal gasoline and diesel 
fuel totalled more than $217,000,000 in 1960 alone. Annual tax revenues of this magnitude represent a major reason for 
federal participation in road development across our country. Provincial ministers of highways in attendance at the Canadian 
Good Road Association Meeting for the past few years have expressed unanimity in their desire for a national highway policy. 
The next step namely the calling of a meeting of provincial ministers of highways for discussion of this important topic is now 
up to the federal government. In the interest of greater development of our country, such a meeting should not be long 
delayed. 
 
This year, Mr. Speaker, a major step forward has been taken in the reorganization of my department on a provincial scale. 
The need for this step is readily apparent, when one considers increased activities of the department throughout the province. 
The need for on-the-spot decision, for greater decentralization of authority has been recognized and consequently, district 
engineers will have the responsibility of making many decisions which normally would have been refereed to Regina. Five 
districts will be in operation in the province, at Prince Albert, Saskatoon, Swift Current, Regina and Yorkton. District 
engineers will head each district and will assume responsibility for both maintenance procedures an construction projects in 
their districts. Greater co-ordination of all highway activities within each district will result to the overall benefit of the 
motoring public. The effects on our overall staffing are of a minimum nature. There will be five new district engineers to head 
up the new districts, and two appointments to a new sub-district office in Moose Jaw. Besides these seven people, there will 
be a further increase of two, making an overall increase to our staff of nine people as a result of reorganization. The main 
effect on staff will be a reshuffling of senior officials as they assume duties in new localities. Former district centres at 
Rosetown, North Battleford and Weyburn, will be designated along with Moose Jaw, as sub-district. There will be no 
decrease in personnel in these former districts as a result of reorganization. The main organizational change here, is that our 
sub-district people will be reporting to officials in the district centres, instead of reporting directly to Regina. 
 
I would be remiss, if at this time I did not pay tribute to the dedicated group of the Department of Highways employees 
without whose wholehearted and efficient efforts, our progress would not have been possible. I have discovered in the three 
and one-half years I have been minister, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan highway officials are held in high regard not only in 
our province, but also across Canada. 
 
It gives me pleasure at this time, Mr. Speaker, to announce the details of the most extensive program ever undertaken by the 
Department of Highways in Saskatchewan. My department’s construction program this year will comprise grading and 
gravelling of 298 miles, shoulder widening of 7.7 miles, bituminous resurfacing of 225 miles, recapping of bituminous 
surfaces 2.9 miles. Seal coating of bituminous surfaces 19 miles and oil treatment and re-oil treatment of 656 miles. Without 
counting the re-oil treatment, we will have, as I have mentioned earlier, 838 miles of dust-freeing in the province in 1964. The 
project list for 1964 is as follows: 
 
No. 1 highway – Sintaluta to west of Indian Head – completion of bituminous surfacing. 
 
No. 2 highway – Rockglen to Pickthall – oil treatment. 
 
                        – Tuxford to Chamberlain – Bituminous surfacing. 
 
                        – Young to Jct. 14 highway – subgrade widening an bituminous surfacing. 
 
No. 3 highway – Melfort to Kinistino – grading. 
 
                        – Shell River to Bridge to Shellbrook – complete of bituminous surfacing. 
 
No. 4 highway – U.S. boundary to north of Val Marie – grading and gravelling. 
 
                        – Val Marie to Cadillac – oil treatment. 
 
No. 4 highway – Saskatchewan Landing to Kyle – grading. 
 
                        – From 12 miles north of Swift Current to Kyle – bituminous surfacing. 
 
                        – Kyle to Elrose – completion of bituminous surfacing. 
 
                        – From the Jct. 26 highway to Cochin – bituminous surfacing. 
 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
423 

No. 5 highway – Invermay to No. 35 highway – oil treatment. 
 
                        – Watson to Humboldt – completion of bituminous surfacing. 
 
No. 6 highway – Corinne to No. 13 – grading. 
 
                        – Raymore to Dafoe – grading and bituminous surfacing. 
 
                        – North of Gronlid to Choiceland – completion of grading and gravel. 
 
No. 7 highway – Rosetown to Fiske – grading. 
 
                        – Rosetown to D’Arcy – commencement of bituminous surfacing. 
 
                        – D’Arcy to Kindersley – bituminous surfacing. 
 
No. 8 highway – Carievale to Redvers – grading and gravelling. 
 
                        – Kamsack to Pelly – oil treatment. 
 
No. 10 highway – From No. 35 west of Fort Qu’Appelle to Jct. of old No. 10 east of Fort Qu’Appelle – bituminous surfacing. 
 
No. 11 highway – Bladworth to Kenaston – completion of modification. 
 
No. 13 highway – Verwood to Assiniboia – completion of oil treatment. 
 
                          – Weyburn to Jct. with No. 28 highway – oil treatment. 
 
No. 14 highway – Manitoba boundary to Marchwell – grading and gravelling to connect with Manitoba reconstruction. 
 
                          – From Churchbridge to east jct. with No. 10 highway – oil treatment. 
 
                          – No. 11 to Lorne Avenue in Saskatoon – grading. 
 
                          – Hawood’s corner to Perdue – grading. 
 
                          – Unity west 18 miles – oil treatment. 
 
No. 17 highway – Lloydminster south 16 miles – grading & paving. 
 
No. 18 highway – Manitoba boundary to Oxbow – completion of bituminous surfacing. 
 
                          – Torquay to Oungre – grading and gravelling. 
 
No. 20 highway – Duval to Lanigan – oil treatment. 
 
No. 21 highway – No. 13 highway to Cypress Hills Provincial Park – grading and gravelling. 
 
No. 22 highway – From Killaly to Lemberg – grading and gravelling. 
 
                          – Lipton to Southey – oil treatment and grading of 4 miles. 
 
No. 23 highway – Carragana to Chelan – grading and gravelling. 
 
No. 26 highway – Meota to Dulwich – oil treatment. 
 
No. 30 highway – Glidden to Kerrobert – oil treatment. 
 
No. 31 highway – Salvador to Macklin – completion of grading and gravelling. 
 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
424 

No. 33 highway – Francis to Kronau – completion of oil treatment. 
 
No. 35 highway – Cedoux to Francis – completion of grading and gravelling. 
 
                          – Elfros to Wadena – oil treatment. 
 
                          – Archerwill to Tisdale – oil treatment. 
 
                          – Tisdale to WhiteFox – completion of grading and paving. 
 
                          – Creighton south west – completion of grading and gravelling contract. 
 
No. 37 highway – U.S. boundary to Climax – oil treatment. 
 
No. 38 highway – Kelvington to No. 23 – oil treatment. 
 
No. 39 highway – Weyburn to Halbrite – seal coat. 
 
No. 40 highway – Krydor to east of North Battleford – oil treatment. 
 
                          – North Battleford to Wilbert – grading and gravelling. 
 
No. 42 highway – (South of Swanson) to No. 15 – grading and gravel. 
 
No. 49 highway – Hyas to Stenen – grading and gravelling. 
 
                          – Pelly to Hyas – oil treatment. 
 
No. 51 highway – Springwater to Kerrobert – completion of oil treatment. 
 
No. 55 highway – Shellbrook to Debden – oil treatment. 
 
And going back to No. 13, there has been deleted a project that should be in the program, namely, oil treatment from 
Assiniboia to La Fleche. Besides these, there will be numerous road improvements associated with access to provincial parks, 
to camp grounds and to highway picnic sites. Some of the larger ones will be oil treatment of the road from No. 9 highway to 
Good Spirit Lake Provincial Park, and further extension of internal roadways in Buffalo Pound Lake Provincial Park. 
 
Subject to the definite requests of the towns and cities it is expected that grants under the Urban Assistance Policy will 
increase from about one million to about two million in 1964-65. 
 
There will be numerous bridge improvements and bridge construction works associated with the highway improvement 
projects. The major one will be the raising of Saskatchewan Landing Bridge to accommodate the South Saskatchewan 
Reservoir. 
 
Northern development work will be continued with major projects being construction of the Prince Albert National Park by-
pass from Christopher Lake corner to Montreal Lake, and a continuation of the road from Otter Rapids to Reindeer Lake. 
 
And besides these items, these projects which we will start this year, Mr. Speaker, it is planned to fall tender for construction 
in 1965, or for possible forwarding in 1964, the following: 
 
No. 3 highway – Melfort to Kinistino – paving. 
 
No. 4 highway – Meadow Lake to Dorintosh – grading. 
 
No. 5 highway – Wadena to Watson – grading. 
 
No. 5 highway – Lashburn to Lloydminster – subgrade widening and paving. 
 
No. 26 highway – North of St. Walburg to Loon Lake – grading. 
 
No. 35 highway – South of Creighton to Denare Beach – grading. 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
425 

As I mentioned the mileages to be accomplished in 1964-65 may be summarized as: grading — 298 miles; bituminous 
surfacing — 225 miles; oil treatment 603 miles. 
 
Mr. Speaker the projects mentioned above go a long way to further improve our highway system. The emphasis given to dust-
freeing will meet with the approval of the motoring public. For the reasons given, I urge support of all the members of this 
legislature for this program and it goes without saying, Mr. Speaker, that I will support the budget. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Hon. F. Meakes (Minister of Co-operation and Co-operative Development: — Mr. Speaker, I had intended to give a 
report on my department on the air, and also to discuss the budget, and I had also a few things to say about my constituency. 
But after listening to the hon. member from Athabaska (Mr. Guy) yesterday, making charges against the co-operative 
movement, I feel obliged to straighten out the record and refute these charges. 
 
In the eight years that I have been in this house, I have never heard such an irresponsible speech as what he made yesterday. 
Practically everything that he said is not true. I realize, Mr. Speaker, that I must not say that he deliberately lied, as it is 
unparliamentary, but it is hard to conceive that he can be so ignorant of the facts. Basically his charges were three; 1. That 
Saskatchewan Co-operative Fisheries was government-dominated; 2. That fishermen were being fleeced by management; 3. 
That the fishermen could do better by selling to private dealers. The member quoted figures off Barrier Lake. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, it is said that figures do not lie, but people can lie with figures. What the member did not tell this house was that the 
private dealer who fished the other lake, Macoun Lake, last summer, is all this winter selling his total catch to Co-op 
Fisheries. He knows where he can get the best price. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a year ago, the member from Athabaska (Mr. Guy) made a great noise in this house about four cheques that 
were signed by Co-op Fisheries that totalled $1.56 for a total of $1,500 pounds. He did not tell the whole story. He did not say 
that because the natives had hired a private airplane instead of Saskair, that they paid 7-1/4 a pound for freight. The private 
airways did not lift a finger to a box of fish. The natives loaded the boxes on the plane on the lake and Co-op Fisheries 
unloaded them. Oh, no, he did not say anything about that. He did not tell us about the fishermen at Cumberland who last 
summer received $1.76 a pound for fish. Yes sure, it was sturgeon. Before the days of Co-op Fisheries, Mr. Speaker, that 
fishermen at Cumberland were lucky if they got 10¢ a pound for a sturgeon. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Meakes: — He did not say that 3,258 pounds of fish that they sold, they received $5,734 for it. He did not say that the 
whitefish the fishermen caught at Cumberland sold for 15¢ a pound, 17¢ at Dore Lake, 18¢ at Deschambault. He did not say 
that the pickerel brought 12-1/2 at Cumberland, 18¢ at Deschambault. He did not say the reason for low prices on some lakes 
is that they are ―B‖ lakes, and that the fish are infected fish. Oh no, he just took the figures that he wanted to take, to give the 
reasons he wanted to give, and to get the results that he wanted to get, to suite the argument against Co-op Fisheries and for 
the fly-by-night fish peddlers. 
 
The member for Athabaska (Mr. Guy) talked about government dominated co-operatives. Mr. Speaker, as far as I am 
concerned this is an attack on the co-operative movement of Saskatchewan . . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Meakes: — Let us take a look at the board of directors of Co-op Fisheries and Co-op Trading in the north. Let me take 
them one by one. Let us first look at Dr. Clifford Whiting. Cliff Whiting is known and loved all over this province. He was 
one of the early members of the wheat pool movement, one of the early members of the federated co-operatives and an early 
delegate of the wheat pool, still is a delegate of federated co-operative. He was one time chairman of the board of governors 
of the University of Saskatchewan. He was honored a couple of years ago by that university when he was given an honorary 
doctor’s degree for his outstanding services to his province. Mr. Speaker, Cliff Whiting is respected as few men are respected 
across this province by people of all political faiths. 
 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
426 

Mr. Speaker, the annual meeting of the Co-op Union of Saskatchewan is presently being held down town in the Hotel 
Saskatchewan. The Co-op Union represents all of the co-operatives of this province, and I challenge the hon. member from 
Athabaska (Mr. Guy) to go down to that convention and to make the statements that he made in this house yesterday, that this 
board is government-dominated, and, Mr. Speaker, when he said that, hon. friends to your left all around him applauded. 
 
Let us look at Mr. Breen Melvin. Breen Melvin was born in Winnipeg and educated in rural Manitoba and Vancouver, where 
he graduated in Arts from the University of British Columbia. Mr. Melvin taught school in the East Kootenay district of 
British Columbia before joining the Y.M.C.A. War services in 1941. In 1944, he went to the Extension Department of the 
University of B.C. where he worked for two years in the co-operative field as a field worker in the fishing communities of the 
west coast. Early in 1946 he joined the British Columbia Co-operative Union as a secretary-treasurer. He later that year 
accepted a call from the late A.B. McDonald, then national secretary of the Co-operative Union of Canada, to go to Ottawa 
and to help with the ―CARE‖ program in Canada under the co-operative union of Canada offices. 
 
In the course of his duties with the co-operative union, Mr. Melvin travelled widely throughout Canada and the United States. 
He attended congresses of the International Co-operative Alliance in Paris and Stockholm and Lausanne and the general 
meeting in 1955 of the International Federation of Agriculture Producers in Rome. Mr. Melvin is presently secretary of the 
Co-operative Life Insurance Company and the Co-operative Fire and Casualty Company, positions which he has held since 
1957 and 1958 respectively. 
 
And again, I challenge the hon. member to go down to the Hotel Saskatchewan and say that this board is government-
dominated, and again, members all around him yesterday applauded. 
 
Let us look at Mr. Robson. Smokey was raised in Manitoba, he has worked in the co-operative movement all his grown-up 
life, presently an employee of the Federated Co-operatives in charge of field staff. This man has put unlimited energy into his 
position as vice-chairman of the board, and again, Mr. Speaker, I challenge the hon. member to go down to the Hotel 
Saskatchewan and make his charge, and again, Mr. Speaker, when he made it they all clapped. 
 

An Hon. Member: — Well, that is the kind of nonsense they like . . . 
 

Mr. Meakes: — And again, Mr. Speaker, the next is Mr. Gus McDonald. Another board member and an employee of D.N.R. 
needs no defense in the co-operative movement. Raised in Nova Scotia, he grew up in the fishing industry; he was one time 
manager of the Maritime Co-op Fisheries; he was sent on leave of absence for two years with the United Nations to work with 
the government of Ceylon to assist in setting up co-operatives amongst the fishermen of that country, and again, Mr. Speaker, 
I say you go down to the co-op annual meeting and say that this is a government-dominated board. And again, Mr. Speaker, 
they all clapped him when he said it was a government dominated board. 
 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — They are all like that . . . 
 

Mr. Meakes: — Next is Tom Preston, another employee of this government. He is one of our good ones, and respected, Mr. 
Speaker, by the fishermen and the co-operative movement in this province and I am not scared to challenge the hon. member 
to go down to the co-operative union convention and make this statement. I also want to say that I challenge anyone to prove 
otherwise, that I, as chairman, have ever used political pressure in my position or talked politics in my capacity as chairman of 
either of the boards. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let us look at the elected directors of these two boards, elected by the natives, to see if they are 
government dominated. 
 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
427 

First I will take Pierre Carriere, of Cumberland House. A man who fought and was wounded for his country in the last war. 
He is a native of his community and one of the best respected people of the north. I challenge the member from Athabaska 
(Mr. Guy) to go to his home town in La Ronge the week after next to the annual meeting of Co-op Fisheries and make this 
statement, and again, Mr. Speaker, when he said these men were dominated all those members around him clapped. 
 
Let us look at Father Megret he is on the board of co-op trading, now at Walloston Lake. He was born in France. Once he was 
ordained he chose to come to northern Saskatchewan to work among the Chipewyan Indians. After 17 years he has completely 
mastered the language and speaks fluently as the Indians do. Ask him if he is being dominated. Go to the meeting at La Ronge 
the week after next and make those statements, that he was not scared to make within the shelter of this house. See what 
happens. 
 
Let us look at Ben Larson of Reindeer Lake. Mr. Speaker, Ben Larson was pulling nets out of the water and drying them 
before my hon. friend was born. Who worked harder for the fulfillment of a dream than Ben Larson? None. His ambition was 
for a co-operative community and he has achieved it. He was chosen by the native people to represent them and he does. He 
fights for them always. I challenge the member for Athabaska (Mr. Guy) to go to La Ronge and make these statements. 
 
Let us take Roy Myke of LaRonge, chosen by the natives there to be their spokesmen. Ask him if there is government 
domination. Mr. Speaker, when the hon. member said this, all those people around him clapped and hollered. 
 
Let us look at Jesse Chatfield of Cochin, farmer and fisherman chosen by the fishermen to represent them on the board. A 
good man, a hard-working member of the board, he was down here for the last two days to a board meeting. And again, Mr. 
Speaker, I challenge the member to go to La Ronge and make that statement that Jesse Chatfield is government dominated. 
 
Then there is Mike Denny of Livelong, chosen by the fishermen to go on the board. A man with his own mind, and I say to 
the member for Athabaska (Mr. Guy), ask him whether he is being dominated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the men that the members said were government dominated, and those members on your left 
applauded. 
 
The member for Athabaska (Mr. Guy) attacked management of Co-op Fisheries. You know, Mr. Speaker, my hon. friend 
from Athabaska reminds me of a little terrier dog, he is not very big but he makes a lot of noise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he also attacked the . . . 
 

An Hon. Member: — What about the rest of the board? 
 

Mr. Meakes: — I gave all the board. He also attacked Jim Town. Jim Town is known and respected in the co-operative 
movement, not only in this province but in the province of Manitoba. He and his father were among the early strong 
supporters of the co-operative movement in Manitoba. After a distinguished career in the R.C.M.P. he came to work for Co-
op Implements, served there as manager of the Regina area until taking over the management of Co-operative Fisheries 
Limited. He is highly respected by the membership of Co-operative Fisheries Limited. Jim is a man who can sit on a block of 
ice or a stump and make friends of the native people. It is noticeable that the native people ask for Jim. They like him. And I 
again will challenge him to go up to La Ronge and make the statements he made in this house. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask this question. What do the native people, fishermen, feel about these men appointed by the 
board, by the government? The board at the beginning established a policy that each year a non-fisherman would retire and a 
fisherman would be appointed. Ho do the fishermen feel about this? Let us look at two resolutions that passed the annual 
meeting last year unanimously at La Ronge. The first was a tribute to a man who has since died, and who was respected in the 
co-operative movement in Saskatchewan. It says: 
 

Be it resolved that we, the fishermen, show our appreciation to Barney Johnson for the wonderful job he has done in these 
past years as our director by a vote of thanks. 

 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
428 

And the other one is the one I particularly want to draw your attention to, and this is what it says: 
 
 Whereas our board of directors are mostly government-selected men who are making a great contribution to C.F.L.; and 
 Whereas we can ill afford to lose these men from our board of directors at this time; 

Be it resolved that next year we add one fisherman to associate director only without depleting the number of government-
selected men from our board of directors. 

 
The member for Athabaska (Mr. Guy) did not discuss, and it was very noticeable, he did not discuss the financial position of 
Co-op Fisheries. Let us look at that. Members must remember that member fishermen of the local co-ops own the assets of 
C.F.L. with member equities in the central organization. This is to make a strong central organization, so that it will be in a 
strong marketing position in the market place. Members must realize that this is extremely necessary as 90 per cent of the 
inland fish of Canada are finally handled by two American firms who work together to dominate the market and the price. 
 
Co-op Fisheries Limited have total assets of $845,157. The original price purchased from the government was $225,000. 
After the latest authorized payments are paid back to the government there will be in the neighborhood of $47,000 left on the 
purchase price to pay. Besides this there are fishermen’s shares in the co-operative of $157,498 and reserves which belong to 
the fishermen as a group of $206,383. C.F.L. has a policy of paying out equities of fishermen who have died, stopped fishing, 
or reached the age of 70. Since 1959 there have been $18,894.82 of these equities paid out. 
 
The member for Athabaska (Mr. Guy) complained about the fish being sold on commission. How do the fishermen feel about 
this? I would like to refer to the annual meeting report, 1962, in which a motion was passed overwhelmingly asking that the 
present system of selling stay, that the fish be sold on a commission basis. Again the hon. member for Athabaska (Mr. Guy) 
does not know what he is talking about. The fishermen and their co-op have been successful, are successful, and will be 
successful, despite his attempts to undermine it. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Meakes: — Mr. Speaker, I am interested to know if this is the official Liberal policy in Saskatchewan to be against 
orderly marketing. Especially in the light of a press release dated January 23, 1964, from the office of the Minister of 
Fisheries in Ottawa. And if I may, Mr. Speaker, I would like to read it: 
 

The establishment of a regional marketing board embracing all fish products produced commercially in the three prairie 
provinces, Ontario and the Northwest Territories was sought at the Federal-Provincial conference on fisheries development, 
being held in Ottawa this week. 

 
and I want to emphasize this next paragraph . . . 
 

Disorderly marketing was described as a central problem in the inland fishing industry. More than 90 per cent of the exports 
of fish from the prairie provinces, for instance, are purchased by a small group of United States buyers, and in the present 
situation Canadian freshwater fish prices fluctuate rapidly, one result being a low level of fishermen’s income. 

 
At today’s meeting, the representatives of Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta recommended the immediate establishment 
by the federal government of a committee composed of representatives of the three prairie provinces, Ontario and the 
federal government to investigate and report on the feasibility of, and ways and means of establishing, a regional marketing 
board embracing of all fish products produced commercially in the area. It was suggested that the Canadian Wheat Board 
should be used as a possible pattern. 

 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
429 

The meeting, after discussing the constitutional aspects of marketing legislation, agreed that the establishment of a fish 
marketing board, involving more than one province, should be achieved through federal legislation. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to draw a special attention to the last paragraph. 
 

Federal Fisheries Minister H.J. Robichaud told the meeting that the committee would be established as recommended, and 
indicated that he was prepared to recommend to his government the enactment of the necessary federal enabling legislation 
for the establishment of provincial fish marketing boards. If the committee should recommend a federal marketing board to 
deal with inland fisheries products, Mr. Robichaud stated that his would require consideration by the government as a 
whole. 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Provincial Treasurer): — What about that? 
 

Mr. Meakes: — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if this was one of the things that the Leader of the Opposition talked about during his 
15 minute visit with Prime Minister Pearson last week, when he was in Ottawa. 
 

Hon. E. Kramer (Minister of Natural Resources): — They don’t even know that . . . 
 

Mr. Meakes: — Mr. Speaker, this misconstruing of facts that we had to listen to yesterday from the member for Athabaska 
(Mr. Guy), I object to, and the attacks on the co-operative movement of northern Saskatchewan I will fight to the bitter end. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Meakes: — He then went on, Mr. Speaker, and he talked about some document that the Department of Education was 
supposed to have circulated in the schools, that was supposed to be political propaganda. It was only after the Minister of 
Education asked a series of questions before the member sat down, that the truth came out. The meeting he referred to was the 
18th annual northern areas teachers’ convention held in St. Albans Parish Hall at Prince Albert on September 3, 4 and 5th, 
1963. This was just prior to the opening of the schools for the fall session. The person who was supposed to have been 
passing out this CCF propaganda was Mr. T.A. Downs, an employee of this government. He is a supervisor of publicity and 
visual aids for the Co-operative Union of Saskatchewan. The program was arranged by the teachers’ executive and the 
suggestion of asking Mr. Downs to speak on visual education came from Mrs. Moira Buckle, Secretary-Treasurer of the 
executive and the convention. The pamphlet? Published by the co-operative union of Saskatchewan. The subject? Visual 
education. The title? ―Who Owns the Store‖. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say the member for Athabaska (Mr. Guy) owes Mrs. Buckle, Mr. Downs, the Co-op Union, the executive and 
the membership of this organization of which I presume he is a member, an apology, an apology for dragging these people’s 
work and good names through the mud. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Meakes: — He than went on, Mr. Speaker, to complain about the power corporation and their rates on Sandy Bay. Let us 
look at the facts behind these charges. Saskatchewan Power Corporation does not operate in the Sandy Bay system. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
430 

Mr. Meakes: — You know it is too bad, Mr. Speaker, that my hon. friend would not go up into his constituency more than 
once in four years instead of just before the election that may take place. It is a co-operative power association which buys 
power from the Churchill Power Company, which is only a mile or so from Sandy Bay, the Churchill Power Company 
supplies the power to those employees who live around their plant, but it does not supply power to Sandy Bay, nor to the 
natives, many of who work for the company. Saskatchewan Power Corporation assisted in building the power line to Sandy 
Bay at an approximate cost of $13,000 – which Saskatchewan Power Corporation financed. 
 
The Sandy Bay Power Co-op sets its own rates, which are designed to cover the cost of operation, plus the pay-off over a 
period of years, the cost of the transmission line and the distribution line. The rates charged to the 70 members, nearly all of 
them natives, I want member to listen to this, 5¢ per k.w. hour for the first 60 hours, 3¢ per k.w. for all over that with a 
minimum bill of $3.00. Mr. Speaker, the facts that I have placed on the records today in this house in answer to the statements 
of the member for Athabaska (Mr. Guy) are proof positive in my mind of his irresponsibility . . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Meakes: — . . .and that his attitude is anti-co-op. Mr. Speaker, the thing that disappointed me most of all was the fact 
that all those members who sit around him, most of those members who sat around him, clapped and applauded. 
 

An Hon. Member: — They are all tarred with the same brush . . . 
 

Mr. Nollet: — Cassius Clay . . . 
 

Mr. Meakes: — Mr. Speaker, I have been discussing this afternoon the problems of the native people in the north and I 
would be remiss in my duty to my constituency if I did not say something about that group of people, the Indians. 
 
We talk of a united Canada, one nation consisting of many racial origins. The word equality is mouthed so often by so many 
politicians and well it should be. But I want to make my position clear. I believe that until there is an equality of treatment to 
Indians as to other races there will never be a united Canada. 
 
For a hundred and fifty years the white man has exploited the Indian, no wonder they have no faith in the white man and his 
word. The Canadian government, whether Liberal or Conservative, every since confederation, has through the out-dated 
Indian Act, kept the Indian herded on reservations. As long as the Indian remained there he could make no final decisions that 
might effect him or his family, unless the bureaucratic stamp of approval was forthcoming from some bureaucrat that had little 
or no interest in the welfare of the Indian or his family. In fairness, Mr. Speaker, I must say that since bout 1957 there has 
been some change of attitude by the Indian Affairs Branch. Some things have been done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to me, the greatest problem that I see is distance. Ottawa is just too far away. Until Ottawa faces up to its 
obligations and turns over the administration of Indian Affairs, and sufficient funds, to all provincial governments, there can 
be no real solution to this problem. I want to emphasize though, that the federal government has its traditional responsibilities 
and should not be allowed to shirk them. 
 
Certainly, none of this can be done without the consent of the Indians themselves. Ways and means must be found to upgrade 
the education of the Indian youth. We are in a society of great technological change, and the manual jobs are vanishing. There 
must be a program of bringing technical training to these young people, so that they can enter the stream of job hunters, 
equipped to compete on the labor market. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I say that the white man must take a look at himself, and ask himself, are we really acting much differently 
than those at Little Rock, Birmingham and Atlanta? Let us stop this hypocrisy; clean up our own back yard. Today it is 
apparent to anyone who looks, that society looks on the Indian as a bum, a drunk a no-good. I have heard it said more than 
once: ―They’re all the same, just a useless bunch of bums‖. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, would we be any different if we had had 
our spirit 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
431 

broken, inferiority complexes bred into us, and been kept herded into restricted areas. 
 
I say again, let us stop this hypocrisy. For 70 years we buried our heads in the sand and hoped the problem would disappear. It 
cannot because we are the problem. We must change ourselves, change our thinking, change our outlook, and change what is 
in our hearts. Let us forget our superior attitudes, and look on them as brothers and fellow citizens. Let us join hands with 
them and make this country a place that we can be proud of. 
 
The other day, Mr. Speaker, the financial critic spent some time building up the Minister of Commerce at Ottawa, and I am 
not going to argue with him on this point. I notice he did not spend much time building up the Minister of Finance. It is 
interesting to note the difference of attitude of the financial critic to the actions of the federal government this year than last 
year. Of course, there has been a change of government down there, naturally this makes quite a difference. 
 
He spent a lot of time endeavouring to prove that this government was a great tax collector, that the government was over-
taxing the people of Saskatchewan, but what he did not say was that we are the only government for a long time that has 
lowered taxes. It was very noticeable that he did not talk about the taxing abilities of the Liberal government in Ottawa. He 
did not talk about a finance minister who brought down a budget last April, who had to withdraw parts, change parts and 
forget parts. The financial critic never mentioned that these supposed financial experts that sneaked into the office of the 
Minister of Finance from Toronto, had to be sneaked back out, and much of their work had to be denied or modified. My 
friend noticeably did not talk about the 11 per cent sales tax that a Liberal government was going to impose at one fell swoop 
but was forced to withdraw, not withdraw altogether, but to tax in three shots instead of one – 4 per cent last April, another 4 
per cent this next April and three per cent next January, it was something like taking a dose of castor oil. Somebody said that 
if you took it in three shots it wouldn’t be as bad, but to me it is just three times as bad. No, Mr. Speaker, he did not mention 
that. He talked of our 5 per cent sales tax, but did not mention the 11 per cent tax in Ottawa. I just wish that my hon. friend the 
financial critic would be consistent. Of course, maybe I am being naïve to expect that. 
 
Then in his usual wild and woolly fashion he made charges that the Saskatchewan Government Telephones have the highest 
telephone rates in Canada. Let us take a look at that statement. Right here is the comparative figures for across Canada. First 
I’ll be quoting on business phones, that is the business cradle phones; Saskatchewan – $3.25; Manitoba – $3.00, they are 25¢ 
cheaper, (don’t start shouting that is not a Liberal government you know); Alberta – $3.25; Bell Telephone – $5.60; British 
Columbia – $6.25; New Brunswick – $5.75; Maritimes – $4.00; and then they have some extra charges in the maritimes, over 
125 phone calls a month you have to pay 4¢ for each additional call. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we with a per capita income for Saskatchewan of $1929 charge $2.30 a month for a house phone. You go down 
to that good Liberal province of Newfoundland, with a per capita $900 – $3.10 instead of $2.40. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, he then went on and he started to laugh and poke fun at my hon. friend the Minister of Industry and 
Information, with the remarks that he made at Moose Jaw where he said that before long we would be importing labor, and he 
waxed eloquent and imagined the minister loading men into boxcars and shipping them back to Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to point this out; for the first time in 40 years, with the exception of war time, could our labor forces work in this 
province and it sure was not with the help of a Liberal government in Ottawa. They used their political pressures just recently 
to keep industry out of Saskatchewan. Of course, I am referring to the heavy water industry which was to come into this 
province if the Liberal government at Ottawa, had kept their cotton-picking fingers out of the arrangements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as usual my hon. friend from Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) condemned, and condemned and condemned this 
government with little or not real construction. 
 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
432 

Well this was what I was going to start off, Mr. Speaker, but I had to answer my hon. friend from Athabaska (Mr. Guy) so 
even though I am half way through, I would now like to congratulate the Provincial Treasurer for what I thought was an 
outstanding address, which to me clearly portrays the spectacular growth of this province, not only last year, but over the last 
20 years. In his usual lucid manner he put forth a picture of the province striding ahead to new goals, and new records of 
achievement. A province that is now just beginning to benefit of the proper conservation of her natural resources and her 
human resources. It portrays a picture of growth and well-being for Saskatchewan such as this province has never seen before. 
And we must thank Providence for the tremendous boost that economy got with the bumper crop of 1963. Other people’s 
misfortunes were also our good fortune. Certainly the crop failures of China and Russia have helped us. We have been able to 
sell a good portion of the over-supply of our grain. 
 
This is indeed fortunate, Mr. Speaker, because the federal government had no other plans to handle the surplus. If it had not 
been for those crop failures in Asia, we would have wheat pouring out of eyes and our ears. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, the thing that this budget points out most is that contrary to the wailings of the Leader of the 
Opposition and his followers, that besides being an agricultural success, we are now becoming an industrial success. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Meakes: — It’s been said that for the first time in the history of Saskatchewan, our non-agricultural production exceeded 
$1,000,000,000. Mr. Speaker, they cannot blame that on the weather. For years we have been listening to these wails and 
watched the crocodile tears lamenting no industry, no incentive, socialism and what have you. I wonder if they really believe 
they can make people believe this. Here we have new records broken in the production of oil, potash, helium, steel, steel pipe, 
etc. Every week the newspapers are reporting new industries coming into production. Mr. Speaker, how stupid do they think 
John Public is? People of this province do realize that there has been progress. Progress in many fields. People realize the 
quiet, steady progress of this province is in safe hands of our Premier. They look at the alternative, the ―kick-on-door‖ tactics, 
and are deciding that there is no need of kicking the doors open. 
 
I would like at this point, Mr. Speaker, to comment on the great honor the Premier brought to this province and to our party 
when Maclean’s magazine did him the honor of choosing him as the man of the year for what he had done and how he had 
done it, in the field of medicare. Certainly I know the people of Saskatchewan are proud of him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to spend just a few minutes on my own department and discuss the spectacular growth of the co-
operative movement in Saskatchewan in recent years. A year ago some members to your left, Sir, stated that if a Liberal 
government was elected they would return a climate to Saskatchewan that would encourage the co-operative movement to 
growth and would remove the political influences that are presently impeding the growth of the co-operative movement. Mr. 
Speaker, let us take a look at the record of the growth of the co-operative movement in recent years. Let us examine the 
statistics; let us see if there has been an impediment of progress. 
 
First I want challenge – I said before I challenge any member of this house to show one concrete example of political 
interference by any of the staff of the Department of Co-operatives. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Meakes: — I want to make clear to all members of this house, and to the people of Saskatchewan, that no member of the 
Department is allowed to take any political action during working hours. What they do after that, and what political party they 
support, is their business and their’s alone. And as long as I have anything to do with it, this is the way it will remain. I believe 
that civil servants should not be robbed of their civil rights, liberties and responsibilities just because they work for the 
government. 
 
A few months ago I had the pleasure of hearing a world-known co-operator from the United States refer to Saskatchewan as 
the ―co-operative capital of North America‖. I heard a world-known co-operator from Sweden, 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
433 

Doctor Bonow, on a platform make the statement that Saskatchewan, Canada, is one of the best known places of co-operative 
development in the world. Too many co-operators in this province are not aware of this. In this traditional manner the co-
operative movement has gone on quietly building a new order within our society. The influence for good, the influence of 
community development, for development of better people has been enormous. 
 
Perhaps the most outstanding evidence of growth is the credit union growth. A short 27 years ago the first credit union was 
formed in this province. By 1956, their assets had increase to $38,646,000; by December 31st, 1962, it had increased to over 
$141,000,000; and I can report that by the end of January, 1964, they had reached over $231,655,116 including the Co-op 
Credit Society – an increase of $193,382,694, in that length of time, or an increase of 505 per cent. At the same time 
membership had increased by 198 per cent, and we estimate that by the end of this year, this figure could well turn into 
$250,000. 
 
It might be of interest to members to know that since the inception of the first credit union in Saskatchewan in 1937, up until 
the end of 1962, credit union had loaned to its members $377,972,000. It might also be interesting to note that at the end of 
1962, there were 30 credit unions with assets of over $1,000,000 each. In the annual period from December 31st, 1962 to 
December 31st, 1963 there was an 11 per cent increase in total memberships, a 23 per cent increase in total assets, and loans 
in force increased by 26.9 per cent. There was a net increase of 9 active credit unions at the year end, making 291 credit 
unions in operation. Membership increased in the same period of one year by 19,105 – to a new high of 191,054 members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these figures to me are doubly important because all this money has stayed within the community; our money 
deposited, our money loaned, and our interest on the loans returned to ourselves. There is another way to look at this, and this 
is the good that is done to human beings as individuals, both to the borrower and to the loaner. There is a personal dealing 
between friends and neighbors. These figures are based on the assumption that people are honest. Here there are no 
unscrupulous moneylenders lending money at exorbitant rates of interest. It would be interesting to calculate the money saved 
by comparison between this money loaned by credit unions and if it had been borrowed from a finance company. 
 
We are all happy with this growth, but with growth comes growing pains. This growth has created problems, both in the 
government and within the department. As credit unions have grown in size, it has become increasingly hard to find 
adequately trained personnel for the jobs of managers and directors, both of whom should not only have the academic 
training, but the philosophical background. The credit union movement and ourselves are looking at the possibility of setting 
up courses at Western Co-op College to give some basic training in this regard. 
 
With this growth there has been an increasing work load in the credit union branch. As most members are aware, our policy is 
to give complete auditing service to credit unions with assets of less than $200,000 – of which there are 137 at the end of 
1962. Any credit union with assets of over $200,000 must engage their own auditors, while the department personnel checks 
loans, loan policies, and makes loans analyses etc. With this growth it has become increasingly hard to make the yearly check 
that they are supposed to, and in our estimates we have two places to fill in the branch to assist in this work. I want to here 
publicly thank the staff for the many dedicated hours of work that have been done, many of them after hours, and they have 
done it cheerfully, too. 
 
As of January 1, 1964, there were 863 co-operative associations of all kinds; of these 496 were community service co-
operatives, such as halls, rinks, etc.; 306 consumer co-operatives, 22 marketing co-operatives, and 38 miscellaneous. During 
the year there were 15 new organizations, 34 were either dissolved or amalgamated. The staff of this branch consists of 15 – 8 
of whom are field men. During the year the staff attended 154 board meetings, 126 annual meetings, 28 special meetings, did 
227 surveys and analyses. In this area the co-operative movement too, has grown enormously. 
 
Total assets now are well over $59,000,000. Volume of all business done by all co-operatives has climbed from $368, 
000,000 in 1955 to $731,535,000 in 1963. This is an increase of $363,000,000 or 98 per cent. Total assets of all co-operatives 
in 1953 were $284,000,000 and climbed by 1963 to $624,000,000. This is an increase of $340,000,000 or 119 per cent.  
 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
434 

Mr. Speaker, I ask you, does this indicate that the co-operatives have not had a good climate to grow in? It is interesting to 
note that gains, percentage gains, in Saskatchewan are much greater than in any part of Canada. At times it would seem to me, 
Mr. Speaker, that his is what worries some of those on your left. 
 
I would like to spend just a few minutes discussing a new type of co-operatives that is showing up in Saskatchewan. These are 
the co-operatives for the use of farm machinery. Actually the first co-operative for the use of farm machinery was organized in 
November, 1943, by 7 farmers under the name of Round Hill Agricultural Production Association Limited. In 1945, another 
group of farmers was organized. The main objects of these two groups was to obtain a small amount of automotive equipment 
to supplement their horse-drawn equipment. Since they could not afford a tractor or power machinery individually, they 
decided to pool their resources and purchase one set of machinery for the group. In a period of a few years as a group, these 
farmers completely replaced their horse-powered machinery with mechanized equipment. Over the years circumstances 
changed, and both groups made the decision to disband their operations and equip their farms individually. 
 
It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that at the dissolution of the Mount Hope Co-op, the members stated they would 
consider reorganizing if conditions again warranted that action. Assisted by the Department of Co-operation, the set two 
groups set up bylaws and worked out an operating pattern which met their needs. This included placing a manager in charge 
of machinery, hiring operators who were usually members, and setting up customer charges for, and rotation of the use of the 
machinery. 
 
One difficult problem to work out was the timeliness of operation factor. A day or two in seeding or harvest can make a 
tremendous difference in net returns. The members of the N.S.N. Machinery Co-operative Limited pioneered a method of 
handling this problem by pooling the returns and dividing it on the basis of the acreage in the pool and an equalization factor 
which takes into account the productive potential of various parcels of land. 
 
The need for special assistance to production was recognized by the provincial government, and in 1947, the extension 
services branch was established in the department. By 1954, Mr. Speaker, there was 147 co-operatives, production co-
operatives in operation. By 1964 this number had risen to 314. 
 
The process of pooling production has opened up a whole new frontier for co-operatives for the use of farm machinery. Four 
groups have been organized in the past two years on this basis and the method appears highly satisfactory. The Golden Acre 
Machinery Co-operative at Keeler, Saskatchewan, reports the following information: six members; total cultivated acres 
4,300; investment in machinery per cultivated acre $13,773. 
 
A dollar comparison with the situation before organizing would not be practical because all new machinery was purchased by 
the co-operative. Two reasonable comparisons may be made. 1. For each horsepower of tractor power originally owned by the 
members, they farmed 13 acres. For each horsepower owned by the co-operatives, 33 acres are being farmed. 2. The six 
members had a total of 70 feet of swathing cutting width for their total acreage. The co-operatives has 30 acres of combine 
width, and they can handle the total acreage as well as they could before. 
 
The cost of all the farming operation last year amounted to $4.32 per cultivated acre. There are too many variables involved 
to compare this accurately with their experience before or the experience of farmers operating individually, but this group 
does feel they have made satisfactory savings and are well on the way to improving farming practices. 
 
The fixed costs that a farmer must pay continues to rise. Machinery prices lead the way in this regard. More and more farmers 
are finding it difficult and even impossible to avail themselves of the use of the machinery they used to do an effective job of 
farming. Machinery pools, rentals and custom contracts, have recently been in the news. The Federal Minister of Agriculture 
has advocated such arrangements and a number of provincial departments of agriculture people have expressed their interest. 
This type of activity has been carried on in Saskatchewan for the last 20 years. Co-operative use of machinery and the pooling 
of production is proving popular with farmers who have adopted this method. Mr. Speaker, I prophesy that within 10 years 
from now we will have a great number of co-operatives of this kind. Once again the co-operative people of Saskatchewan 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
435 

have lead the way for the rest of the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I might go on, but I have talked long enough and made it clear enough to know that when the vote comes for you 
to leave this chair, Sir, I’ll be voting to see that you leave it. 
 

Mr. A. Guy (Athabaska): — Before the hon. minister sits down, I wonder if I could direct a question to the minister? I was 
not too sure which one of his statements he made at the beginning of his address and I did not wish to interrupt when he had a 
full head of steam up. Did you say that the statements that I had referred to in the house yesterday from private dealers did not 
include flying, that flying was paid in addition. I was not sure about that statement. 
 

Mr. Meakes: — No, I did not. 
 

Mr. Guy: — Well, I was not sure about that statement. 
 

Mr. K.F. Klein (Notuleu-Willowbunch): — Mr. Speaker, my first words in this debate must, of necessity, be words of 
appreciation and gratitude for the many kind wishes and good wishes that have extended to me, because I have announced my 
intention to retire from politics. Before I made the decision to retire, which was not an easy one to make, I had to do a lot of 
thinking and I realized that the work of the government of today is perhaps the biggest business of the province and that 
politicians are going to have to spend more and more of their time taking care of those problems. 
 
I in turn want to wish all those who will be retiring after this next election, not through their own volition, a truly happy life, 
and also I would like to offer to the members of the government, not out of any malice, a long and fruitful life in the future as 
members of the opposition, and again to my fellow members and to the Leader of the Opposition a happy and fruitful life as 
members of the government. 
 
I don’t want to miss this opportunity to thank the civil servants who have over the period of years been so helpful and have 
done everything to assist the members of this house, during session and out of session. I want to make special mention of the 
Library staff. I imagine no legislature in Canada can boast of so much co-operation and assistance as we are fortunate in 
getting here in Saskatchewan, and I would heartily accord a round of personal thanks. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Klein: — I am certain that the experience in this legislature for the past years will be of great assistance to me. I think 
one of the things that I really benefitted by is the experience in stretching one single point to an entire speech. This I think will 
be tremendously helpful, particularly if I am ever caught short of subject matter in the classroom. 
 
I note that the Liberals are still accused of being saboteurs and disloyal to apparently the Queen, because we have the audacity 
to utter a few words of criticism. The Minister of Highways for example, insisted continually that we were saboteurs. I started 
to look for all the bombs that I was carrying with me. I did not have any, but I wondered how many of the crown corporations 
we have succeeded in blowing up. Have you any statistics in that regard? I have never heard of any actual sabotage going on. 
 
The lady member from Saskatoon (Mrs. Strum) was very gracious yesterday and she said she has no malice or hatred to 
anyone I this house. Within a few minutes she proceed to launch about the most malicious attack I have ever heard, since I 
have been in this legislature. 
 
I, too, have had the opportunity of teaching the poem, ―My Native Land‖ to my students in high school and I always preface 
my remarks when I teach the poem, that Walter Scott must have wanted to attribute this poem because of the strong language 
to traitors that deserved to be shot or hung such as our Lord Ha Ha, and Benedict Arnolds and so forth. I would never in my 
classroom attribute this poem for example to the former Provincial Treasurer or T.C. Douglas. I just would not in my 
classroom. But the lady member from Saskatoon (Mrs. Strum) very non-maliciously attributed this poem to the Leader of the 
Opposition on the air to the entire province, and I wouldn’t do it in my own classroom. If this is not malice, I would hate to 
see the lady member when she is being malicious. 
 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
436 

The Minister of Highways always graciously announces his highway program and I must say today I was extremely and 
pleasantly surprised when he announced that No. 13 would be oiled from Assiniboia to La Fleche. He nearly forgot it because 
it was on the second page. It made me wonder if it was recent decision to enhance his political position. About a couple of 
weeks ago, some of the people at home were asking if it was true that they were going to oil No. 13 from Assiniboia to La 
Fleche and I said that it could be, but my goodness in eight years that I have been representing the constituency I had a hard 
time getting them to put gravel on it, let alone oil it. However, I said it could be and that I would have to wait until the 
minister brought down the program in the house. Now I commend him for his actions, however, I do not know whether you 
could call this action disloyal or dishonest or in contempt of the legislature but the CCF candidate apparently was in the 
position to announce this program at last, two weeks ago. 
 
He was going around making hay left and right and centre, because he knew that the road was going to be oiled from 
Assiniboia to La Fleche, now I had no knowledge of this at all, in fact, I doubted it highly and I said I could not say what it 
would be or what it would not be. 
 
I wonder if the Minister of Agriculture, got his road. Did you get the road you announced at your convention? I was trying to 
follow very carefully but I did not know exactly what the highway program was you asked for. Did you get it? I just wondered 
because there was a little bit said about No. 40, from some place to North Battleford. Is that what you are after. 
 
My first reaction to the budget is that it is undeniably the largest budget; it shows the largest budgetary revenues that we have 
ever had in this province. I remember back in 1956-57 when they were dealing with the budget at that time, we all held our 
breath wondering just what was going to happen to this province because we had reached the $100,000,000 mark. Now since 
that time we have more than doubled that budget and it has now reached the $214,000,000 mark and we are still holding our 
breath. 
 
I take some consolation in the fact that it might represent some prosperity in the province, however, we must recognize that 
the number of people that are supporting the budget today has not increased accordingly and the only conclusion that we can 
come to is that we are extracting $114,000,000 more today out of the residents of Saskatchewan than we did back in 1956-57, 
when we were already holding our breath. Now, how long this can go on without having our bubble burst, I really don’t know, 
but it certainly is cause for fear and apprehension when you recognize that the problems that we had with us in 1956 and 
1957, are still with us today and perhaps to as great a degree as they were then, as the opposition has very effectively pointed 
out to the government. Many problems do exist and we would have to be extremely narrow not to recognize that fact. The 
problems of social aid, social welfare, the population loss, over-taxation, the lack of industrial development, the lack of 
proper planning for future needs, the loss of highly trained individuals, and the loss of many of the human resources that this 
province is so dependent on. 
 
But today, I would like to bring to the attention of the house a problem that has not been mentioned yet, it is a problem that 
has divided brother against brother, farmer against farmer, business man against business man, it has disrupted family routines 
and has created some extremely ridiculous situations. I do believe this problem when it is completely analyzed may even be 
the reason for the break-up of some marriages. Now, undoubtedly, it is a serious problem, and yet it is not a new problem, and 
I did not really think that this problem would be on the Saskatchewan scene today. Because I was in the house at the same 
time the Attorney General a few years ago stood up in his seat and solemnly vowed and declared that if there was one thing he 
was going to do in his public life was to settle the unholy mess about time in this province. 
 
Now, let us just see how settled it and whether the problem has continued and is still with us. In my constituency at the present 
time I have never in the eight years that I have represented it, seen people so agitated as they are at this time. Now I said it has 
created some ridiculous situations and here is one ridiculous situation. The husband goes to work on fast time, two children go 
to school that operates on fast time, two other children go to school that operates on 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
437 

slow time, so the poor wife has to get up and prepare breakfast for husband who gets up an hour earlier than three or four of 
the other family. The fast item bus calls around and picks up two children and takes them to the Gravelbourg school which 
operates on fast time, then preparations have to be made to get the two kiddies that go to La Fleche on slow time. Husband 
and wife barely speak to each other after that set-up and you can imagine what a stress and strain it puts on families. It is no 
good to ask anybody in town what time it is. They really don’t know, so you have to ask, central or standard. 
 
However, something new has developed and the member from Arm River (Mr. Danielson) has sent down some of his well 
organized – I do not know whether he did, but they originated from there. The Mountain Standard Time Committee, and I 
understand the president and secretary of the executive have come into the constituency and they have scheduled meetings in 
nearly every town in our area and they have circulated petitions and as I said, have farmer fighting against farmer, business 
man against business man, farmer against business man and we have business people being threatened by boycott by farmers 
if they operate on fast time. Every business man in our constituency who operates on fast time is now being threatened with 
boycott. If this is the unholy mess the Attorney General has vowed to clear up, and if this is his satisfactory answer to the 
clearing up of this problem, I wonder what he is going to do if he really gets a serious problem to deal with. Has this 
government finally admitted defeat on this problem? The people are reasonable, they are saying we are not too concerned as 
long as somebody sets a single time and they are hoping it would be the provincial government. Now again has the provincial 
government solved this problem or are you admitting defeat? Have you not planners who can come up with the right answers 
on this problem? How can we, the citizens of this province, trust a government that cannot even set the time, to administer a 
$250,000,000 budget. I am very hesitant in having any faith and confidence . . . 
 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Provincial Treasurer): — Too bad you can’t tell time. 
 

Mr. Klein: — . . .in a government that won’t tell us what time it is but will tell us how to administer $215,000,000. 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Too bad you can’t tell time. 
 

Mr. Klein: — What? . . . 
 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Too bad the people can tell time . . . 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — I didn’t say the people, I said you . . . 
 

Mr. Klein: — Well, I can’t and neither can the people . . .and I don’t think you can either. You have never dared tell it yet. 
 
The next problem I want to deal with is one that each of us are faced with, it is one that all of us must accept a degree of 
responsibility for, and it is the problem of education. The present Minister of Education seems to be finding it necessary to 
move ahead fast and to move ahead fast in all directions. He seems to have found it necessary to bring in the division system 
instead of the grade system, he finds it is necessary to introduce a new teacher-training program – he is greatly concerned 
about recognized training and building programs and what have you. 
 
Now I agree with him it is an urgent problem and the minister must feel the urgency of the problem. However, we must come 
to the conclusion that if this present minister finds it necessary to move, and to move fast, we can only conclude that the 
former Minister of Education, who is now Premier, must not have moved at all, because these problems have been growing up 
gradually over the last 20 years, and they should have been recognized as such at that time. 
 
Now to bring this problem into focus I think it is necessary to take a look at a few statistics. In 1944 we had a total of 
approximately 40,000 students, entered in grade one, in 1956; 12 years later, approximately 4,000 graduated from grade 12, 
which meant that 85 per cent of these students fell by the wayside someplace. Therefore, we were ten per cent successful in 
our educational system in getting students to graduate from grade 12. Now of that group perhaps only four or five ever 
became professional 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
438 

people, and, therefore, we can say our education system was successful in bringing four professional people on the 
Saskatchewan scene. Now what about the other 90 or 95 that have fallen by the wayside. What have we done for them? We 
have brought them into our classrooms and we said in effect – look, son, if you can’t do literature, if you can’t do physics, if 
you can’t tell how a past participle agrees with a direct object which precedes it, if you can’t do physics, or chemistry, there 
just isn’t any room for you in this school. I have had students come up and seriously say – ―I can’t master French, I can’t do 
algebra, I can’t do physics, I’m just not smart enough to make a living‖. And this is an attitude that is being reflected by these 
people, and it is a serious attitude, because we recognize that out of those hundreds that come to us in grade one, they are full 
of curiosity, they are full of the childish vitality and thirst for knowledge, by the time they get to the high school, they are 
bored with school life, they resent going to school, they have lost that healthy curiosity so necessary for good education, and 
indeed we have repressed all their inclination for learning. 
 
This problem, as I say, must be faced by all of us, and it is one that has been in existence for at least the length of time this 
government has been in office. Gray, in his Elegy, made the claim – ―Chill penury has repressed their noble rage‖ – and in 
Saskatchewan that should read: ―Perhaps our public school system has repressed their noble rage‖, because we have failed to 
develop the native talent that all people have. I am not one of those individuals who admits that people in this day and age, in 
spite of technology and everything else, cannot make a good living, but we cannot all be professional people, we cannot all 
master grade 12, therefore, there must be some way of developing the talent for the various fields that are crying for people. 
We can recognize this need when we look at the entertainment world and see a group of Beatles storming a nation, we wonder 
perhaps if we shouldn’t be developing in our school system some of that native talent that children have for entertaining. 
However, a child comes into the classroom and if he brings that classroom down with a witty remark, he is immediately 
reprimanded and he is rapped over the knuckles for being some sort of notorious character, for being witty in the classroom. 
 
These problems, of course, are faced by teachers primarily, but they ought to be a concern to parents as well, and surely if we 
develop the creativity in children – all of them can find themselves. We need, heaven knows, good cooks, good mechanics, 
good plumbers, good electricians, and musicians and everyone of these trades certainly can be filled by the students who 
come to us in grade one. However, none of this is developed, and we tell them that if you can’t master your arts or science 
subjects, there is no room for you, you are not wanted. 
 
What is the ultimate end for the child who leaves and has fallen by the wayside from grade one to grade twelve? He finds 
himself in the milieu of daily living, at sixteen or seventeen. He has to develop naturally into some useful work, in this cruel 
world of work, and if he can’t establish himself in the positive world he may take the attitude, well, I can go in a negative 
direction as well as in a positive direction and I am going to show society that I can steal a car better than any one else, or that 
I can drink more liquor than anyone else and I am just as smart as if I became a professional person. The absolute value of 
plus eight is the same as the absolute value of minus eight. And so we have to stop these people from going in negative 
directions and go into positive directions. 
 
A few years ago it was necessary for school boards to embark on a building program, setting up high schools, we did not have 
adequate facilities, and these unit boards did proceed with an expensive building program. However, I remember the member 
for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) urged that the department should set up a group who would do some research to advise and 
admonish these boards regarding the type of facilities they may need to fill the needs of the future. 
 
After we met through that building program, we now find ourselves in a position that what we have done is not adequate and 
we are going to have to start all over again, because today we are starting to recognize that our school system, in order to take 
care of some of that school drop-outs, will have to enter the filed of vocational training. Before we, in this province, can enter 
that field we have to set up the type of facilities that are necessary and I don’t think it is right that only cities should get 
technical schools. I think each and every school unit should have one, and we would have the population to supply the pupils 
for such a school, but it is going to mean a complete new building program.



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
439 

The new ideas in education may demand complete new facilities for the type of education that we are visualizing. Team 
teaching, for example, will require huge auditoriums, so because there was no one in the department that could foresee these 
things that were coming, no board received advice on building programs, and they said – well, fellows, do the best you can – 
and so the taxpayers’ money was spent in putting up high schools that today are not adequate at all to right the needs of 
education. 
 
Before I leave this field, I also want to say a little bit about teachers’ pension plans. Last year members will recall that we 
amended the teachers’ pension plan so it became a reasonably good pension plan. An amendment was made previously in 
1957 which made it better than it was but today there are still some 386 teachers who retired before 1957, who are getting 
below subsistence allowance. I remember the Provincial Treasurer said that his budget was designed for a little more 
abundant living. Well, let us just have a look at the abundant living that these 386 teachers have. Here are some of the scales 
that they have retired on: One man after 32 years of dedicated service to the public and who was disabled at the age of 56 
years has now somehow, (because he was disabled, he can’t go into any other field), has now somehow got to try and subsist 
on $840 a year, after 32 years of service. Twenty-one teachers who retired before 1957 are receiving $720 a year. Twenty-one 
of the, after 20 and 30 years of dedicated service. Five are receiving less than $800; 16 are receiving less than $900 a year; 
and they have devoted their entire lives to serving the public, yet the Provincial Treasurer makes the claim that his budget is 
so designed to provide abundant living. More abundant living, true, but for whom? In the 1962 session we found out a little 
bit about one other teacher in this province who also came under the act prior to 1957, and the question was asked ―Were 
there any cheques paid or payable to the government, of the province of Saskatchewan, or any agency thereof, which have 
been issued to the former Provincial Treasurer, C.M. Fines?‖ Now under the Teachers’ Superannuation Act, C.M. Fines is 
getting $88.11 a month for the rest of his natural or unnatural life. Here is a teacher who has served this province and the 
public and the community, living on a $900 a year pension. More abundant living for whom may I ask? Now then, my friend, 
if I were drawing $800 in the thirties when the Liberals were in, it would have been a darn good pension compared to now. 
 
We have been very careful, Mr. Speaker, in this legislature to amend acts so we also could provide the former Premier with a 
pension of $4,200 a year. At the same time that he is drawing $18,000 plus in Ottawa. 
 

Hon. W.D. Davies (Minister of Public Works): — Not only one Premier. 
 

Mr. Klein: — Poor old Tommy Douglas. He must really be suffering compared to the teacher living on $900 a month. 
 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Premier): — What about other premiers? 
 

Hon. R.W. Walker (Attorney General): — What about Mr. Patterson? 
 

Mr. Klein: — Now, I imagine we can say that it is true that never have so few in this province experienced abundant living at 
the expense of so many. The taxpayers are supporting men like C.M. Fines, giving him a lovely holiday, and yet when we 
request, and this is the request that has been made of this government, which believes in abundant living, namely, that they 
extend to $2,700 the single life plan. I had better quote our request: 
 

The age and service disability orders in council and subsisting allowances that are less than $2700 per year be increased by 
$15.00 per year of teaching service, in such additional amount as may be required to provide a minimum allowance of 
$1500 per year, provided that no allowance which is adjusted is increased to provide an amount of excess of $2700 on a 
single life basis, with half of any increase granted to be paid to the surviving dependent, and that dependent’s allowances 
granted prior to April 1st, 1963, be increased by $10 to bring it up to $1500 a year. 

 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
440 

You know what this would cost the government if they acceded to this request? $390,000 a year, to put these people on the 
level where they can at least subsist. The situation is so desperate that the teachers themselves are willing to tax themselves a 
few extra dollars, so that we can give a dole to these people who are retired on such a niggardly pension. How proud do you 
think those teachers would be and how would they hold their heads up to go and take a hand-out from their fellow teaches 
who are now teaching? This is the kind of abundant living you people visualize. This is the pride that you speak of, that you 
say has been inspired in this province. The Minister of Social Welfare is the greatest tear-jerker of them all. He says today we 
can proudly hold up our heads, and take our relief, we have eared it, we have paid for it. Yet after 30 years of teaching 
services, we cannot get this government to provide a better pension. 
 
I mentioned that we were very careful to adjust acts to suit certain people. This is not new and I did not think this Premier 
would do it. I wondered why this Premier kept under his control the number of liquor outlets that are provided in the 
province. I now have the answer. Apparently e wants to gain votes. I must come to that conclusion; there is no other 
conclusion; and I did not think he would do it. Some of the others I thought might, but this statesman would never do that. 
However, I want to let the government know that I deplore these kind of tactics and I don’t want to go into the whole story of 
the thing, and I won’t at this time, but I just wanted to let the government know that I know that is going on under this present 
Premier. 
 

Mr. Walker: — On a question of privilege, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that it does not really matter what my friend says, but to 
keep the record straight I want to make it clear that I did not say that. 
 

Mr. Klein: — What was the headline this morning? Do you deny that one too? 
 

Mr. Walker: — It was a Leader Post editorial, but they don’t necessarily quote what I say. 
 

Mr. Klein: — You admit though, that this was an essential thing that had to happen because of the machine age. You said so, 
and repeatedly the government says these small farms have to go – they are inefficient – they are no good – they don’t serve 
any useful role in our society any more – they have got to go. 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — We never said that. 
 

Mr. Klein: — Well, you imply, whether you say it or imply it, it is the same darn thing – they’ve got to go, there is no room 
for them. 
 

Mr. Lloyd: — No wonder your students had trouble at school. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Klein: — I am going to take a survey of what some of your students have done after you left teaching. 
 
The government does imply that these small farmers have to go. In our area we have pretty well eliminated the half-section 
farmer. Today we are in the process of eliminating the section farmer and the two and three section farmer. Our farm units in 
that area have gone up so that the average farm unit would cost approximately $70 or $80,000 to purchase. How many young 
farmers are going to establish on that costly a unit? Will a young man, if he has to borrow $80,000 at 7 per cent interest ever 
see daylight on that farm unit? It is an impossibility. I pointed out 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
441 

last year in this house that the policy of this government pursues, the Minister of Agriculture pursues, in my particular area is 
responsible for more family farmers disappearing than any other single factor. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Klein: — In our constituency I could name names to him, young farmers who were farming a good arable section of land 
have repeatedly gone to the Minister of Agriculture and said – could we have a section of lease so that we can diversity our 
farming operations; we don’t want 20 sections, we don’t want 13 sections; we want a single section of lease land. They are 
living right on the edge of all the crown lands and they know that in some cases a bachelor controls 20 sections of government 
lease, and yet this family farmer cannot get one section to diversity his operations and he has to pull stakes and sell out, 
because of the way you are handling leases in this province. 
 
We always have this holier-than-thou attitude of the Minister of Agriculture, he says – the policy in giving out leases is set 
and definite, we have no politics in it. Last year I had one fellow complaining he could not get a half-section of grazing land 
transferred when he bought the deeded land, so this board said that is right, anything under half-section has to be posted, only 
if it is above half-section will it be transferred. Today I had a fellow come to me and he said I want to buy a half-section of 
land and with that half-section there are seven quarters of deeded land, now he is told – Oh, no. We can’t transfer that, you 
had too much land before you bought it. 
 
You are changing your policy and you have no policy. I want policies that you can point your finger at and say this is a policy, 
this will be abided by. So he is told the seven quarters cannot be transferred with this unit because he had too much land, and 
his neighbor, I know him well, who has perhaps 40 quarters of land just recently purchased a section of land and six quarters 
of lease went with it without a question. 
 
Now that leads me to believe that somebody may be making under-the-table money, or something, I don’t know why the 
policy changes so fast. Why this can’t be one stable policy, I don’t know. 
 

Mr. Nollet: — Is the hon. member suggesting that there are under-the-table transactions with the knowledge of the land 
branch officials? Is this what he is doing? 
 

Mr. Klein: — No, I am not. I am saying they lead me to suspect that it might have happened. I don’t know whether it is or 
not, but it leaves me to suspect that it must be because why do policies change s fast. We are really shedding crocodile tears 
about family farmers and are not going to do something about this. Credit alone cannot solve this problem. Five years ago 
when they extended The Credit Corporation Act so that we could borrow up to $25,000 instead of $17,000 or whatever the 
case may be, I predicted that every section of land in the province would be selling for $25,000, and it is that today. At the 
time the farmers were arguing that we were losing money, the value of the land was going up directly in proportion as credit 
was extended. 
 
What is necessary is the availability of farm units. Any young man who is interested in getting into farming, can make a go of 
it, if he has a section of good arable land and a section of lease. What we have got to do is devise a plan wherein you will get 
the co-operation of all members in the community to provide these farm units, namely, a section of arable and a section of 
lease or section of submarginal. It takes a little imagination to do this, which I recognize you don’t have. 
 

Mr. Nollet: — Now where does the hon. member expect to get the land? 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! 
 

Mr. Klein: — That is what I say, I think I know the plan, but you have no imagination, you cannot devise one. In my area we 
have discussed these plans with business people, with farmers who are on the verge of selling their large units and they 
wholeheartedly support it and yet you have no plan. WE have the wholehearted support of this kind of program, because the 
farmers recognize and the townspeople recognize that if a family farm were set up on every section around the community, the 
business in 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
442 

that community would thrive. There would be sufficient people to set up schools, the country would become beautified 
because people would take an interest in developing nice farmsteads instead of the desolate-looking area with abandoned 
buildings. It was a sad reflection on our rural area, and our province will never look beautiful until we can have beautiful 
farmsteads and young farmers who take a pride in setting them up. If we give them the right initiative and give them the right 
incentives, they will come through. And besides that we will be providing someplace for the people who are now standing in 
the employment line, who are now pacing the streets looking for a place to work. They will have a place to farm and make 
their livelihood. Many of the young people graduating from high schools would make excellent farmers. But it is a closed 
shop, unless they can inherit a farm from their father, or have some backing where they would not be harnessed with a debt of 
$80,000 at seven per cent. 
 
These are a few of the problems that I have pointed out. I think there are many more to discuss, but it is my hope that in future 
we can look for the kind of Saskatchewan I visualize and I know we cannot hope for it under the present government, but I am 
really hopefully looking forward to a change of government and the thriving conditions after the next election when we feel 
that we are in a province that we ant to make more beautiful than it is now. Under the present Leader of the Opposition, 
Saskatchewan will thrive and will take its place in the sun when he becomes Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the motion. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. M. Semchuk (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Provincial Treasurer on the realistic budget 
that he presented for the consideration of this assembly. Not only is the budget realistic, Mr. Speaker, but it is forward 
looking. It expresses confidence in the accomplishments of the people of this province, for in the final analysis, this legislature 
is but the instrument by which the people of our province through their democratically elected representatives, shape their 
social and economic destinies. I like this budget because there is much in it that commends itself to the people of my 
constituency and to the people of Saskatchewan, and therefore I am proud to support it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the course of the last two or three years, new faces and new personalities have added extra youth and 
extra vigor to the executive council. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I believe that this is probably one of the youngest executive councils 
to be found in any provincial jurisdiction in Canada today. Couple this with seasoned veteran leadership and you have a real 
team for progress, and while on personalities, Mr. Speaker, it occurred to me that the members of this assembly represent 
almost every occupation and profession in this province. Predominantly the members here are farmers. However, we also 
have workers, lawyers, teachers, businessmen, and others as well. And to go a little further, Mr. Speaker, our members 
represent many of the races that form the population of our great province, and I think this is bound to reflect even greater 
confidence in the democratic process among the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget reflects the pioneering spirit and at the same time the bold adventurous youth of our province, and in 
essence it says, the CCF have made us proud to live in Saskatchewan and we confidently go forward to new horizons and 
greater achievements. We are proud of the new and expanded programs for our great agricultural industry. New programs for 
our ever-expanding manufacturing, service and other industries. We are proud of new programs to provide even better 
educational facilities and opportunities for the young people of the province. And we are pleased with new programs that live 
and work in our northern communities. We are proud of the budget that will provide even greater emphasis to every section 
and segment of the economy of this province, thus assuring all the people of Saskatchewan an ever increasing measure of the 
good things of life. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to devote a few minutes to the programs instituted by the government which have brought a greater 
measure of economic security to people living in the northern areas of the province of Saskatchewan. Even I, Mr. Speaker, 
sometimes get somewhat impatient with members to your left when they make general statements regarding the 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
443 

northern part of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I believe that one of the purposes of these debates is to present facts regarding conditions in our province, to point out 
problems and possible solutions and to make recommendations for improvements to existing programs. Things are never so 
good, Mr. Speaker, that they could not be improved, b it in government, in business, on the farm or in the home, and I would 
be the last person to say that our work is just nicely started, there is still much to be done. We have just pushed open the door 
to accelerated economic development. 
 
Sure, it took us 10 years to get Saskatchewan out of the mud, to provide good roads, and highways, a good communication 
system, electrical power, natural gas, health services, educational facilities, resources conservation and development 
programs, agricultural and industrial development programs. All this and much more was done in the first 10 years. In the last 
10 years, we have expanded and diversified our economy to the extent that the living standards of Saskatchewan people are 
second to none on the North American continent. 
 
And this does not mean to say that we intend to rest content; we intend to go forward to even greater development and greater 
achievement, Mr. Speaker. The simple truth is, Sir, that Liberals both federal and provincial are not the kind of people that 
accept new ideas or changes or new concepts readily. Mr. Speaker, you will remember John Diefenbaker and his great vision 
of northern development. The Conservatives campaigned on a program of northern development just a few years ago. We all 
remember the Diefenbaker Roads – to – Resources program, which was part of his election platform. Now what did the 
Liberals say about that program? They said a conservative government would build roads from igloo to igloo. And that is 
exactly how seriously they consider the CCF northern development program. They say that the CCF is building roads from 
blueberry patch to blueberry patch. Yes, Mr. Speaker, in the minds of the members opposite, the Otosquen Road, Hansen 
Lake road, the roads to Churchill, the Buffalo Narrows road, Beauval, the La Ronge, the Canoe and the other northern 
development roads are roads from blueberry patch to blueberry patch. These roads are a waste of money as far as members 
opposite are concerned, Mr. Speaker. And they also criticize the northern development power line to Buffalo Narrows, and 
the Liberals asked: Who are you building this power line for? Indians and half breeds? Mr. Speaker, these same people today 
promise great programs. In fact they say ―You name it, we’ve got it‖. I wonder why. Could it be that they expect an election, 
Mr. Speaker. Yes, roads, power lines, communications systems are there today, where there were none a few years ago. And 
schools, Mr. Speaker! What a tremendous change! The same modern schools that you see everywhere else in the province of 
Saskatchewan, you can see in the northern areas. 
 
Just in the last three or four years, new modern schools have been built in most northern communities requiring these 
facilities. New modern schools have been built at Loon Lake, Pierceland, Good Soil Rapid View, Green Lake, Beauval, Ile a 
La Cross, Buffalo Narrows, La Loche, Dillon, Canoe Lake, and other communities in my constituency, in the last three or four 
years. Of course, Mr. Speaker, the opposition then say, ―Yes, but what have you done to provide work for these people?‖ 
 
Well, now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to tell you. New construction in the town of Meadow Lake totalled just around 
$1,000,000 in 1963. Today Meadow Lake can boast a senior citizen home, providing comfortable living for our pioneer. A 
provincial building, a new government telephone building, new power building, a new credit union building, numerous new 
modern business buildings, also a 50 bed union hospital is under construction at the present time. A new auditorium is under 
construction, and numerous new modern homes. These public works and construction projects, and I am only naming a few, 
Mr. Speaker, have provided work in the largest community in my constituency, and I might say, Mr. Speaker, other 
communities are doing equally as well. This government’s programs and assistance based on needs has made it possible for 
northern people to take on responsibility on the local level, and to make useful contributions to life in northern communities. 
 
Assistance to northern co-ops, to Co-op Fisheries, co-op stores, northern recreational and community centres, have helped our 
people to acquire managerial and other skills which make it easier for them to adapt to the new way of life. These are some of 
the steps that had to be taken in order to make it possible for these people to help themselves. And this is not all, Mr. Speaker, 
this government has started housing programs to provide better living conditions and useful work in our northern 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
444 

communities. Housing projects have been carried on a Beauval, Ile a La Cross, Buffalo Narrows and other communities. One 
example, Mr. Speaker, there have been over 49 subsidized homes built at Green Lake, the people at Canoe Lake built 22 new 
comfortable homes in a few months with government assistance. These people at Canoe Lake actually built a whole new 
community, complete with school and other necessary services. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Semchuk: — I certainly want to commend the Community Development Branch of the Department of Municipal Affairs, 
for their realistic approach to community development in northern areas. 
 
Another important works program, is, the lumbering operations. Community saw mills have been set up to provide work in 
the logging and the lumbering industry, and at the same time provide building materials for housing and other community 
projects. A winter road has now been completed to the Clearwater River, just a few months ago. This is north of La Loche and 
a new saw mill has been set up at Clearwater River. This lumber will be used to build much needed houses at La Loche. 
Similar lumber operations have been set up at Ile a La Crosse, at Buffalo Narrows, as a co-operative operation, and at 
Beauval. 
 
The people of Green Lake are taking out approximately 2,000,000 board feet of spruce and poplar material. Treated poplar 
materials are converted to bridge and culvert materials which are supplied to the Department of Municipal Affairs and the 
Department of Highways and of course to other people as well. The people of Canoe Lake organized a co-operative 
lumbering operation, which is adding substantially to their income from fishing and from trapping. A sylvaculture program is 
progressing favorably in the Ile a La Crosse area. This forest improvement program is providing meaningful and useful 
employment for the people of the Ile a La Crosse and Beauval. Another program which I should mention, Mr. Speaker, is the 
recreational areas and park improvements program which provides work for people living on our northern areas. 
 
I would also like at this time, Mr. Speaker, to say a few words about the northern development and housing fund. This 
program will make it possible for more of our northern people to become self-sufficient and independent. These people are 
capable of doing things for themselves. The big problem has been lack of even small amounts of capital which would enable 
them to start family enterprises which would supplement their present income from fishing and trapping. No doubt some of 
them will raise poultry to supply the local market, others will grow vegetables for local consumption, more will go into mink 
ranching and of course, many will be employed in logging and lumbering and the building of homes. 
 
There is no good reason, I do not thin, that these people with some training and guidance and supervision cannot go into the 
tourist business at some of our beautiful northern lakes. They are generally pleasant, friendly and obliging people and 
certainly love the great outdoors. An accelerated self-help program with assistance in a form of grants and loans, will enable 
our northern people to acquire better homes, this is very important for good family life and will create the desire and the 
incentives to strive for other amenities. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have mentioned a few of the programs that the government has instituted in our northern communities to 
provide employment, and I mean useful employment, and at the same time, to enable northern people to build better homes, to 
install electrical power and other conveniences. And, in short, making it possible for these people to become masters of their 
own life, and assure that their children will take their rightful place in our society. So, Sir, in a nutshell, the situation is this: 
More of our people living in northern areas have better health services than ever before. They have better educational 
facilities than ever before, better communications than ever before, better opportunities for useful employment than ever 
before, and a better outlook and a more meaningful purpose in life. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Semchuk: — However, there are people living on Indian reserves in my constituency, who are ill-clad, ill-fed, ill-housed, 
with no visible means of support; 90 per cent of the people in some Indian reserves, in my constituency are dependent on 
social aid. It is only in recent months, 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
445 

Mr. Speaker, that some steps have been taken to provide social workers on reserves. What is required is a broad social 
economic as well academic education. These people have to acquire a new set of values, and a new value judgement, 
education is the logical first step. It is gratifying to note that many people are concerned with this serious national problem. 
The I.O.D.E. have taken commendable active interest, missionaries are concerned, in fact many people that know and 
understand our native Canadians, are saying, let us do something about this situation. It is my earnest hope, Mr. Speaker, that 
in the near future, our native Canadians will be provided with the same kind of services in the same way, as all Canadians, and 
that they will be given equal opportunities to develop their lives on the same social and economic level as the rest of us. 
 
While a few moments ago, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned some of the programs that affect the people of my constituency, and the 
native people in particular, this is not all that is taking place in Saskatchewan’s northland. We are very proud with the fact that 
No. 4 highway has been blacktopped to Meadow Lake, that No. 26 highway has been extended north from Goodsoil to the 
Meadow Lake Provincial Park, that No. 4 highway has been improved north to Dorintosh and a start has been made on the 
blacktopping of No. 55 in the Meadow Lake area. We, of course, are looking forward to further improvements to No. 26 and 
No. 4, and especially No. 26 as it brings people from southwest and south central Saskatchewan to our most beautiful Loon 
Lake resort. Now, I cannot over-emphasize, Mr. Speaker, the need of a bridge over the Saskatchewan River on No. 3 
highway, at Deer Creek Ferry crossing, to serve our expanding agricultural, industrial and commercial enterprises as well as 
our increasing tourist industry. We are pleased with the connecting road between Canoe Lake and Beauval which will make it 
possible for the people of Canoe Lake to utilize hay meadows as well as the good timber stands in that area. I think it is 
reasonable to assume that a Department of Natural Resources road will be constructed which will connect Leoville to Green 
Lake, thus making it possible for the people living in the Leoville area to visit the numerous recreational areas to the north. 
This road would at the same time, provide access to excellent stands of timer and large hay meadows at the south end of 
Green Lake. Now these resources could be utilized to a good advantage by the people living in the Green Lake area. 
 
I think the time has come, Mr. Speaker, when we should seriously consider the possibility of building a resource access road 
from Beauval through Pine House, along the Churchill River and eventually to La Ronge. Such a road would open a vast new 
scenic holiday area, second to none in this province. It would tap new forest and water resources, would bring people who 
would explore and develop these resources, thus providing more employment for our northern residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure that we are all happy with the bountiful crop that was harvested in Saskatchewan’s farms in 1963. 
However, there is only a small are of good agricultural land in my constituency. A large percentage of the land utilized by the 
farmers in my area is marginal or sub-marginal. We have also large tracts of low land which must be drained, before it can be 
utilized to best advantage. The government assisted our farmers in may ways. Some of the programs that are of special value 
to farmers in the northern areas of our province are: The Ag Rep Service, the clearing and breaking program, the community 
pastures program and the drainage program provided by the Conservation and Development Branch of the Department of 
Natural Resources. 
 
In the Meadow Lake area last year, under our agricultural representative program, 99 extension services were held. Six were 
one week courses at which rural plumbing, carpentry and welding were taught. A two day general agricultural course was 
held. A start was made on a farm water and sewage program – 24 rural hook-ups were carried out. Development and 
expansion of the livestock industry, sound land use programs, development of under utilized land resources and emphasis on 
more education for rural youth are some of the things that were stressed. 
 
The Assembly recessed from 5:30 to 7:30. 
 

Mr. Martin Semchuk (Meadow Lake): — When 5:30 was called, Mr. Speaker, I was talking about the agricultural 
programs which this government has instituted to assist our farmers to get the most out of their farming operations. I 
mentioned the agriculture representatives program, the clearing and breaking program, and had touched briefly on the farm 
improvement program. 
 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
446 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words about the community pastures program and the drainage program as they 
apply to the Meadow Lake area in particular. There have been four community pastures competed in the Meadow Lake area 
in the past three or four years, and there are six more community pastures and fodder projects under active consideration at 
the present time. 
 
The north-west water control and drainage program is well on its way. A new water control dam was built at Loon Lake and it 
was completed this summer. The Rapid View drainage project should be completed some time next year. This drainage 
project should put another 10,000 acres of good land into agriculture production. Another 15 acres are being studied at the 
present time for possible drainage projects. These worthwhile projects instituted by our Department of Agriculture have 
helped our farmers a great deal. Our farmers have diversified their farm operations, they raise more livestock and show better 
returns on their investment. I am happy to note, Mr. Speaker, in the budget speech that further assistance is forthcoming under 
the proposed Agricultural Adjustment Act. According to the budget speech, this new act is intended to provide the means for 
the better use of marginal and sub-marginal land, it will make it possible for farmers to get loans on favorable terms for 
extending livestock and hog enterprises. For buildings, for bringing unused lands under cultivation as well as providing 
working capital. This certainly will be appreciated by our farmers. 
 
I want to just touch briefly, Mr. Speaker, on centralization as some people show genuine concern about the present trend of 
centralization and urbanization, especially because it affects our farm population, and I admit that I, too, have some concerns 
regarding this matter, however, let us take a look at the cause as described by Huxley in his presentation called ―over-
population means over-organization‖. Talking about technological progress he said, 
 

These amazing and admirable advances had to be paid for, indeed, like last year’s washing machine, they are still being 
paid for and each instalment is higher than the last. Many historians, many sociologists and psychologists have written at 
length and with deep concern about the prices that western man has had to pay and will go on paying for technological 
progress. 

 
They point out, for example, that democracy can hardly be expected to flourish in societies where political and economic 
power is being progressively concentrated and centralized. 
 
But the progress of technology has led and is still leading to just such a concentration and centralization of power. As the 
machinery of mass production becomes more efficient it tends to become more complex, and more expensive, and so less 
available to the enterprises of limited needs. Moreover mass production cannot work without mass distribution, but mass 
distribution raises problems which only the largest producers can satisfactorily solve. 
 
In a world of mass production and mass distribution the little man, with his inadequate stock of working capital, is at a grave 
disadvantage. In competition with a big man he loses his money, and finally his very existence as an independent producer. 
The big man has gobbled him up. As the little man disappears, more and more economic power comes to be wielded by fewer 
and fewer people. Under a dictatorship the big business made possible by advancing technology and the consequence ruin of 
little business is controlled by the state. 
 
That is to say by a small group of party leaders and soldiers and policemen and civil servants who carry out their orders. In a 
capitalist democracy such as the United States or Canada, it is controlled by what Professor C. Wright Mills has called the 
power-elite. This power-elite directly employs several million of the country’s working force in its factories, offices and 
stores. Controls many millions more by lending them money to buy its products, and through its ownership of the media of 
mass communication, influences the thoughts, the feelings, the actions, of virtually everybody. I think, Mr. Speaker, this 
makes it abundantly clear that centralization is caused by the technological advances that have been made and by the control 
of whole sections of our country by privileged interests. 
 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
447 

Mr. Speaker, we, in the CCF, believe that private enterprise, that co-operative enterprise, and that public enterprise, working 
together make the best team for economic development and progress. This is why Saskatchewan people enjoy a greater 
measure of social and economic security. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Semchuk: — Now, Mr. Speaker, it appears to me that taxes are only a vote-getting gimmick, and that is all it is, a 
gimmick that the Liberals think they can use with some effect. Time and time again, Dominion Bureau of Statistics figures 
have been brought out which show that Saskatchewan is not taxed nearly as high as the opposition hoped we would be. Time 
and time again we have shown that municipal taxes are lower in Saskatchewan, that the major sources which provide the 
major part of the revenues of our province are comparable, in many cases, lower than other provinces, yet the opposition go 
merrily on screaming high taxes, with no regard for reality or fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This reminds me of the last federal election. At that time the Liberals promised to cut expenditures and to cut taxes. Well, you 
know what happened, Mr. Speaker. The Liberals slapped on an 11 per cent sales tax as a start, and then gave themselves a 
$8,000 raise and don’t ever let us kid ourselves they are finished yet. 
 
The Conservatives in Ontario made promises too, Mr. Speaker, but what has happened there. The Ontario government is 
increasing taxes in that province by many millions of dollars. Mr. Speaker, there are no tax increases in the Saskatchewan 
budget. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Semchuk: — The $5,000,000 reduction in the medicare premium, the more than $2,000,000 cut in electrical power 
rates, and the $5,000,000 increase in grants to education are worthy of mention and are appreciated by the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, instead of giving constructive criticism the hon. members opposite talk about the population trends, and make 
comparisons that suit their purpose. Maybe they should compare Saskatchewan’s population with China’s or with India’s and 
tell us that because these countries have huge populations, that they are better off, or, compare Canada’s population of 
19,000,000 people with the almost 200,000,000 in the United States, and tell us that the government in Ottawa is to blame. 
How frustrated can you get? 
 
In recent months, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has been busy running around our province in desperation trying 
to make deals and saw-offs with the other political parties. He is trying desperately to salvage at least a few of the seats now 
held by the Liberals. Mr. Speaker, this is the man who prior to the 1960 election was going to win that election almost single-
handed. This is the man who prior to the 1960 election said there will be no CCF after the June 8th election. This is the man 
that today squeals for deals, not for programs, not for progress, not for people, just for politics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I agree with people that say that if the people of Saskatchewan considered the record of performance of the 
Liberal party during the last few years, the Liberals would not elect a single representative in the next provincial election, and 
I mean that most sincerely, Sir. 
 
Let us take a look at the record of the Liberal party on medicare. They smeared it from stem to stern, didn’t they? Just about 
four months ago the member for Turtleford (Mr. Foley), for instance, speaking in the town of Meadow Lake said and I quote: 
―we must fight medicare because the government subjugated the doctors‖. What did the hon. member for Moosomin (Mr. 
McDonald) say at the Yorkton K.O.D. meeting? I will tell you what he said: ―The impasse can be solved if the government 
will throw the medicare act in the waste paper basket‖. That s what he said. Oh, but what a difference today, Mr. Speaker. 
Today, they pretend to make a complete about-face, pretend a complete reversal. They say we are for compulsory universal 
medical care. Yes, they do, buy why? I will tell you why, Mr. Speaker. Because now they know that the people of 
Saskatchewan are a lot smarter than the Liberals had the good sense to realize. Now they know. They know that if they go into 
the next provincial election condemning medicare, that the so-called Liberals would not elect a single representative in this 
province. Now, they go on to say – we are for medicare, but, 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
448 

and it certainly is a big but, but, we would take it out of the realm of politics. Now what does this mean, Mr. Speaker? What 
does it mean? Medicare is administered by a public body, responsible to the elected Medicare is administered by a public 
body, responsible to the elected representatives of the people of Saskatchewan. This is who it is responsible to. Now, if it is 
not a public body, then who? The people of Saskatchewan have a right to know, or is this a big dark secret, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Because the budget provides for continuing progress in the fields of education, health and recreation for the people of 
Saskatchewan, because this budget provides for challenging new progress in the agricultural, industrial and service industries, 
because it provides for accelerated development of our natural resources, and because it will provide for an expanded housing 
and northern development program, Mr. Speaker, I support the motion. 
 

Mr. Franklin E. Foley (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, we should give the legislature just a moment to allow the sound waves 
to come back to rest after this most recent tirade. I don’t know what the Minister of Highways was trying to defend but I must 
say he was defending his position most vociferously. 
 
It ahs been rather interesting, Saskatchewan to notice the time that has been spent this afternoon by members on the 
government side eulogizing ministers of the cabinet. It is too bad the Provincial Treasurer was absent from his seat, since a 
considerable amount of time was spent on him, so much so that I began to wonder if the Minister of Highways was expressing 
some undue concern over the political future of the member from Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank). Now that he has his halo on 
straight, possibly I can proceed with a few remarks regarding the budget debate. 
 
There was another remark made just before the hon. member for Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. Klein) took his seat this 
afternoon and I feel it should not go unanswered in this legislature. When at one point in the debate, the member paused, the 
Premier was heard to remark from his side of the house ―No wonder your students are in trouble‖. Well, Mr. Speaker, I want 
to say on behalf of the hon. member for Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. Klein) that he has an enviable record in the field of 
education in this province. Three years ago in his three room high school, where the member and one other teacher were 
instructing grade 12, one student received a $4,000 scholarship, and two others received government scholarships. I think this 
is an enviable record for the member for Notukeu-Willowbunch; he did not merit the type of remark which the Premier was 
heard to make. I would like the Premier to stand up and withdraw that remark. 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Recover from shock . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! Is the house ready for the question? I must warn the hon. member . . . 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Question. He took his seat . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I must warn the hon. member when he takes his seat like that he has a chance of losing his place in the 
debate. I must warn members against that. 
 

Mr. Foley: — I merely paused to give the Premier an opportunity of speaking to this remark. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member has no right to ask the Premier to rise. 
 

Mr. Foley: — In subsequent years another student of the member for Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. Klein) won the Governor-
General’s gold medal, and last year two out of the seven students in his class won government scholarships, so I submit, Mr. 
Speaker, that his is hardly a record for the Premier to make such remarks about. 
 
Now, before addressing myself to the budget speech delivered by the member for Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank) on Friday last, I 
would like to make further reference to some of the remarks made in this debate this afternoon. I listened with a good deal of 
interest to the Minister of Highways and to his eulogy of the Provincial Treasurer. Among other things 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
449 

he attributed the NDP with having overcome the drought of the thirties along with poverty and other ills in this province. I just 
wondered offhand when the NDP acquired such divine ability. He went on to express a great deal of pride in the tremendous 
profit of the crown corporations in this province, mentioning some $11,000,000 surplus accumulated by the crown 
corporations and the government finance office. And yet, Mr. Speaker, this is the government, the party, who boasted 
throughout the province that these corporations were being operated for service and not for profit. This is the same 
government who in the operation of the Saskatchewan Transportation Company removed some 23 routes and busses from 
throughout this province, which proved to be unprofitable. This is the government who in many other corporations in this 
province, supposedly originated for public service, have removed unprofitable services. Certainly I see nothing here for this 
government to brag about. 
 
Now in this regard I want to single out one corporation for mention this evening, Mr. Speaker, and I refer to the Saskatchewan 
Timber Board. Now a good deal has been said in this house throughout the years regarding the operation of this corporation. I 
think we all recognize the fact that because this corporation has a complete monopoly in Saskatchewan it has made it very 
difficult for individuals to operate in the north and to make a living from our timber resources. 
 
I want to deal briefly with one aspect of the financial operation of the timber board. Two by fours, eight feet long: price to the 
logger in the bush, $39.50M; price to the timber outlets, the wholesale price to the lumber yards in the province, this same 
length of material $75.00M; retail price $92.00M. A difference, Mr. Speaker, of $52.50 a thousand between what the timber 
board pays to its operators in the bush and what it received in retail price to the public. Now I mention this because it 
indicates the difficulty which the operators in the north must certainly have in making a living from our timber resources. 
Surely a province such as ours which is blessed with the timber resources that we have, should certainly be able to make those 
resources available for the livelihood of our northern residents to a much larger degree than they have. When the Minister of 
Highways makes statements about the crown corporations I think he should realize what has been done to the freedom of the 
people with regard to the operations of many of these monopolistic companies. And yet this is the party across the way, Mr. 
Speaker, who like, from time to time, to run down monopoly among other groups and agencies throughout Canada. 
 
Now I also listened with a good deal of interest to the remarks of the Minister of Co-operatives this afternoon, and I thought it 
rather significant, Mr. Speaker, that he saw fit to spend all of his air time attempting to refute some of the remarks of the 
member for Athabaska (Mr. Guy). I thought this rather interesting, especially in view of the fact that he failed to answer any 
of the charges which the hon. member made with regard to his department. 
 
I thought he was going to attempt to justify the great discrepancy in the price of fish that was mentioned, between his 
operation and the operations of the private operators in the north, but not a word was mentioned. I was rather interested, when 
the member for Athabaska (Mr. Guy) spoke, in the fact that private companies were paying double and triple the price that 
was offered by the co-operatives and he did not mention a word about it. Certainly it seemed tome, Mr. Speaker, that if he is 
going to justify this operation in the north, he should explain why the members of these organizations should be expected to 
take half the price that they could receive on the free and open market. This was one of the major points made by the member 
for Athabaska and I suggest was deliberately avoided by the Minister of Co-operatives. He went on at great length quoting 
from individuals throughout the north, many of them government supporters or he would not be mentioning them. I suggest, 
Mr. Speaker, this only served to emphasize some of the very serious charges made by the member for Athabaska, a sever 
indictment, I suggest, of this government, particularly in their northern operations. 
 
Now, the last speaker this afternoon, the member from Meadow Lake (Mr. Semchuk), went on at great length about activities 
in the north. To the extent that the people of the north, particularly the Metis, and the native people are making progress, I am 
sure that members on both sides of this house rejoice. For far too many years these people have had a very difficult time 
indeed. I believe it is very important that the native and the Metis people receive the same pleasure of life, the same services, 
the same utilities that we all enjoy, but at the same time, Mr. Speaker, I think it should be kept in mind that we do have Metis 
people in Saskatchewan whose lot in life leaves a great deal to be desired, and who could certainly benefit from some of the 
programs that have been mentioned today. 
 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
450 

Now just a few remarks concerning one portion of the Provincial Treasurer’s speech when he says ―Individual self-fulfillment 
cannot be achieved in a static or stagnant community. To reach out to new horizons of social and economic development is to 
create conditions of individual self-expression.‖ Now I think this is rather an interesting statement coming from a member of a 
socialist government, Mr. Speaker, because I have always been under the impression that the best of individual self-
expression could come only from a free enterprise group or party in this Canada of ours. Certainly if there is any government, 
or any party, in the history of Canada that has stood in the way of individual self-expression it has been the group that sit on 
your right, Mr. Speaker. When the Provincial Treasurer boasts about individual self-expression I thin he forgets some of the 
basic philosophies of the socialist movement, which places the welfare of the state over the individual, and certainly if we go 
back into socialist doctrine over the years, we will find that this is the case. 
 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Premier): — Nonsense. 
 

Mr. Foley: — All right, you can say nonsense, but history does not support you in that statement. 
 
The Provincial Treasurer went on to mention the development of Saskatchewan Government Telephones as a crown 
corporation. I am particularly interested in telephones, because, of course, in the northern part of this province, little progress 
has been made in providing this important utility to many of the rural areas of this province. I do not see anything specified in 
the minister’s remarks to raise much hope for something in the near future. However, I was interested to hear the Minister of 
Telephones remark last night that a special committee had been set up, I have not as yet been informed of the personnel of 
that committee, but nevertheless I am hopeful that something will be done to supplement the work of the rural telephone 
companies in providing telephone service to rural people. Certainly it is high time that something was done in this regard. 
 
Now on the topic of education, our Provincial Treasurer had this to say, ―In part I am pleased to note, that thanks in no small 
part to the initiative this government took last year, a veterinary college will e established in Saskatoon‖. Mr. Speaker, what a 
short memory the Provincial Treasurer has, for as far as I am concerned the first concrete step taken in this legislature on 
behalf of the veterinary college at the University of Saskatchewan, was when a motion was moved in this legislature by the 
hon. member for Saltcoats (Mr. Snedker) and it received the unanimous assent of this house. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Foley: — This was the first concrete step taken by this legislature, Mr. Speaker, and I think it was obvious the Provincial 
Treasurer was attempting to bury that progressive move on the part of the opposition. 
 
Speaking about the opposition, Mr. Speaker, I would like to come back again, for a moment, to the remarks this afternoon of 
the Minister of Highways, when he attempted to attach to the opposition, the role of those who cried blue-ruin. Just exactly 
what does he believe an opposition should do? What are the functions of an opposition in this province? To fawn over every 
remark of the government and to entirely neglect the principles and the welfare of the people of this province? I believe the 
opposition has displayed courage, initiative, and has at all times had the welfare of the people of the province at heart. To 
suggest otherwise is not becoming a Minister of Highways or any other minister on that side of the house, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again, in the field of education, the Provincial Treasurer went on to discuss the university program and I am sure many 
members on both sides of the house were disappointed, to see no mention made of a dental college in the near future for our 
university. Certainly this is one matter which deserves the attention of all legislaturers in the province and I would just like to 
say a word again this evening, on the matter of dental health in Saskatchewan. In spite of the fact that the bursary program has 
been extended, the fact remains that our supply of dentists in the province is down from last year by a small amount. About 
179 practicing dentists in the province is down from last year by a small amount. About 179 practicing dentists in the 
province last year, about 174 this year. Now certainly, Mr. Speaker, with a critical shortage such as this, it deserves more 
attention than this government has seen fit to give it during this and past sessions of this legislature. I am pleased to learn that 
a brief was present to



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
451 

the senate of the university last fall and that the matter is now being studies in committee. I am also very pleased, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Liberal party of Saskatchewan in convention last fall, went on record as favoring the support of the 
university senate whenever it saw fit to recommend such an institution in our province, and I hope a Liberal government will 
have the opportunity very soon of building a Dental College at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Foley: — Now, let us look at this bursary program for a minute, Mr. Speaker. Just recently the Minister of Health made a 
statement that some 50 bursaries had been awarded and that as result of that, we would be getting the services of a great 
number of these young people in the province. Well, I find that unfortunately this is not altogether the case, and that many of 
these young men, instead of returning to the province, are buying themselves out from their bursary commitments and are 
remaining in other provinces. If we don’t soon have further instructional institutions for these young people, we are not going 
to substantially lessen the critical shortage of dentists in Saskatchewan. 
 
Just recently the federal government has announced extended assistance for the university students. This is going to mean that 
we are not going to get dental students in Saskatchewan unless we provide them with a college. I am referring to recent press 
announcements that legislation will be brought in during the present session of the federal House of Commons giving further 
aid to university students. I don’t know the details, but if more students go into dentistry, we are not going to be able to 
accommodate these students unless we increase dental college accommodation. As I pointed out last year in this legislature, 
the classroom space throughout Canada is now pretty well filled and additional space will be urgently required very soon. 
 
I was particularly interested in what the Provincial Treasurer had to say regarding vocational education. I believe that more 
emphasis must be placed on vocational education in Saskatchewan and would hope that the north-west part of this province 
will receive a vocational school in order that the young people from that area can be given the service that they need. 
 
Now, in one portion of the Provincial Treasurer’s remarks, he talked about the plans being made for the jubilee and centennial 
celebration here in Saskatchewan. This brought to my mind a project in my own constituency which I have brought to the 
attention of the legislature on past occasions in this house, and I refer to the very valuable collection of art, lodged at the 
Imhoff Studios at St. Walburg. Now on several occasions I have requested that the government give some attention to 
assisting in the retention of this studio and its paintings in the community of St. Walburg, but I am sorry to say, Mr. Speaker, 
that outside of a few highway signs, I do not know of any direct assistance being given. As a matter of fact, the position of this 
studio is more difficult today since due to highway changes, the studio is now some two miles off the main highway. Now in 
the intervening time, the Glenbow Foundation saw fit to make an overture to the studios and through their efforts about half of 
this valuable collection of paintings is now housed in a beautiful new Calgary. Now, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that in a year 
when many of us throughout the province are thinking about projects to commemorate both our Diamond Anniversary and 
our Centennial, this is one project in our part of the province, that should commend itself to all members of the legislature. I 
urge their support in keeping this valuable collection of art in our province and particularly in the community of St. Walburg 
where it has been for many years, as a monument and dedication to the last Mr. Berthold Imhoff. 
 
It was interesting to note the Provincial Treasurer devote some time to citizens rights. This is a topic which we have not heard 
much about from this government during the past number of years in the legislature. Certainly no other government left 
themselves open to more questions with regard to the individual rights of people. I think we all recall the remark or the 
statement made by the former Premier of this province, Mr. Douglas, when he said that if anyone lost his land because of the 
actions of the CCF government, he would resign. I think we are all aware of the fact that several thousand people have since 
then lost their lands and yet no such action was forthcoming until of course, Mr. Douglas was forced to resign. 
 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
452 

Mr. Brockelbank: — He wasn’t forced . . . 
 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): — Sure was, he was scared out, scared out. 
 

Mr. Foley: — Mr. Speaker, between 3,000 or 4,000 people have been evicted from their farms in this province since this 
government took office and if the Provincial Treasurer has evidence to the contrary, let him rise on a point of privilege . . . 
 

Mr. W.R. Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Rise up, Brockelbank. 
 

Mr. Foley: — Further on the matter of citizens rights, we have also the case in this province of a person being put in jail for 
failure to pay hospitalization tax. We certainly need an Ombudsman or a committee for citizens rights in this province. 
 
The Attorney General made a remarkable statement in this house during this debate which I feel should be referred to, Mr. 
Speaker, when he stated and I quote the Leader Post: 
 

This population loss in Saskatchewan must be hailed as an advantage and a benefit to our province. The only regret we 
should voice is that it was delayed unnecessarily. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is a shocking statement. I am going to repeat it again, because you know when I read it the first time, I 
thought it was rather original, but, of course, I had my usual disappointment when I picked up the Commonwealth and found 
that they also expressed similar sentiments. I thought the most significant part was, however, not only that he called our 
population loss . . . 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — On a point of privilege. The hon. member invited me to rise on a point of privilege a few minutes ago 
and I now take the liberty of doing so . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! He said he was rising on a point of privilege, I want to know what the point of privilege 
is . . .ORDER! ORDER! 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Someone said I don’t have a point of privilege. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Please be seated. 
 

Mr. Foley: — I want to thank the member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! I am the one looking after order in this house, not the member for Arm River. 
 

Mr. J.E. Snedker (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — An I’ll have order from you too. 
 

Mr. Snedker: — I am in order . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I’ll have order from you. The hon. member may proceed. ORDER! ORDER! Will the hon. member 
proceed. ORDER! ORDER! 
 

Mr. Foley: — This indicates very clearly, Mr. Speaker, the dynamic energy and aggressiveness of the party who sit on your 
left, certainly they are ready to form a government anytime. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, here we have the rather amazing spectacle of the Attorney General saying,



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
453 

This population loss in Saskatchewan must be hailed as an advantage and a benefit to our province. The only regret we 
should voice is that it was delayed unnecessarily. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I am sure it was not delayed any longer than the NDP could arrange it and have been working so 
successfully, at it for the past 20 years in this province. And yet we have the Premier on the other hand saying, ―People are a 
major concern and a major resource of this province‖. Mr. Speaker, we cannot have it both ways. Since the hon. Premier and 
other members on the opposite side are so fond of attempting to read discrepancy into remarks from this side of the house, I 
would like to see them justify this stand. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, I firmly believe that the energy of every member of this 
legislature should be devoted to making Saskatchewan more attractive for young people. On the matter of population 
increases, probably the member for Melville (Mr. Gardiner) can speak with some authority, Mr. Speaker, as can the Minister 
of Natural Resources. You know it occurred to me yesterday, that probably there were those who could speak on this 
particular matter with more authority than the lady member from Saskatoon (Mrs. Strum). However, in all sincerity, Mr. 
Speaker, the energy of all hon. members should be devoted to improving the economy of this province thus making 
Saskatchewan more attractive for the young people who account for a good portion of our population loss. I think the hon. 
member for Gravelbourg (Mr. Coderre) raised a very important point in this house yesterday when he pointed out that we 
should in some manner or other be remunerated for the great numbers of trained young people which we have exported to 
other provinces in Canada. I am sure if we were, that the remuneration would be a staggering sum, running into millions of 
dollars, and this is a very excellent argument for more federal aid for education. I hope that the hon. Attorney General will 
change his thinking before too long. 
 
I want to congratulate the member for Moosomin (Mr. McDonald), the deputy leader and the financial critic of the Liberal 
opposition for a very substantial contribution to this debate, Mr. Speaker, when he stated that the only new horizons that he 
could note in the budget were increased costs and no decrease in taxes, increased costs, and increased expenditures. Why not 
cut taxes in Saskatchewan? The Provincial Treasurer and other members on that side have gone to great lengths to defend 
holding the line in spite of considerable surpluses and a good deal of over-taxation. I would like to draw to the attention of the 
Provincial Treasurer the steps that have just been taken in that great nation to the south of us, when Wednesday evening last, a 
tax cut was signed into law by President Johnson, who called it ―the single most important step we have taken to strengthen 
our economy since the second World War.‖ He went on to describe the proportion of the tax cut in the United States. It 
reduces taxes for 80,000,000 individuals by 1/5 on the average, for 550,000 corporations by nine per cent and he finalized his 
remarks with this statement: ―We have made this bill an expression of faith in our system of free enterprise‖. Mr. Speaker, I 
would presume that the Provincial Treasurer has by holding the line on the high tax level of this province, thereby indicated 
his lack of faith in the free enterprise sectors of our economy here in Saskatchewan. I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that on this 
issue alone, this government will merit defeat when they next go to the polls. 
 

Mr. Meakes: — Tell us about Gordon 
 

Mr. Foley: — Something was said by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. Semchuk) on remarks attributed to myself 
regarding medical care. The government members find it very convenient to serve their purposes by talking about medicare 
and conveniently overlook the implications of state medicare. The hon. Minister of Health in his nomination address, said that 
medical care will be the sole issue in the forthcoming campaign. I think his motives here are all too clear. I think he is hoping 
to avoid going to the people on the sorry record of this government in the field of industry, the sorry record of this 
government with regard to population, the sorry record of this government with regard to many areas of the economy of this 
province. 
 
I believe that he will not be allowed to get away with this type of juggling, since the people of this province are going to 
demand an accounting, of over-taxation, and for the illogical manner in which the Provincial Treasurer has held the line with a 
very damaging five per cent educational-hospitalization tax when all his figures point to the fact that it could have been 
substantially reduced without reducing services in this province. Some of the issues in the coming election are going to 
include the lack of industrial expansion, the serious loss of our trained young



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
454 

people from this province, and the lack of employment opportunity for many of those young people. Then the Minister of 
Industry has the nerve to stand up and say, ―We will soon have to import help to this province, we have no further 
unemployment‖. We have no further unemployment, Mr. Speaker, because these young people who we could normally expect 
to employ are leaving our province for greener fields. 
 
Now, I attempted before the orders of the day, to question the Minister of Industry and Information with regard to a new 
industry which I thought possible might be attracted to this province. I wish to draw again to the attention of the legislature, 
the fact that the Mitsubishi Bus Company of Japan, received offers from the city of Winnipeg and from the city of Edmonton 
to inspect their cities as a possible site for a transit bus assembly point. We have heard no mention from our own Minister of 
Industry and Information as whether he has made any attempt whatsoever to interest this company in Saskatchewan. 
 
Further plans have been announced recently for two more pulp mills in British Columbia. Prince George is getting a new 800 
ton pulp mill and Kamloops another 200 ton pulp mill. The pulp and paper producers of British Columbia are planning to 
spend between $75,000,000 and $80,000,000. Mr. Speaker, I envy them very much in this respect and I regret that the 
economic atmosphere in this province has not been able to attract a major industry of this type. I can only suggest, Mr. 
Speaker, that we will never get a pulp mill in Saskatchewan until this government is sent out of office and we have a 
government in this province that industries of this type will have confidence in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word about the recent survey that was conducted on hospitals throughout the province. I want to 
make reference to a statement which appeared recently in the press by Doctor Houston of Yorkton. Doctor Houston is a native 
of Saskatchewan and served on the Saskatchewan health survey committee, the Health Services Planning Committee and the 
Advisory Committee on Medical Care. Mr. Speaker, the future of our hospitals throughout Saskatchewan is of concern to all 
of us. It is certainly a very vital concern to many members who like myself have a number of smaller hospitals in the 
constituencies which people are depending upon for very vital health service. Doctor Houston makes this statement and I 
would like to quote: 
 

The future of our hospitals affect most intimately the lives and health of each one of us and our loved ones. Yet these 
hospitals which were created through the devotion, effort and sacrifice of local citizens are today in the throes of a great 
change. The fate of many of our hospitals hands in the balance. 

 
And in reference to the Saskatchewan Hospital Survey Report made public in the summer of last year, he says this: 
 

This report contains recommendations which if implemented could drastically alter the quality and distribution of hospital 
services to all the people of Saskatchewan. It contains provisions for a marked acceleration in the transfer of authority, from 
local to central offices throughout the hospital field. It contains much material that is contentious and has received little 
public study. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I appreciated the remarks of this gentleman very much, and I would simple like to express sincere hope that 
before any changes are made in existing hospital service sin this province, or any action is taken regarding recommendations 
of this survey, that the local people throughout the province be consulted very closely indeed. I believe that the smaller 
hospitals in Saskatchewan have provided a very important service over the years and I for one would be very reluctant to see 
any of them closed unless even larger facilities were being offered in their place. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the hour is getting along. In conclusion, I would remind the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. Semchuk), he 
might well remember that much of what has been accomplished not only in his part of Saskatchewan but throughout the 
province, ahs been accomplished to a large extent by the resourcefulness of all our citizens, and by the courage and the ability 
of people to make the best of difficult circumstances. When he rants long and loud in praise of the present government, and 
his party, he



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
455 

would do well to remember the importance of human resources throughout the province, which all of us are elected to serve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because I believe that Saskatchewan badly needs a change of government and because the Provincial Treasurer 
has failed to grant relief from heavy taxation, in spite of increased revenues, I cannot support the motion. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. A. Kluzak (Shaunavon): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this budget debate, I would like first of all to 
congratulate the Provincial Treasurer on the presentation of this budget to this assembly. The veteran member is well-known 
throughout this province and has served with distinction in many departments. His budget speech is revealing of the man 
himself and his consideration for others. The budget also reveals that new horizons have been reached in all phases of 
development in Saskatchewan and suggests that the surplus that has bee accumulated from last year’s budget is a good 
indication of the buoyancy of the economy of this province, it would further indicate that the people of this province are in the 
hands of a good government. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Kluzak: — The member for Moosomin (Mr. McDonald), financial critic, criticized this government because of the 
surplus which the Provincial Treasurer has announced. I would like to draw your attention to a report in the Leader Post of 
May 1st, 1962, where the member for Weyburn (Mr. Staveley) had criticized the government because we had had two deficit 
budgets. It appears that we get a squeal from the opposition no matter which way the budget turns out, so I think their squeal 
is not really very important. The main thing is to spend the money wisely and well. I am also very proud to be associated on 
this side of the house with a man who has been named ―Man of the Year‖ in Saskatchewan, Premier Lloyd. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Kluzak: — This distinction has been awarded Premier Lloyd in Maclean’s magazine on January 4th. It was the first time 
that a man in Saskatchewan politicos, and I believe in Canadian politics, has ever been awarded this distinction. I would like 
to congratulate the Premier and I sincerely believe that this award could not have gone to a man with greater stature, integrity, 
and consideration for others. This honor was awarded Premier Lloyd because his government had successfully implemented a 
comprehensive medical care insurance program, the only one of its kind on the North American continent. This was done 
despite all the pressure to abandon the plan, in which pressure the Liberal party were so prominent. They tried everything 
possible to make this government back down on this plan, at no time did they advance a single, positive, constructive 
suggestion. 
 
Quoting the member for Melville (Mr. Gardiner), Hansard, volume 3, page 29, October 13th, 1961, and I quote: 
 

If there is any man, and I want to leave this thought today, in this province that has done more, particularly in the last three 
years, to see to it that it will become more difficult for people of Saskatchewan, whether rich or poor, to have proper 
medical care in the days that lie ahead, there is only one man that can be accused of that and that is the Premier. 

 
This then, Mr. Speaker, came from the medical adviser of the Liberal party. One who claims great concern for the disable and 
the sick. Surely now he should bury his head in the sand and imprint the words K.O.D. on the dune. I would like to quote 
again from the Star Phoenix of November 6th, 1961, and I believe this quotation has been made before, but I believe it is 
worth quoting again: 
 
 It might be the quickest way to defeat the CCF government if doctors kept their promise not to have anything to do with the 
proposed state control medical care plan: David Boldt, Rosthern



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
456 

MLA said Friday afternoon in addressing the reorganization meeting of the Rosthern Liberal association in Saskatoon, he 
expected the doctors to refuse to operate under the medical care plan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, surely this member is living in the days of Hitler and Mussolini, with absolutely no regard for democracy or 
democratic way of government. All of the hopes of the Liberal party of Saskatchewan have been shattered, at no time, then or 
since, have they indicated in any specific form their own policy, except that it would be a private enterprise plan as had been 
quoted by them on so many occasions, the exact type of plan which is now trying to operate in Alberta and getting no 
response, because of those that cannot afford to pay and those that are in minimum income brackets that do not qualify. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot pass without making some reference to the member from Milestone (Mr. Erb), and I regret that he is not 
in his seat as usual, it appears that his seat over there is very uncomfortable because we seldom see him in it. 
 

Mr. A. Guy (Athabaska): — Tell that to the Minister of Natural Resources. 
 

Mr. Kluzak: — Speaking in this house on March 14th, 1961, he loudly praised the mandate given the government by the 
people of this province to implement a medicare plan, but he went on and I quote from the Leader Post of March 15th, 1961: 
 

The Liberals picked up a new leader, loud, loquacious and bold, one raised in affluence, schooled in socialism who 
succumbed to ambition with a penchant for power. The aspiring faithful to the coveted crown fed like brittle reeds before 
the fury of his persuasion. 

 
But Liberal leader, Ross Thatcher, employing CCF techniques, used the idea of the convention banquet to raise funds and 
membership cards, and waving the Liberal party membership card the health minister said it was a masterpiece of 
counterfeit, so like the CCF card that one could unwittingly become a paid up member of the Liberal party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Kluzak: — Well, Mr. Speaker, could it be that the member for Milestone (Mr. Erb) unwittingly, unknowingly, signed 
one of these cards, these membership cards, and so got into the Liberal ranks by this method. It seems to me that this member 
is performing rather strangely, first so in favor of a medicare plan, then so opposed, and now again he says he will go along 
with the medicare plan. These actions, I suggest, are going to be very difficult for him to explain to the Regina-East electors. 
The people of this province are going to be very cautious in trusting the Liberal party with this medical care plan that they 
now have. The Thatcherites will not change their spots and the people of this province well know this. 
 
The cost of this plan was estimated at $21,5000,00 and it is gratifying to note that the cost in 1963 was just under the 
$20,000,000. More people have had medical care than ever before in the history of this province. Doctors’ incomes have also 
increased which puts this profession on a sunder basis. The medicare commission are to be commended on the accuracy and 
the speed in which they handled these accounts. Due to the buoyant economy of Saskatchewan it has been possible to reduce 
personal medicare and hospital premiums by a sum of $5,000,000, giving the people the benefit of this reduction in taxation. 
 
Saskatchewan’s steady climb towards complete health care is outstanding on the North American continent. Provincial grants 
of $3,000,000 have been made in 1963 for the construction of new hospitals and additions to others. It is gratifying to note 
that this program will be continued. 
 
I am pleased to note that provincial base hospital to serve the people of southern Saskatchewan will receive some 
consideration at this session. The time has surely arrived when we should give some consideration to patients who come to 
Regina for specialized medical treatment from outlying areas such as the one that I represent. While we have appreciated 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
457 

the services of Regina hospitals that have been provided to our people, we certainly regret that these services are provided to 
a large extent at the cost of Regina taxpayers. This to me seems most unfair, I assure you, Mr. Speaker, that the people of my 
area are not looking for charity, furthermore we regret that many times people, Regina citizens, are unable to get a bed in 
these hospitals because they are occupied by people from outside areas. I certainly would recommend that a provincial 
hospital be under construction at the earliest date possible. 
 
The opening of the provincial geriatric centre at Swift current last summer is a significant step in this government’s plan to 
provide care for Saskatchewan’s senior citizens. It again illustrates that those on this side of the house are concerned about the 
welfare of the unfortunate. I am pleased to say that I have already had a number of patients from my constituency admitted to 
this centre where they will receive the best of care. 
 
The construction of 21 new senior citizens’ homes during the last four years which now gives us a total of 82, is further 
evidence of our interest in our senior citizen. Over 5400 men and women are being accommodated in these homes. It is 
gratifying to know that this socialized program will be continued under this government, while the Liberal party so opposed to 
socialism, would be sure to discontinue this policy. 
 
We have reached so many new horizons in Saskatchewan as we enter the sixties that one may well speak on any subject. 
Agriculture production was most outstanding, having overshadowed all previous records, we will agree that rains were the 
greatest single factor in this record grain crop. Credit for this must also be due to the Saskatchewan Department of Agriculture 
for their many programs of assistance to promote production. I think of such services as those of the ag. reps. who can supply 
and advise farmers of the latest methods of combating many problems. The distribution of insecticides on a comprehensive 
and fast basis, at cost, have saved a good portion of crops, thereby helping to produce more grain. 
 
Irrigation projects under the conservation and development program have also made a great contribution to this production. 
The further development of provincial and co-operative pastures, particularly those in the northern areas, are a great boon to 
farmers in this province. Further expenditure in this field is certainly warranted so that a better base may be established under 
agriculture. It is worthy to note that last year the 30 provincial pastures in operation grazed 36,000 head of cattle and served 
2128 farmers. I know that many people in my area could not survive if it were not for the availability of these pastures. 
 
I know that we are all rejoicing over the large wheat sales made possible during the last few years. This has been a great boon 
not only to Saskatchewan farmers but to the whole Canadian economy. The Liberal members of this house, along with some 
new Liberals, who have already ended up in the garbage can, are trying to do their best to convey to the farmers that this 
wheat sale is a miracle performance of the Liberal government in Ottawa. I would like to draw their attention to an article in 
the Leader Post of January 18th, 1964, under the heading, ―Sharp says wheat sellers’ wheat market won’t last‖, and I quote: 
 

Vancouver. Trade Minister Sharp warned Thursday that the sellers market of wheat won’t last. We can expect the revision 
to normal competitive conditions after this year. 

 
This clearly indicates that these large wheat sales are windfalls due to the extreme drought in Russia and China. I suggest that 
the Thatcherites are not going to sell this bogeyman to the Saskatchewan farmers. They just won’t go for it. Unless the federal 
government develops some sound planning in their sales policies with other countries there is every indication that the selling 
of wheat will again be vastly curtailed. 
 
The building of more higher and better roads in all parts of Saskatchewan is certainly a program that we can all boast about. 
This session is no exception, with the announcement by the Minister of Highways that many and better highways will again be 
built. We in the southwest who were the forgotten people during the rule of the Liberal regime have appreciated greatly the 
fine highways and construction that has taken plan under this government. I am again pleased that the reconstruction of No. 4 
highway, from Val Marie to the U.S. border will take place and oiling of the same highway from Cadillac to Val Marie. The 
oiling of No. 37 highway from Climax south will give southwest Saskatchewan the first dust-free highway linking us with the 
United States. We still have highways where dust-free sections are desired, and I am sure that under this government that’s 
these will be achieved before any great length of time. 
 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
458 

The municipal grid road program has met with the greatest of enthusiasm and has provided excellent all-weather roads to 
people in rural areas. This is another program that the Liberals vigorously opposed when it was introduced in this house. I 
wonder if they are aware that many municipalities that have now completed their program are asking for a further extension. 
This surely indicates that it is a popular service and well warrants the expenditure. To date 9,500 miles of this grid system has 
been built, which have received grants from this government amounting to $36,000,000. 
 
Where did this money come from? Well, from gasoline taxes, of course, handled through the provincial treasury. The 
popularity of this program shows how ridiculous those on your left are, Mr. Speaker, when they continuously harp about 
taxes. You know, Mr. Speaker, when I was a boy my greatest ambition was to own a parrot, so that I could teach him to say 
ridiculous things and then sit back and laugh and just realize how crazy this was. Well, I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Leader of the Opposition over there has acquired a whole flock of parrots and he has done a pretty good job of teaching them 
this taxation talk. However, it is falling on deaf ears and I am sure that its success will be very, very small. 
 
I would like to congratulate the Provincial Treasurer for finding money for these road programs. Grants to municipalities in 
my constituency have increased by 30 to 70 times since this government took office. Now this would give you some idea that 
there is a lot of money going out to municipalities and this is why we are getting some roads in rural areas. I have ten 
municipalities and three local improvement districts in my constituency and I would just like to give you a summary of the 
type of grant that they used to get and what they get now. I am not going to cover all of the, I would just like to make 
reference to two which would be about an average. Now, I will give you the last two years under the Liberal government and 
the last two years under the CCF government. The rural; municipality 76 of Auvergne that bordered the Ponteix area: the 
provincial government – $544; in 1943 it was $624. Yes, but there is a catch in this, in each of these years this municipality 
paid the provincial treasury in public revenue tax $5,966, so they paid out ten times as much money to the government as they 
received in grants. The public revenue tax was cancelled by this government in 1952. In 1962 this R.M. received grants for 
roads and bridges from this government, this is 1962, compared to 1942, $55,263; in 1963, $21,278 or an average of $38,270. 
Compare this against an average of $584 under the Liberals. Over 60 times as much grants paid by this government. Now you 
can see, Mr. Speaker, how the rural areas are getting the roads. 
 
I have another municipality here that is even probably worse than that. Let us take a look at R.M. 49, White Valley, that 
borders the East End area. Well, they did not receive any grants at all in 1942 and 1943, but they did pay in public revenue 
tax to the then Liberal government, $4,900, in grants. This means a 100 per cent more than they received under the Liberals. 
 
I was very pleased with the announcement of the cost-sharing program for oiling and surfacing of streets in urban 
municipalities. this will be of great assistance to these towns and villages, not only in the cost, but also in eliminating dust and 
mud hazards. 
 
One could not speak in this house at this time without mentioning the work of the senior member for Regina (Mr. Williams), 
the Minister of Labour and Telephones. It is with great regret that we know that one who has done so much for Saskatchewan 
will not be sitting in this house next time it convenes. However, there is a bright side to the picture, to know that one who will 
not be here has left so much good behind for the people of Saskatchewan to enjoy. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Kluzak: — The Department of Labour under his jurisdiction has passed the most progressive labor legislation in 
Canada. The minister working with this government has made possible telephone service to thousands of rural and urban 
people, by having the foresight to build a telephone system, from almost nothing, to one that can claim first place in service 
and connections 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
459 

on the North American continent. While we in the outlying rural areas are very grateful for the extension of 24 hour service in 
all exchanges of 100 subscribers or more, construction and maintenance grants in rural areas, rural telephone companies, has 
made it possible to bring telephone service to hundreds of rural farm people. It has made it possible to get rid of the old barb-
wire system which we established under the Liberals. Now there is direct long distance dialing which was cut in on January 
12th this year, again puts Saskatchewan in the lead of many provinces. Surely the money that has been borrowed for the 
extension of this utility has been wisely spent and justified. So it seems natural that we will miss this minister, not only for the 
things that he has made possible, but also for the very fine qualities and his sincere an thorough approach to problems, large 
or small. I can think of not better way to show our appreciation to him than to name the new telephone building in Regina, 
The Williams Building. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Kluzak: — Also missed will be the senior member from Saskatoon (Mr. Stone), who has dedicated himself so well in the 
administration of this province. May I wish both these members the best on their retirement. 
 
The four members on your left, Mr. Speaker, who have announced their retirement will also be missed in this house, not only 
for the contribution that they have made, but also for the fine manner in which they have conducted themselves in this house. 
The member for Cannington, (Mr. McCarthy) – this is probably the only time he has been out of his seat – but I was going to 
congratulate him because I think the times that he is away from his desk are very few and far between, and I think that he is 
one of the most devoted members in this house to his constituency. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Kluzak: — There has been much said about the lady member (Mrs. Batten), that she will be missed too, and I say she 
most certainly will be missed sitting in that front seat, where those of us on this side could admire the very pleasant manner of 
this lady, Mr. Speaker. Some reference has been made by those on your left, Mr. Speaker, that this side of the house is 
occupied by tired old men. Well, I am sure that the lady member has played a great part in inspiring these so-called tired old 
men, so I wish her well. I also wish all the other members well on their retirement. 
 
I think the most gratifying and interesting is the rapid pace of progress and assistance in the field of education. Last year over 
$4,000,000 was paid out by the department in construction grants for the building of new schools. We now have new schools 
in small urban centres that are as modern and up-to-date as any large centres, making possible the best opportunity for these 
students. 
 
The student loan fund established in 1944 and again a first for Canada, has made interest-free loans of $3,500,000 to 11,170 
students, and you know, Mr. Speaker, that not one Liberal government yet has established this kind of assistance. During the 
last fours years 1,998 grade 12 scholarships were awarded, totalling $912,000, in 1964 these scholarships will amount to 
$300,000. This has given these students the opportunity and incentive to continue and further their education. The $1,000 
bursaries that are made available to teachers to further their education is another important step in raising our standards of 
education available to students. 
 
The Provincial Treasurer is to be commended for making available another $5,000,000 in school grants and an additional 
$2,000,000 to the student loan fund. Besides the bursaries and scholarships I have mentioned there are the dental bursaries of 
$600 and $1200 made available to dental students for their four years of training. We now have 55 students receiving these 
bursaries and this will surely help to bring the number of dentists up in this province. 
 
One of the most outstanding developments in increases in revenues last year was that in the Department of Mineral Resources. 
In this respect I again must congratulate the minister for the very able manner in which he administered his department. It is 
worthy to note that last year the revenue from this department was over $28,000,000, up $7,000,000 from the previous year. 
We now have over 1,400 more producing oil wells than we had in 1960, the highest increase in active oil rigs of any province 
in Canada. 
 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
460 

People of this province will recall that during the 1960 election the leader of the Liberal party, and his associates tried to sham 
the people into believing that all oil companies were leaving Saskatchewan and that the drilling rigs had already left. Again 
trying to run this province down with their propaganda. Representing the Shaunavon constituency where we never dreamed of 
having any development of this type, I am watching this progress in this area with the greatest interest. Three years ago when I 
spoke in this house I proudly announced that our constituency had 63 producing wells, since that time we have added 65 new 
producing wells, making a total of 128. All together there have been 397 wells drilled at a cost to the oil companies of 
$30,000 for a dry hole and $50,000 for a producing well. Drilling costs during the last four years would be in the order of 
$4,750,000 in my constituency alone. since 1960 an expenditure of $1,000,000 has been made in the Shaunavon constituency 
by oil companies in seismograph exploration. Forty-nine crews or rigs were involved in this exploration work. This clearly 
indicates the faith that oil companies have in Saskatchewan. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, if this is stagnation as claimed by the 
Thatcherites that we would want more of it. 
 
I am please to support the budget. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Hon. E.I. Wood (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — In rising to take part in this debate I would like to join those who have 
expressed their felicitations for those members who will be leaving the house this year, who are not again seeking election. I 
would like to speak primarily in regard to those with long years of service in this house, the Minister of Labour (Mr. 
Williams), the senior member from Saskatoon (Mr. Stone), the hon. member for Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) and the hon. 
member for Wilkie (Mr. Horsman). I think that these men have all put in long years of service for the public, and for which 
the public undoubtedly owes them a great deal of gratitude, and which I am sure the same public is only too happy to 
acknowledge. I believe that these people who have given so much of their time have performed a real service for the people of 
this province, and we wish them the very best in the years ahead. 
 
We also have some of our younger members who are not contesting the next election, such as the hon. member from 
Kelvington (Mr. Peterson). The hon. member for Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) the other day, when he was speaking in regard 
to these people who are not coming back again, expressed the situation very well. These are the sort of things that we do find 
in public life; we are not always returned to the house by the people we represent, either by way of the election or by 
nomination. I have to admit, myself, Mr. Speaker, that if it were not for a member of this legislature not receiving the 
nomination to come back again, I would not be with you myself. I am sure that because of this, because of the fact that Harry 
Gibbs did not get the nomination in Swift Current in 1956, does not mean that the people of Swift Current thought any they 
less of Mr. Gibbs in the years past, I think that this does not mean that people necessarily must leave political life or public 
life because they have not received again the nomination to fight another election. 
 
In regard to the members on the opposite side of the house, the hon. member for Humboldt (Mrs. Batten) and the hon. 
member from Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. Klein), I can sincerely say that we are sorry to have them leave the house, 
especially in this way. I think it would have been a little more desirable on our part to have it the other way, but we will miss 
them. I sometimes wonder just who it is that is going to argue with the Attorney General in the years ahead, the way we have 
been entertained with the debates that we have had in the last nine sessions. 
 
I also would like at this time, Mr. Speaker, to express my regards concerning the Provincial Treasurer concerning the speech 
that he made the other day in bringing down this budget. I think it was a very good speech, and it was very forcefully and well 
delivered. I sincerely hope that the hon. Provincial Treasurer is with us for many more years to deliver many more of the 
same. 
 
I would also like to say that in my opinion it was a good budget, one that was fitting to a burgeoning province such as we have 
here in Saskatchewan, brought in by a government which is prepared to undertake and 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
461 

to do things for the people of this province. 
 
This afternoon in speaking to the house, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. Klein), (and I am 
rather sorry that he is not in his seat at the present time), said that some of the members of the house got up and said nice 
things about people and then turned around and were rather scathing in their remarks. I have, I think expressed my sincere 
appreciation of the hon. member for Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. Klein) but I am going to have to disagree with some of his 
attitudes in regard to what he said this afternoon. 
 
He was talking about the trouble that the people of the province are in, in regard to the time question. 
 
Let me be the very last, Mr. Speaker, to say that I do not think that we are in a good deal of difficulty concerning the time 
question, and I do regret this. I also regret sincerely the hon. member’s attitude in regard to it. Simply being prepared to 
complain and to endeavor to thwart any effort that is being made to adjust the situation and then to glory in the result of the 
destruction that has been accomplished, is not the way to approach such a serious problem as this which we have in this 
province. 
 
I would like to remind the hon. members opposite that this government did take some action in regard to the time question. 
Back in 1957 and 1958, we had a discussion in the time committee, as you will recollect . . . 
 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — You lost . . . 
 

Mr. Wood: — . . .and there was a motion in the time committee that we do endeavor to have uniform time throughout all of 
the province with central time in the summer time and in the winter time, mountain standard time, and having uniform time 
through the whole province. I am not at all ashamed of the fact that I was the one that seconded that motion in the committee. 
It may not have been the very best idea that was every brought forward, but at least I am happy to think that for that one 
summer, at least, all of Saskatchewan was on the same time throughout the whole province for the first and only time in the 
history of this province, and I think that was something that was worthwhile. If we had had the co-operation of the members 
opposite and the party they represent I think that the result would have been quite a bit different. This solution that we had of 
putting the hole province on the same time was a bonanza for the political party that did not care too much about what the 
results were, as long as they were able to achieve some political mileage. 
 
In the east it was very popular and very easy for them to say, here the government is trying to force mountain standard time on 
you, and to try to cause as much trouble as was possible in this regard. In the west the absolute reverse was true, members 
there were able to say to the farmers, here is this government trying to force central time on to you. It was a natural and they 
made the best of it, and I do believe that the trouble that we had at that time with bringing in this change in the time situation 
in the province was largely, to no small extent, due to the work of some of the members opposite. As I said before I do not 
want to say that this was the ultimate solution, but if we had at that time been able to have all of the province on the same time 
throughout, we could have been able to go on from there. I do believe that this matter of time depends a great deal on what 
people are used to. Ti think that you will find that throughout the province to a great extent, and if the people of the province 
had become accustomed to having the same time throughout, in a few years it would not have been too difficult for the 
province to switch to either mountain time or central time, whichever they desired to have. 
 
I think that getting them on a uniform time throughout the province was a worthwhile effort and something that we should 
have endeavored to maintain, instead of endeavoring to disrupt it, as was done by a good many people in this province. If you 
are going to have a solution to the time question, Mr. Speaker, it is going to be due to people being prepared to give and take 
a little, if everybody is going to insist upon having that which they want and not prepared to give an inch for anybody else, 
this time question will never be settled in this province, and I think this is something that we just cannot forget. 
 
The hon. member for Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. Klein) also showed his lack of knowledge of what is being done in the 
province at the present time in regard to this problem. A year ago last spring the executives of the urban municipal 
association, the rural municipal association and the 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
462 

school trustees association formed together to make a time committee. They appointed three members form each of these 
associations on this committee. The expenses of this committee have been paid by the provincial government and they have 
met several times and have had carried out quite a study in regard to what could be done concerning the solution of the time 
problem in this province. A year ago they bought to their respective organizations three propositions which they desired to 
have voted upon in an effort to see which one of them might be the best to use as a vehicle to achieve what they were 
endeavoring to do. This was not too successful but they did, form their discussions that they had, and from the results of the 
votes that were taken, later formulate what they felt might be a solution to the time problem in this province. They reported to 
us in the government what their program was, and we told them that so far as we were concerned we were not in a position to 
accept at this time their proposal. We felt that we would be in a much better position to do so if it were ultimately accepted by 
their organizations and requested that they go back again to their organizations to endeavour to have acceptance of this 
proposal, and this they are endeavouring to do. 
 
These people met in my office not too long ago, and among other things this was one of the matters that came up, and I do 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that these municipal people from the urban and rural municipal associations and the school trustees are 
sincerely and earnestly trying to come to a solution of this problem which has irked us for many years here in Saskatchewan. 
 
As I have said a few moments ago I cannot carry any brief for what they are proposing, but I do hope that their efforts do have 
success, and if their proposals do receive acceptance by these three organizations which are very representative of the people 
of this province, I think it would be a wonderful thing and a great step towards what I mentioned a few minutes ago, where the 
people of the province are prepared to give and take a little, and to accept something that is going to work out for the 
betterment of the province. 
 
I would like to say this, Mr. Speaker, that as I have said, these people are sincere and I sincerely hope that they are not 
frustrated by irresponsible people who try to keep this trouble alive for the hope of political gain. 

 

Mr. Danielson: —Make up a ballot and then people can vote on it. 
 

Mr. Wood: — Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to say a few words about the Department of Municipal Affairs. I don’t 
like to brag, but I think I have about the best department in government. 
 

Mr. Kramer: — Go ahead . . . 
 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Minister of Public Health): — Go ahead, you will get no applause here . . . 
 

Mr. Wood: — I sincerely mean it, Mr. Speaker, I thought it would provoke some merriment among colleagues, but this is the 
truth as far as I am concerned. I think there is nothing more interesting, or nothing more important than working in regard to 
municipal and local government. This is true grass roots democracy, and where you have a group of people getting together to 
deal with the things that concern them personally in their own community, and the things which they know themselves, that 
they, personally, are going to have to pay for, this is real democracy, and this government has shown itself willing to aid and 
to strengthen this kind of democracy. 
 
I would like to compliment, Mr. Speaker, the municipal councils of the cities and of the towns and villages, and the rural 
municipalities of this province. I think that they are doing a good job of this governing of their local people in regard to their 
local affairs. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Wood: — I am not saying that they are perfect, there is nothing perfect in this world, not even you and I, Mr. Speaker, 
but I do think that 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
463 

by and large these governments are making a good job. I’m not saying they are making no mistakes, but here is a body of 
people, several thousand in number throughout this province who are sincerely dedicated to the service of their communities 
and I want to take off my hat in honour of the work that they are doing. I believe that the municipal people are people who get 
less respect and less credit for the work they do, and less money, than a good many in service of the public throughout our 
province. 
 
I’m proud, Mr. Speaker, of the relationship I believe that our department has with the municipal people of Saskatchewan. It is 
not one of domination on our part, or animosity, but it is one of co-operation where these people can come into my office and 
I can talk to them, and we can sit down together and endeavor to plan out that which is the best for the operation of municipal 
governments in their areas for the benefit of the people which they represent. This is the way it should be, I think. 
 
So far as municipal reorganizations is concerned, I would like to say Mr. Speaker, that I do believe that a good amount of it 
would be desirable in this province. Premier Douglas has said in the past that this would not be forced upon the people of the 
province. Premier Lloyd has reiterated this, and these promises have been kept and they will be kept. The municipal people of 
this province are not worried about what is going to happen in this regard, and they are not afraid of what is going to happen 
when this government is returned to office after the next election. 
 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Just wait until after the election . . .Yes Sir. 
 

Mr. Wood: — As I said, this is not a thing to worry about. Our people know they can trust this government. They have shown 
themselves to be people of their word, and they know that if and when municipal reorganization comes in this province, it will 
be because it is desired by the people themselves who are being reorganized. We have said this, and this they re prepared to 
accept. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words about taxes. I don’t know if there is any more appropriate time to talk about 
them than in a budget debate, and I think that this is as good a time as any to say a few words on this subject. Members 
opposite talk about taxes all the time, as thought they were something that was sinful – really a terrible thing. I don’t know 
how they feel they are going to operate a modern society without taxes. People of our age and generation have found that they 
can do many things a good deal better as a community than what they can do singly by keeping their own money and spending 
it themselves. 
 
When the people opposite are decrying taxes and talking so much about taxes, are they proposing that social welfare should 
be done away with and that every man fend for himself, irrespective of his age or his health or whether or not he is able to 
obtain employment? Are they suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that the roads and the streets and the highways of our province should 
be provided for by the individual, instead f by the municipal or provincial governments? Are they suggesting, Mr. Speaker, 
that we should do away with our police forces, and everybody carry their own guns because they leave their money in their 
pockets instead of taking it away from the in taxes? This is the basis of the argument, Mr. Speaker. 
 

An Hon. Member: — Ridiculous . . . 
 

Mr. Wood: — I may sound rather ridiculous but it is not more ridiculous than the mouthings that come from the opposite side 
of the house in regard to taxes as we have heard them in this debate. 
 
The members on your left, Mr. Speaker, apparently must have some magic formula by which they are going to find money to 
operate the affairs of this province. They say there are going to be tax cuts if they ever get into office and they are going to do 
a lot more things than what we have been able to afford, and they still don’t believe in borrowing any money, even for such a 
necessary thing such a self-liquidating thing as our power corporation or our government telephones. How they are going to 
do this is one of the best kept political secrets of all time. If I may give the hon. members a bit of political advice – I don’t 
know whether they will accept it or not —- but if I may be so out of place as to do so, I would suggest that they should soon 
be saying something in this regard, because otherwise the people of the province are quite liable to think that this is just a bit 
of cheap talk on their part in order to endeavor to obtain office. 
 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
464 

There has been a good deal said about our provincial taxes, how they are the highest in Canada. Nothing is ever said abut the 
reductions that have taken place recently in regard to our hospitalization and medical care taxes and reductions in power rates 
and other things but they keep harping on how high the taxes are here. The fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker, is well known, that 
both Ontario and British Columbia have higher taxes per capita than we have here and they don’t have medicare either. When 
it comes to the percentage of the income, the pre capita income of the provinces Saskatchewan provincial taxes are only 6th 
highest, not the highest, but the 6th highest in the dominion of Canada, at the present time. The national average throughout 
Canada is that provincial taxes are 6.9 per cent of the average per capita income and in Saskatchewan they are only 6.5 per 
cent. They are lower than the average in that regard in Canada. 
 
I would like at this time, Mr. Speaker, also to say a few words about municipal taxes. A good deal has been said about how 
high the property taxes are, and I am prepared to a great extent to go along with this statement. I feel that probably taxes are 
high in this province, as they are across Canada. The responsibilities and the expenditures of municipal governments have 
risen tremendously in the last fifteen years. The municipal expenditures have in the years between 1945 and 1960 expanded 
some six times. In that same time the provincial government expenditures, this is across Canada as a whole, expanded some 
seven times. During that time federal expenditures only increased by some 20 per cent. Now I know right well that this is not 
a fair comparison in regard to federal expenditures because in 1945 the war was still in operation and while I think these 
figures are valuable in that they show how municipal expenditures and province expenditures have greatly increased during 
those years, this matter of the federal expenditure only increasing 20 per cent is scarcely relevant. 
 
But I would like to point out that since 1950 municipal expenditures have increased by 195 per cent, provincial expenditures 
by 191 per cent and federal expenditures by 132 per cent. But the responsibilities and the expenditures of municipal, as well 
as provincial governments, have greatly increased during the last years, and this has put a real pressure upon tax rates in the 
local areas, and let me be the last to say that property taxes are not an item to be reckoned with. But I would also like to make 
a few comparisons. When we are talking about how high property taxes are in Saskatchewan, I would like to remind the 
members of the house of the statements that I made last year in regard to how the urban taxes per capita in Saskatchewan were 
lower than what they were in either Manitoba or Alberta. 
 
It is true that this cannot be said about the per capita rural municipal tax in Saskatchewan as compared to the other two 
provinces, but if the per acre tax is lower in Saskatchewan than it is elsewhere and the per capita tax is higher, it is a corollary 
that it must be because the farms are larger in Saskatchewan and this is, I think quite understandable. 
 
I’m sorry I don’t have anything further on this this year, Mr. Speaker, because we just go the reports from Alberta today and 
we haven’t been able to assess them in this regard. But we do have some figures from the D.B.S. in regard to the 1962 taxes in 
these provinces as well as throughout the dominion and this shows that the tax per capita, the local –g taxes, this is including 
both municipal taxes and education, for Saskatchewan are $92.48 which is lower than the $94.32 in oil rich Alberta. This 
statement which is taken from D.B.S. financial statistics of municipal governments revenue and expenditure shows that the 
total property taxes of Saskatchewan have risen less in the years from 1959 to 1962 than any other province in Canada. The 
average rate throughout Canada is 23.9 per cent and the raise in Saskatchewan during this time over this period of years has 
been only 14 per cent. 
 
So not only are our property taxes lower here than they are in neighbouring provinces in many regards, they also show that 
they are not increasing as fast as what they are in the other provinces. 
 
I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that there are other comparisons that can be made and can be made quite validly. As I had 
said that time pre capita tax for property in Saskatchewan is $92.48 I’m not going to say this is not a good and quite a high 
piece of money, but I would like to point out that the federal tax per capita throughout Canada is $268.62. We don’t hear 
nearly as much about the, but the federal tax throughout Canada is very close to three times to what the property taxes are in 
this province. I would also like to point out, Mr. Speaker, I have a little 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
465 

information here that I think could be rather relevant in this regard. I’m sorry again that I don’t have these figures for all the 
years in question. The year that I’m speaking about here is 1962 and the only report I’m able to get on this subject is in regard 
to a statement made by Mr. J.M. Keith, president of the Imperial Tobacco Company of Canada Limited in a pamphlet entitled 
―Review of the Canadian Tobacco Industry in 1963‖: ―The Canadian Retail tobacco sales are 860,000,000 or 2,400,000 for 
each day of the year‖. Assuming a similarity of smoking habits in Saskatchewan to the rest of Canada, this should work out 
for Saskatchewan we well as far the rest of Canada to $45.62 per capita. These are 1963 figures, but I have no reason to think 
that there would be too much difference in regards to the 1962 figures. In fact, in view of some of the campaigns that have 
been carried on in regard to lung cancer and such, it might be hoped that the sale of tobacco might be a little lower in 1963 
than what it was in 1962. 
 
I have a statement from the document by DBS ―The control of the sale of alcohol beverages in Canada‖, which shows that the 
sale of alcoholic beverage in Saskatchewan in 1962 total $45,246,000 and these figures include only the more or less retail 
value of the beverages and it doesn’t include any extra charges that were made in regard to being sold by a licensee. This 
works out to a per capita expenditure in Saskatchewan of $48.65. In other words in 1962, the people of Saskatchewan spent 
on liquor and tobacco some $94.28 which was slightly higher than what they paid property taxes. 
 
We hear a great deal about the property taxes, but when we star making some comparisons, these things are really not quite as 
high as what we might think they were at the first look at them. 
 

Mr. Danielson: — What per cent did you get out of this? 
 

Mr. Wood: — Well, I’m sorry to say it, maybe I didn’t contribute my share to that tax. I snuck out of that one. If the hon. 
member would stand up and continue his speech, I would be able to understand what he’s saying. 
 
There’s another matter I would like to raise, Mr. Speaker, which I do believe has a good deal to do with the property taxes in 
Saskatchewan. The members opposite have said a great deal of how much aid to the provinces they would give if they were 
elected and they accuse the members on this side of the house, they accuse this government of starving the municipality. They 
say that we just aren’t al all interest in local government and do nothing whatsoever to assist them, and they make many rash 
promises what they would do if they and the opportunity. It’s very hard to tell just what they would do because we don’t have 
any experience with them for some 20 years but we can say what we have done and what we are doing in this regard. 
 
I have some figures here, Mr. Speaker, I won’t bore you with them all, but I would just like to say that for the present year 
1963-64, the revised estimates of this province show that in regard to grants for local schools, grants for municipal roads, 
bridges and streets, capital grants for hospitals an health centres, capital grants for municipal sewer and water systems, grants 
for municipal winter works (provincial share) contributions for a regional public health service including Regina and 
Saskatoon, grants for local homes for senior citizens and local housing projects, grants to the Anti-T.B. league, grants for 
local and regional libraries and grants for regional parks, this government has paid directly to municipalities in regard to 
grants and direct financial aid $52,806,000 which is 1/4 of our total budge for this year. 
 
Now this is what we are going at the present time. If you are trying to foretell the future, as I say it’s very difficult to know 
what the members opposite would do if they ever did have the change. But when you’re trying to foretell the future, you’re 
able to take a projection on what has happened in a certain year in the past and what you have come to and you can draw this 
and you have a fair idea of this government’s attitude towards local government and what they are liable to do in the future. In 
order to do this, I will take you back to the year 1953-54, just ten years ago, which at that time for thee same direct grants to 
municipalities and local governments of this province, we paid some $12,107,000. In other words, in the last ten during our 
grants to these municipalities have been multiplied by 4½ times. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Wood: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite don’t like us to talk about 1944 and years prior to that, and I agree 
with them. I think that such are not always the fairest comparisons and I do not like to go back 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
466 

into the dark ages at any time. But if you are going to really take this project I’m talking about down to the ultimate, this is 
what we have to do. You know when we were kids in school, we had certain drawings to do, where you draw a railroad and 
you draw the thing down to the vanishing point and you draw a cube in perspective you draw it to the vanishing point here. 
Well, when it comes to talking about ―Aid to Municipalities‖ Mr. Speaker, 1943 is the vanishing point. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Wood: — In that year, for these things which I have spoken of, there was paid out some $3,729,000. Well I know very 
well, as we all know, that the expenditures at that time were some $30,000,000 or very close to this. This works out to 
approximately 12 per cent of their total expenditures or just about half in regard to percentage of their expenditure, what our 
expenditure for the same thing was in this last year. We in this last year, have paid 1/4 of our expenditures to the local 
governments; they paid 12 per cent. 
 
But let us not forget, Mr. Speaker, that in that same year – I just happen to have the book on my desk this morning and I 
turned to 1943-44 accounts and it shows there that the public revenue tax collected that year was $3,214,555.47. In other 
words, what they actually gave to the municipalities over and above what they took from them was some $500,000 or 
approximately two per cent of their total expenditures. Now this is just about as close to the vanishing point I think, Mr. 
Speaker, as we could car to come, and these are the people that talk about how they would support the municipalities and how 
they are interested in helping municipalities where this government is not. 
 
I would like to go a little further, Mr. Speaker, and speak about some of the indirect financial aid that is given by this 
province. I would like to speak also, Mr. Speaker, about some of the provincial programs that we have at the present time for 
relieving municipalities of potential expenditures. These are not rally direct grants to them as the one that I have mentioned, 
but expenditures that are made in regard to the things which would relieve the municipality from things that they quite 
possibly might have to pay for. These expenditures by the provincial government are directly for the benefit of the individuals 
in these municipalities. We have here Health Services for the provincial public assistance cases, we have Saskatchewan Caner 
Commission, we have the social aid net provincial share in regard to certain programs not all of the programs but in regard to 
their social aid, the aid to dependent families and the supplementary allowance to those over 70 and for the blind. The 
hospital insurance, the net of federal contributions and the medical care insurance. These things amount to $55,299,000 in the 
year in which we are now engaged. This is compared with $12,440,000 back in 1953, and again getting back to this vanishing 
point $352,000 back in 1943-44. In other words, these things have increased some 4½ times over the last ten years and it’s 
ridiculous to lay a comparison with what was done before this government came into power. These taken together, Mr. 
Speaker, show that of the expenditures of the government during the present year, show that over half of the government 
expenditures are made directly to the municipality or in regard to the well-being of the people in those municipalities for 
things which otherwise these people would have to pay themselves. Half of the provincial revenue which I think is not a bad 
percentage and when they talk about assisting municipalities and the people of these municipalities I would think this is going 
about as far as you could be expected to go. 
 
Besides these things, we have given assistance in local financing to the school units, towns, villages and cities in this last year 
by purchasing their debentures to the extent of some $4,826,000. This is over and above that and I think the record of this 
government in regard to aid to local government is something that we on this side of the house can be very proud of and I 
think that the members opposite can make very little hay out of talking about the record of this government in this regard. 
They may say, in regard to these figures that I have just quoted where we are making this money available to take care of 
indirect costs of municipalities and in regard to costs that otherwise have to be paid by the individuals themselves, why should 
we go to all this bother of collecting this money and then returning it back to them? Well, I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, 
that this does two things: it removes the burden from those people who are weak and need this help, it takes and places the 
burden upon the backs of the strong and able to carry it. I think this in itself is a worthwhile offer. I would like to say also, Mr. 
Speaker, that it does away with the fear of the future and the worry about what may happen in regard to many of the things 
that could accidentally happen to people otherwise. I speak 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
467 

with a certain amount of experience on this. I have been a taxpayer and a resident of an area where it had both medical care 
and hospitalization since 1947. I know that during that time, I was one of the lucky ones, undoubtedly. I paid a good deal 
more out in taxes than what I ever received back in benefits but I’m glad of this, Mr. Speaker, and I’m also very pleased that 
during that time I was happy to do this because it took away from me that feeling of uncertainty of what might happen. We 
have been able to go to bed at night knowing that if any trouble arose, we were covered in regard to our health both in regard 
to the hospital and in regard to the payments to the doctor and it has been worth every cent that I have put into it as far as I am 
concerned. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Wood: — Mr. Speaker, I know I have talked longer than I should have tonight but I do have a few more things that I 
would like to say in this debate and I beg leave to adjourn. 
 
Debate adjourned 
 

MOTION RE INCOME TAX REGULATIONS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Snedker respecting income tax regulations, and 
the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Williams. 
 

Mr. J.E. Snedker (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker – the amendment to my motion reads as follows: 
 

That the words ―for board and lodging when required to work away from home and for tools and equipment required while 
carrying on their work‖ be inserted after the word ―employment‖ in the fourth line. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I am willing to agree that where a worker in the course of this employment which takes him away from 
home is required to pay for board and lodging in excess of what it would cost him if he was working at home in the normal 
course of business, then I’m willing to agree that this is a just and reasonable expense. I know that in the province of 
Saskatchewan and in fact all over Canada, there are very many instances when people, particularly those working in 
construction find that they’re called away from home in the course of doing their jobs and as a result they have to buy meals 
and secure lodging and this is a cost in excess of what it would normally cost them if they were doing work at home and living 
in their normal place of residence. I therefore consider that this is a just and reasonable request. 
 
In that matter of tools and equipment required by workers, I presume that this means ―required by workers in their jobs‖, I 
don’t suppose that this applies to do-it-yourself-kits down the cellar or anything of that nature. In regards to tools and 
equipment which it may be necessary for a worker to purchase himself with his own money, in order that he can continue in 
his employment, I agree also that this is a just and a reasonable expense and should be allowed as a deduction for income tax 
purposes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I considered the inclusion of the forgoing requests in the original resolution, however, I thought that it possible 
would be more effective to make one single request and make it stick and because that was my opinion I chose the one which 
I thought would be the most effective and the most important and would bring the greatest good to the greatest number of 
workers. Now in that regard, I could have been wrong. Perhaps tools and lodging might bring more benefit to working people 
than transportation costs, if they were allowed as an expenses. However, I don’t think so, I think that more expenditure is 
involved in the overall transportation costs of all the workers of the province than there would be in the other two matters that 
have been mentioned, that is board and lodging and tools and equipment. Of course I notice this more in my own area than I 
do in other parts because it is drawn to my attention more forcefully. As I said, I considered their inclusion and I didn’t 
include them because for those reasons. Now we have a triple request. Well, Mr. Speaker, there are various ways of doing 
things, sometimes you make a single request and go after it. That is make up your mind to what you want and go after one 
thing, sometimes you go after a group of things and some people and I think this is not a very good attitude to take, make up 
their minds what they want, ask for what they want and then they also include a whole 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
468 

package of things which they never intended to ask for or wanted anyway but they just throw them in for good measure on the 
grounds that we’ll get something out of the deal and we’ll include the additional requests in order to have something to 
bargain on. That hasn’t been done in this case, because the other two subjects that have been asked for inclusion in this 
resolution, I believe, are just and reasonable. Because I agree with the justice of the other two requests, if not the wisdom of 
their inclusion at this time, and in order, if possible to secure the unanimous support for the motion which I consider to be of 
the utmost importance in order to achieve the success which we desire, therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am willing to support the 
amendment. 
 

Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon): — Mr. Speaker, when I was speaking on the main motion about a week ago, I said I thought 
there was merit in the motion but I thought it was kind of narrow in scope and it ought to include lodging and meals and tools 
as the amendment states. I wouldn’t say anything tonight only I sensed some doubt in the mind of the member for Yorkton 
(Mr. Gallagher) when he thought perhaps by including the meals, there might be some difficulty in administrating such things 
as meals and perhaps would take a lot away from the motion. Well, I would like to assure him that there are certain categories 
where meals are allowed as exemption on income tax and I point out that employees in transportation, those operating trains, 
are allowed meal allowance when they are away from their permanent residence, also salesmen on commission basis, is 
another category. A brief was put on my desk just bout the time that the amendment came in and it was submitted to the Royal 
Commission on Taxation by the employees of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool on behalf of the employees of construction, the 
employees that repair and rebuild elevators, annexes and cottages. Apparently their collective bargaining agreement with the 
company, that is the Wheat Pool, agreed to give them $1.00 a day allowances for when they are away from home and I thin all 
members appreciate that these construction workers go to every part of the province, a long way from their permanent 
residence for the best part of the year. Now this $1.00 allowance allowed to them is computed as income on their income tax 
and I think this is going a little too far. This allowance given to them because of their extra expenses away from, and they’re 
actually concerned and I think they have a right to be so and therefore I think that this matter of meals and expenses when 
they are away from their permanent residence is a worthwhile inclusion in the amendment and so, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted 
to say those few words and say that I will support the amendment. 
 

Mr. B.D. Gallagher (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, I realize that I have spoken on the amendment, I wonder if I would be out 
of order in correcting a statement that came out in the press attributed to myself, and would I be in order? 
 

Mr. Speaker: — No, if a statement in the press attributed to yourself, it should have been raised at the earliest opportunity 
after the orders of the day. 
 

Mr. Gallagher: — I was misquoted, I believe. The press said that I was not supporting it, but I am going to support the 
amendment. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! 
 
The question being put on the amendment, it was agreed to. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — The debate is now on the motion as amended. 
 

Mr. Gallagher: — Do you recognize me now, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, first of all seeing that I didn’t’ have the 
opportunity before to correct a statement that came out in the press, I guess I might just as well take this opportunity now to 
correct it. I am very sorry that I was misquoted, of course. I didn’t have the amendment in front of me when I spoke in the 
house and I certainly wasn’t prepared to say everything that I might have said had I had the amendment in front of me and I 
do believe that I had said that I was wholeheartedly in support of the last part of the amendment. I didn’t realize exactly what 
the first part of the amendment contained. I was 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
469 

a little bit skeptical, but I don’t think that at any time, at least I hope I did not say, although I may have left the impression 
with the press that I was not going to support the amendment, now I have supported the amendment, so that’s all cleared up. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, it is only right when you think of how other people are used regarding the payment of income tax, how 
farmers are allowed to charge machinery and small tools, that labourers would also be using in the earning of their daily 
bread, the farmers are allowed to use this as an item of expense in calculating their income tax, garage operators and other 
businessmen are allowed the same and I think it’s only fair to allow the same thing for the working people. If there’s one 
group of people in this country who certainly have no chance to evade income tax – and I don’t think anybody should have a 
chance to evade income tax, but there are people, no doubt, who are being accused of evading income tax, whether they are or 
they aren’t – if there’s one group of people who cannot evade income tax, it’s those people who work for a living, work for 
wages and have their income tax deducted at source, now I think that this is only fair that those carpenters, those tinsmiths, 
those electricians, those plumbers, some of the welders and other people who work for wages, should be given this little 
privilege, and with those few words, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I am wholeheartedly in support of this amended motion. 
 

Mr. J.H. Staveley (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, just before the debate is closed on this motion, I would like to say a word or 
two. The first part of the motion has been amended, and I would like to say that I think the hon. member for Saltcoats (Mr. 
Snedker) painted a very complete picture for this legislature as to certain discriminations that existed against some of the 
people in his constituency and respecting this income tax regulation. 
 
I would like to say just a work, because we do have a somewhat similar situation in the Weyburn area, which I represent. As 
you know, Mr. Speaker, the southeastern part of the province has enjoyed a very considerable development in the oil industry. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Staveley: — I’m glad to see that my hon. friends across the way agree with me for once. The operations of this industry 
are carried out by the staffs of the various oil companies involved and the operation are being carried out over many square 
miles of rural area. You will appreciate, I am sure, that it’s impossible to provide normal housing accommodation within a 
normal distance from their work, with the result that these people who are in this type of work do incur additional and unusual 
expenses only by the type of work that they are engaged in. 
 
Now, I think we all realize, Mr. Speaker, that the petroleum and natural gas industry is making a very great contribution to the 
economy of this province and to economy of Canada as a whole. I think we must realize within the limits of the income tax 
regulations that this contribution is being made at the expense of some people. Now there are other people in various towns 
across the province that re in similar situations. I think particularly of those people who work on crews for the building and 
repairing of elevators with the question of their meals, and the question of their tools and equipment also being involved. And 
I think the amendment merely extends the benefits which we request by way of this motion. For these reasons, I would have 
been very happy, Mr. Speaker, to have gone along with the original motion. I did vote for the amendment and certainly I will 
vote for the motion as amended. 
 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — I want to say a few words in support of this motion as it has been amended. It may 
have been pointed out, but I didn’t hear it that the group of people that will benefit most are the people in the lowest income 
range. I know garage men who are required to buy tools – tools are lost and tools are stolen – and yet that is considered part 
of their expenses and they are allowed to make deductions in their returns. It has been pointed out by the member from 
Yorkton (Mr. Gallagher) that farmers are allowed deductions for small tools, garage owners are allowed similar deductions 
and I think it’s only fair that working people be allowed this kind of an exemption. We also know that the people in higher 
income brackets who are employed as travellers are allowed to deduct for transportation, for meals and exemptions for other 
expenses, including entertainment. As a matter of fact, it seems very unfair that the man who is in the low income bracket 
trying to support a family is not allowed the fairest of exemptions. 
 



 

February 27, 1964 
 

 
470 

I would like at this time, seeing that it is 10:00 to adjourn the debate, Sir. 
 

Mr. G.H. Danielson (Arm River): — Speak for . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! The member for Arm River knows that the mover did not conclude the debate because I 
pointed out that anyone wishing to speak must do so, and he couldn’t be recognized until the other members did rise. I wish 
the hon. member for Saltcoats (Mr. Snedker) would remain in his seat and give hon. members their right to speak. The debate 
has not been concluded and the hon. member from Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) was on his fee at 10:00. It is now past 
10:00 and I do leave the chair. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 p.m. 


