



















































Hansard: March 03, 1964


547 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

SIXTH SESSION – FOURTEENTH LEGISLATURE 
19th Day 

 

Tuesday, March 3rd, 1964 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Arthur Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to introduce a fine 
group of students in the Speaker’s gallery. They are from Kinistino and are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. 
Richert, bus driver, Mr. Bridor and I know the house will join with me in wishing them a very pleasant trip her 
and I hope it will be an informative and a profitable one. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Hon. O.A. Turnbull (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to bring to the attention of the 
house a group of students in the Speaker’s gallery, led by Mr. W.A. Ross, their teacher. This is a group that will 
have particular interest perhaps to the assembly, in that they are two classes representing a total of four classes 
that exist in the city and are listed as a vocational up-grading group. The ages of this group are between 18 and 
40, they represent an unemployed group. I think it is commendable that they have availed themselves of their 
opportunities to take this line of training, which is in the math., sciences, English, record keeping, for a three 
month course and I hope that their stay here is profitable and informative. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mrs. Gladys Strum (Saskatoon City): — Before the Orders of the Day are called, I would like to bring to the 
attention of the house two groups of students in the west gallery from King George School, 35 students under 
Mrs. Sutherland, and Bates School, 26 students under Mr. Grasbee, and we are very happy to have them here 
today, and we hope that they will enjoy their stay in their capital city and that the deliberations this afternoon will 
add to their understanding as to how democracy works, and we wish you a safe journey home. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

COPIES OF BUDGET SPEECH 
 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the hon. members that 
one of Saskatchewan’s best sellers is now available in quantity on request of the members. I am referring to the 
budget speech, so if some of the hon. members want 25 or 50 or maybe 100 copies, they can be supplied on 
request. Just let me know. 
 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, that book which my colleague is advertising is not only available 
for distribution but the price is right as well. 
 

CONDOLENCE — DEATH OF PATRICK DESHAYE 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
548 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, members of the legislative assembly will be saddened by the news 
which appeared in last evening’s paper of the death of Patrick Deshaye. There are many of us in this legislature 
who still will remember Pat Deshaye as one of our fellows a few years ago. We recall him as one who was a 
vigorous representative of the ideas of this party and of the constituency which he represented. As a result, Mr. 
Speaker, may I move, seconded by Mr. Thatcher, 
 

That this assembly learns with profound regret of the death on Sunday last, of Patrick Deshaye. Mr. Deshaye 
was born in Fenwood, Saskatchewan, was educated at Ituna and at the University of Saskatchewan, 
graduating in 1940 with a Bachelor of Law Degree. He practised law in Melville from 1942 to 1955 and sat 
in this house for the Melville constituency from 1948 to 1952. In 1955 he became solicitor for the Prairie 
Farm Rehabilitation Administration in Regina. Mr. Deshaye was active in community affairs, he was the 
Secretary of the Melville Chamber of Commerce, and Chairman of the Separate School Board. In addition he 
was vice-chairman of the Melville Kinsmen Club, past president of the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 
Administration Association and a member of the Harrow-DeGroot School Board in Regina. 

 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement this assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy 
with members of the bereaved family. 

 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join on behalf of the Liberal party in the house, 
in expressing our sorrow to the family of Mr. Deshaye at this time. Pat was not only a political colleague of mine, 
but I had the pleasure of associating with him in the field of business for a number of years, I also had a very 
close personal relationship with Mr. Deshaye while they were resident in Melville and of course, I had on many 
occasions the opportunity of working with Pat in the field of politics as well, before he was in politics, while he 
was a member of the legislature, and after the time that he met defeat in 1952. I was present at Pat’s original 
convention when he was first nominated and I was also at his second convention in 1952 and he was present at 
my convention in 1954. 
 
Mr. Deshaye, unfortunately was plagued by poor health during many years of his life. For that reason his political 
career was cut somewhat short because of the fact that health made it impossible for him to continue the grind 
that was necessary in order to continue to be involved in political life. Only ten days ago, the member for 
Moosomin, (Mr. McDonald) and myself went over to visit Pat at his home and I would like to say that in spite of 
the fact that he had been weakened by illness, he still had a great deal of interest in the people of this province, 
the people of the Melville constituency, and the party that he supported so loyally during his lifetime. 
 
I know that all of us on this side that know Pat join with the members of the government side of the house in 
expressing to Mrs. Deshaye and the members of the family, our profound sorrow on his passing at such an early 
age in life. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, I then move, seconded by Mr. Thatcher, 
 

That the resolution just passed, together with transcripts of oral tributes be communicated to the bereaved 
family on behalf of this assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

TABLING OF TELEGRAM 
 

Mr. Walter Erb (Milestone): — Before the Orders of the Day, Mr. Speaker, I should like to refer to a statement 
that I made in my speech yesterday, and on which the member for Shaunavon, (Mr. Kluzak) rose on a point of 
privilege. 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

549 

I had stated and I had also said that I would table the telegram which I received from him which I said read, ―I 
hope your actions of today will haunt you for the rest of your life‖. The telegram says, ―your actions today should 
haunt you for the rest of your life‖, and I should like to table that . . . 
 

Hon. R.A. Walker (Attorney-General): — Quite a difference. 
 

Mr. Erb: — Not at all. 
 

QUESTION: CONSTITUENCY MAPS 
 

Mr. W.R. Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I wonder if I 
might direct a question to the Premier, which I hope he might be able to answer either today or a day later. Could 
he tell the house when the constituency maps with the new polls will be ready for circulation? 
 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I have no information on this at the moment. As members know 
they may not even be needed until next year, so I don’t suppose there is any particular pressure on them. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

STATEMENT RE RAILWAY TAX EXEMPTION 
 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would just like to make a statement 
which is a little bit lengthy but I think it is important to make it at this time. For some period of time the 
governments of Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba have been discussing with each other the situation because 
of the taxation exemption which has been granted to the main line of the Canadian Pacific Railway through all 
our three provinces. As a result, today Premier Manning of Alberta and Premier Roblin of Manitoba and myself 
have agreed to put on the tables of our respective legislatures a copy of a memorandum to the Governor General 
In Council, which will be presented in the near future. 
 
May I read the associated statement, Mr. Speaker? 
 

Later this month, Alberta, Manitoba and Saskatchewan will meet with federal cabinet ministers at Ottawa. At 
this meeting the governments of the prairie provinces will submit a joint memorandum to the Governor General 
In Council requesting that federal legislation, including the 1881 Act, which extended the provinces of 
Manitoba, and the 1905 Acts, which established the provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan, be amended to 
remove a feature which has long discriminated against the prairie provinces. 

 
The Historical facts are that in 1880 an agreement was concluded between the Canadian Pacific Railway and 
the government of Canada. Under this agreement the C.P.R. received $25,000,000 in cash, 25,000,000 acres of 
fertile land in western Canada, free of taxation for 20 years, and numerous other concessions. 
 
This agreement which was ratified by federal legislation in 1881, also exempted the C.P.R. main land from 
provincial and municipal taxation of every kind in the provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan, and in those 
parts of the province of Manitoba, which were added subsequent to 1881. This exemption in perpetuity was 
also written into the federal acts of 1904, which created the provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan. 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
550 

The 1880 agreement between the C.P.R. and the government of Canada, as ratified by a federal act of 1881, 
and the provisions of a Saskatchewan Act, 1905, has meant that Saskatchewan’s constitutional right to levy 
taxes was restricted. 

 
Precisely this has meant that three cities, 15 towns, 12 villages and 24 rural municipalities in Saskatchewan 
located on or around the main line of the C.P.R. have been unable all these years and are still unable to levy 
any municipal taxes on any property which may be designated as being used for the working of the C.P.R. 
Yet these municipalities have been expected to supply services to the C.P.R., much the same way as they do 
to any other business. 

 
The governments of Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba are in full agreement that this constitutional 
limitation imposed on their respective provinces should be removed, and that they should recover the right to 
exercise their full authority to levy and collect taxes, or to delegate this responsibility to their municipalities. 

 
Accordingly a joint memorandum will be presented by the governments of the three prairie provinces to the 
Governor General-In-Council later this month, which when acted upon will correct a long standing injustice 
suffered by our respective provinces. 

 
This joint memorandum going to . . . (inaudible) . . . the C.P.R. main line enjoys tax exemption only in the 
provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan, and in parts of Manitoba and in no other province. It claims that this 
tax exemption is discriminatory for the following reasons: 

 
1. The provinces of Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta are denied the power to tax certain property of the 

C.P.R. whereas all other provinces are unrestricted in their powers to tax all railways lying within their 
borders. 

 
2. It restricts Manitoba and Saskatchewan and Alberta in the granting of taxation powers to certain municipal 

corporations, those in which the C.P.R. main line is located, with resulting disparity in the taxing powers 
of the municipality. 

 
3. Such municipalities are deprived of a source of revenue available to municipalities elsewhere in Canada, 

although required to provide services ordinarily provided by municipal corporations elsewhere. 
 

4. In the municipalities affected other property owners are required to bear the full load of local taxation 
while the tax exempt Canadian Pacific Railways properties derive the usual benefits of local government. 
Alternatively the narrowing of the tax base as a result of the tax exemption deprives the communities 
affected of services which would otherwise be provided. 

 
The memorandum further states: 
 

The main line of Canadian Pacific Railway was built in a large measure of public assistance but 
disproportionately heavy shares of that assistance came from these provinces. The correction of this situation is 
long overdue. 

 
The governments of the three provinces maintain that: 
 

Binding the tax exemption to the legislative powers conferred upon with the provinces by their Constituent 
Acts conflicts with the principle of provincial equality. It constitutes a reminder of our inferior position in the 
federal union that is Canada, and contracts sharply with the manner in which other undertakings have been 
carried out by the dominion. 

 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

551 

So, Mr. Speaker, by agreement with the premiers of Alberta and Manitoba, the Joint Memorandum to the 
Governor General in Council is being tabled today in the Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba legislatures. May 
I lay on the table copies of the memorandum as well as copies of the statement which I have just read. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the Budget Motion moved by the Hon. Mr. Brockelbank. 
 

Hon. O.A. Turnbull (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, last evening I was entering into the debate with 
respect to the budget that has been delivered and the excellent speech that was offered to this assembly by the 
Provincial Treasurer and I was outlining how I thought this budget was offering new opportunities for the whole 
of the educational complex that Saskatchewan is developing. 
 
In order that the hon. members of the assembly might understand a little more fully the nature of the changes of 
the program that such an expanding economy as Saskatchewan’s requires, (and I am referring to the change in 
nature of the educational program) and in order that I may offer my support to the budget that has been offered by 
the Provincial Treasurer, I would like to continue to explain the changes of education and give special reference 
to the projections in vocational and technical training. 
 
Most members here, I believe, are well aware of the fact that there are vocational and technical schools in 
Saskatchewan. I’m not at all sure that all members fully appreciate the changes that we envisaged that must be 
forthcoming if this vocational and technical training program that we are now designing be adequate enough and 
full so that it can meet not only the problems of today, but also the challenge of the future. 
 
In order to review the types of changes that face Saskatchewan and the world as a whole, it is necessary just to 
linger for a moment on the reason for change, the causes for change if you wish, Mr. Speaker. I think nobody 
here questions the genesis of technological change, it arises through applied research and the scientific methods. 
What it does of course, to Saskatchewan and particularly the people of Saskatchewan, is a profound thing. 
 
New positions of employment are being created and existing positions are becoming obsolete. We are seeing at 
the same time a continuing substitution of labour by capital with rather sizable shift out of our primary industries. 
These people are shifting out of these industries and must be relocated and re-employed in other industries. 
 
I have here before me, Mr. Speaker, a summary of research that has been carried out in respect to Canada as a 
whole, showing the structural change of the labour force and in respect to Saskatchewan as a whole. It is 
interesting to notice that in 1931 in Canada, 9.3 per cent of the total labour force was in the service industries. 
These are in the personal services. Twenty-four point four per cent were the so-called ―white collar‖ group. 
These are managerial positions, commercial and financial, professional and clerical. Thirty-two per cent of the 
total labour force was in primary industry, that is agriculture, fishing, logging and mining. Thirty-three point 
eight per cent was in the manual group, manufacturing, technical, labourer, construction, transportation and the 
like. 
 
By 1961, we do see a change in the Canadian scene. The service industries have increased from 9.3 per cent to 
10.8 per cent. The ―white collar‖ group has increased from 24.4 per cent to 36.6 per cent. The profound shift is to 
be found in the primary industries, Mr. Speaker, and in the intervening time from 1931 to 1961. We have seen in 
Canada the primary industries which formerly employed 32.5 per cent of the labour force shift down to 13.1 per 
cent of the labour force. The manual group remains much the same for all of Canada for this 30 year period, 
which was in 1931, which I have said 33.8 per cent, it rose by 1961 to 34.9 per cent. In the Canadian 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
552 

scene then we can summarize this table in this way: service, industry, opportunity, remains about the same, 
increasing about one per cent; white collar opportunity increased considerably shifting from 24.4 per cent to 38.6 
per cent; the opportunity in primary industry shrunk in all of Canada from 32.5 per cent to 13.1 per cent; the 
manual remained about the same. As you would expect, Mr. Speaker, you can look at Saskatchewan and find a 
similar type of a shift, because the basic forces of the economy act right across the whole of society. 
 
However, there are some differences and they are worthy of note. If we take the same period 1931 to 1961, we 
find that the service opportunities have increased about one per cent, 8.6 per cent to 9.7 per cent. White collar 
opportunities have shifted from 11.4 per cent to 29.4 per cent. The great change once again is in the primary 
industry and in Saskatchewan this is almost entirely agriculture. Here you have a shift from 63.6 per cent down to 
37.9 per cent within a 30 year period. 
 
Another substantial shift is in the manual area, this is manufacturing, mechanical, labouring, construction, 
transport and communication. This has shifted upwards from 16.4 per cent to 23 per cent. It is necessary to 
review this, Mr. Speaker, if we are to have a clearer picture of the needs of the people of Saskatchewan in terms 
of the trainings that are required, the training that is required. 
 
As we think of this problem, it becomes apparent, as well that the method of training in employment is also 
changing. Thirty years ago a young man seeking training in employment generally found it at the side of his 
employer. There was some professional training, it is true, but within the technical field, the labouring field, 
within the primary field, these persons almost always received their training within that particular industry. This 
is no longer true, Mr. Speaker, and the demands that are being made upon a modern educational system are such 
that we must increase the capital expenditure, increase the level of training, so that the persons that emerge from 
the vocational and technical schools can fit more readily into our rapidly changing society. 
 
This is very easy to say, Mr. Speaker. Almost at once we are confronted by four or five basic questions, and they 
might be put in this way; What kind of training is required? Who should be trained? How much training is 
required? Where should the training be done and by whom? It is to these questions that I now turn my attention. 
 
Nowhere in Canada is the research going on that is necessary. Saskatchewan has taken some steps in this respect 
and we have moved a bit slower than other provinces have, in developing our vocational and technical programs. 
We have believed it will be folly to rush in, to take advantage of federal-provincial agreements, if we are only 
succeeding in building schools and equipping those schools with equipment, and turning out persons into a 
restricting labour market. We think that we have to take cognizance of the shift within the economy in terms of 
opportunity; take cognizance of the possibilities that lie and then look to our training needs and relate those 
training needs to the changing nature of society. 
 
We do know that we are fast moving away from a point in time, where individual obsolescence was unheard of. 
A man could train himself for an occupation and he was relatively sure that this occupation would still be there 
when he reached his retirement age. This is no longer possible, Mr. Speaker, in many occupations. It has even 
become truth, I believe, that those of our people who are professional persons also must have re-training and 
opportunity of continuous learning. 
 
We have to develop, therefore, a new type of training and move away from the do-it-yourself concept of training 
which is fast becoming wastefully impractical because of the changes that are generated in our society. Modern 
training must provide for a broad basic training, and also a continuing training beyond the first job. It must 
provide for the re-training of those that are displaced by changing labour demands, and by capital substitution in 
order that the citizens can regain employability. 
 
In our modern society, Mr. Speaker, particularly in our agricultural community, we see massive injections of 
capital and a corresponding reduction of labour. This is true in all other fields of endeavor, manufacturing, 
mining, transportation and the like. The result of this added increase of capital and the declining of labour is, we 
find a rising efficiency in productivity, by virtue of the fact that machines can produce more efficiently than hand 
skills. Also society, Mr. Speaker, benefits form this increased productivity. 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

553 

All of us, as consumers, benefit from the increase in productivity by virtue of the fact that we have more 
consumer goods. We benefit through having shorter hours of work, longer periods for holidays. These things are 
all beneficial to society as a whole, but are highly disastrous at times to the individual citizens, and if consumers 
in our society benefit as a whole, then society as a whole must accept the social costs that go with this process. 
 
The social costs are found in unemployment, social welfare and re-training. I suggest that these facets of modern 
society, unemployment, re-training, social welfare are here and they are here to stay as a facet of modern society. 
They will constitute one of our major problems as we move forward. 
 
We are in need of some better vocational training program, and you can see as you review the total picture, the 
clientele available for this better system of vocational training is an exceedingly large one. It includes those that 
are now in the labour force, as well as those who might be entering into it. I think we can summarize it in this 
way. 
 
We can think in terms of the persons who have now entered the labour forces and are now on the jobs and who 
must get further training if they are to keep in step with that job. We have to think of the type of training that will 
make provisions for persons in the secondary school system, or who are in the pre-employment training programs 
in vocational schools, and we have to think of those that are outside of the formal school system. Those who are 
socially or physically handicapped, who are untrained, frequently unemployed and who need special help in 
getting into training programs and subsequent employment. While I have perhaps given you the impression, Mr. 
Speaker, that these latter may constitute a special group, I do not for one minute believe that they are. They 
sometimes present special problems from a training point of view, but they should be treated and they have every 
right to be treated as all other people, insofar as this is possible. 
 
I am suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan and all of Canada, needs a reassessment of both the function 
and the responsibilities of vocational education. I am suggesting that this assessment must be done now, and it is 
absolutely essential if we are to conserve our energies as well as our tax dollars. 
 
A new approach, an improved system and re-programing are vital, if we are to meet the present and modern 
needs. I suggest that the approach must be broad, bold and scope and has three main components. 
 
There is first the program component. We have to review this as I have been attempting to, from the point of the 
many needs of our community. The secondary schools of course, are a part of this program, and we have to 
review the total program from the secondary schools through to the technical institutes, to the institute of 
technology. This total program has to be reviewed in conjunction with the university program so that they fit well 
into the work that is now being done there, because this work will also change in the future. 
 
Secondly, we have to devise a systematic advancement from one level to another, so that a student does not at 
any time find himself locked into a position. We have to arrange the program in stages, making it possible for the 
individual to attend for a short or long period as his individual needs are met. I’m suggesting that we have to take 
a look at the media used for training. And this must be broad and should include all the plans, offices, schools, or 
any other facilities that exist in Saskatchewan that can be useful and utilized well, in this training program. We 
must be imaginative in concept and we must be prepared to use all these facilities besides the formal vocational 
school, our concept of a laboratory must go beyond the individual school concepts and we must realize that we 
must broaden it to include as many different agencies, both public and private that exist in Saskatchewan. 
 
Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, we will require an administrative structure capable of planning and implementing this 
whole system in accordance with the needs of a wide range of groups and interest but which can effectively 
co-ordinate the program that are inter-related. This is an exceedingly difficult job, Mr. Speaker, but I am 
confident that the people of Saskatchewan can rise to this challenge and develop such a program as well as 
develop the administrative structure, that will be necessary to carry it out. This co-ordinating program must be 
developed, otherwise we will have duplications, different training standards and some general public confusion. 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
554 

To launch this program, we have already thought in terms of the technical institutes that exist now in Saskatoon 
and in Moose Jaw. Saskatchewan citizens I think, Mr. Speaker, are generally aware that these institutions exist, 
but I’m not at all sure that the hon. members here have reviewed their existence in terms of the total concepts. 
Another part of this total concept is the development of regional vocational schools. These are important in terms 
of meeting a very particular need. We have started to develop these when we developed the school in Prince 
Albert. 
 
We think that the reorganization of the school system, which allows for the high school division or secondary 
school divisions to be screened into the academic and vocational streams calls for the development of regional 
vocational schools. We have now, as I said, the Saskatchewan Technical Institutes. We now must move into 
phase two which is to develop these regional schools. The one at Prince Albert has been useful in being a pilot 
project and has given us some much needed guidance. We now think we’re ready to move into the next phase, 
and in response to pressures that are now developing, we think that we can, over the next period of time, develop 
a series of regional schools. 
 
I have been referring, Mr. Speaker, to the major re-organizations in the school system which is designed to 
provide opportunity for maximum general education for all, and a more positive orientation to high school 
education and to continuing education in the work for every student. I am not now using the term ―student‖ in the 
traditional sense of an age group between 12 and 18 years of age. Every student now must be every person, no 
matter what his age is, who wants to avail himself to a training program. 
 
However, as far as the formal school system is concerned, we have taken the 12 years of the school program and 
we are re-organizing it into four divisions, with the first three constituting the compulsory basic education 
program, and the fourth is to be the secondary education program. In division three of the basic program, students 
will assisted in discovering their occupational interests and aptitudes with a view of helping them select a 
preparatory course in the secondary school which will be most meaningful and useful to them. Division four, the 
high school division, will provide two broad streams the academic and the vocational, with many opportunities 
for variations of course content and for student transfer within and between these streams. 
 
Provisions for academic secondary education in the province are already fairly extensive, but in order to 
implement adequately the proposed program for division four, vocational education must be made as accessible 
as possible to all high school students within the limits of practisability imposed by the geography of the 
province. The system must be broad in concept, allowing for full participation of the school system, the needs of 
students and in additional meet the requirements of manpower training demanded by a modern nation. In order to 
offer a program of adequate scope and flexibility, these facilities must be large and well equipped. Obviously this 
is only possible where there is a large enrolment and a large supporting population for each school. 
 
It becomes clear, then, that the logical approach to provision of such facilities, is for school unit boards and urban 
boards to co-operate on a regional basis to provide for regional schools. Each of such schools would then be 
identified with the region in which it is built. Keeping in mind the geography of the province, and as I mentioned, 
Mr. Speaker, the need for the extensive population base for each school, a minimum possible number of regions 
are suggested, and they may be described in this way: The south west, the south east, Regina city and environs, 
the west central area, the east central area, Saskatoon city and environs, the north west, the north east, Prince 
Albert city and environs, Moose Jaw and environs. The government is anxious, therefore, that school authorities 
in these as yet loosely defined areas undertake consultations with a view of presenting submissions for regional 
vocational schools. 
 
It is envisaged that all capital costs of regional vocational schools, including equipment but exclusive of property, 
will be borne by provincial and federal funds under the recently amended Federal-Provincial Vocational and 
Technical Agreement. The government will undertake the entire construction of these schools, including 
architectural planning but this will be carried forward in consultation with local authorities by bilateral 
agreements negotiated with local authorities. 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

555 

It is expected that operation will be financed by a combination of a new grant structure, fees based on usage and 
local taxation. The grant structures will have to take cognizance of consideration not met in the operation of more 
traditional school system. Steps are being taken to provide types of teachers education which will supply properly 
qualified certificated teachers for vocational schools. The flexibility of building, equipment, and staff required 
for this type of secondary vocational program holds promise for extensive adaptability of these facilities for 
various form of adult education such as academic up-grading, vocational up-grading, and a multitude of programs 
involving training in industry. A similar adaptability can be built into the bilateral agreements for the 
administration of these schools such that they will become, in fact as well as in name, regional vocational 
schools. 
 
Submissions from regions requesting the construction of vocational schools should be made to the Department of 
Education. The first preparatory step in developing a submission is the formation in the region, a vocational 
committee representative of the unit, urban and other boards of the region. Any board in the region may take the 
initiative in approaching other boards to form a vocational committee. The functions of the vocational committee 
are; first, to obtain agreement from the boards in the regional that a submission be made requesting a vocational 
school for the region. Second, to assure that the boards represent an area sufficient to ensure a total grade X, XI, 
XII, enrolment in the area, we are suggesting that we ought to have a basic population of 2,000 students. Thirdly, 
to produce reasonable evidence that the area to be served does include all of these units and districts which might 
reasonably be considered to belong to the region. Fourthly, to recommend a location of the school and insure a 
suitable site for the school. Fifth, to set as the interim liaison body between the boards of the region and the 
department during the planning and construction of the school. 
 
Submissions from vocational committees will be reviewed as they are received. It should be noted that the 
division four, vocational program being developed for regional schools will provide a broadly-based ―laboratory‖ 
type of vocational training rather than a narrowly-based, specific trade skills type of training. Programs for 
students of all interests and aptitude levels will share extensive general education components. As a result, not 
only will there be maximum provisions for transfer during school years, but such a background will permit 
maximum range of choice of entry into specific pre-employment training or into industry which provides 
on-the-job training or provision for continuing education for employees. Such a broad background will also 
provide the best possibilities for re-training as jobs in industry are overtaken by automation or other causes of 
obsolescence. 
 
We believe, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan will greet this proposal with a good deal of enthusiasm. We believe 
that this budget, which is before this house, offers the type of opportunities and the financial base which is 
necessary if this type of a program is to be launched successfully. It has only become possible within the last two 
or three years, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan can contemplate such a program with confidence, and I suggest to 
you, that this type of program reflects the competency of this government, the competency of the programs that 
we have developed and I think Saskatchewan will endorse this heartily. 
 
I would like to linger a bit, Mr. Speaker, on the question of teacher training, because while buildings are 
important, and the equipment must be there, they are meaningless unless we can provide the level of teacher 
competency that such a system demands. It is interesting to review the course of teacher training, and education 
in the province of Saskatchewan. With the permission of the house, I think it would be an interesting thing to 
review that in 1905, with the formation of province, several normal schools for teacher training, established 
under the authority of the Council of the North-West Territories, were taken over by the Department of 
Education. In 1910, these normal schools were affiliated with the university. In 1927, we see the mergence of the 
College of Education, which has become a major college on the campus of the university. In 1946, we see the 
mergence of a four year Bachelor of Education program. In 1952, the first two years of the College of Education 
program were recognized as meeting the requirements of a standard certificate, and in 1963, we see the final step 
of this evolution, which is to merge these two systems together. 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
556 

This is to be done without sacrificing the responsibilities of public education that the minister in the department 
carries. The program is to be entered into by an agreement between the university and the Department of 
Education. The program is to be resolved by the board of teacher education and training. The university is to have 
its usual authority in terms of accreditation of classes for degrees and certification of teachers is to remain in the 
department. We think that the evolution of this program offers some very highly desirable features. We think that 
the type of situation we now find ourselves in, demands that we use every available resource at our disposal to 
give the best possible training that we are capable of giving to our teaching force. We believe that this is only 
possible if the training is done on the university can be brought there on the question. 
 
I have here before me some comparative statistics, pertinent to teacher education, which may be of interest. 
These range across the ten year period from 1953 to 1963. In 1953 there were 500 students enrolled in teacher 
colleges; in 1963, there were 1000. In 1953, there were 250 enrolled in the College of Education; in 1963, there 
were 1,250. You see a 100 per cent increase in the teachers college and a 400 per cent increase in the College of 
Education. 
 
In terms of teaching positions, we find that the total number of positions had increased from 8,250 in 1953, to 
9,750 in 1963. The major increase in the high school area, Mr. Speaker, because people are staying longer in 
schools. In 1953, there were about 1,000 teachers in the high schools in Saskatchewan. In 1963, there were 2,400, 
an increase of 140 per cent. Its even more interesting, Mr. Speaker, to see that the number of elementary teachers 
remains about constant. In 1953, 7,200 in the elementary schools, in 1963, 7,350. This, Mr. Speaker, in spite of 
the fact that the enrolment of elementary students had gone up from 121,000 to 170,000, or an increase of 40 per 
cent. 
 
You may well wonder how we could accommodate an increase of 40 per cent in enrolment and yet such a mild 
increase of the elementary teaching force. This is only possible, Mr. Speaker, because of the emergence of the 
school unit system. Once these schools were able to cluster around centres, once you’re able to have the type of 
facility that the school units can produce, once you could do these things, it became possible to reduce the total 
amount of teaching force, even though the total enrolment had gone up. I think, Mr. Speaker, that this itself is a 
very significant point and one that is not appreciably recognized by a great many people. The efficiency of the 
centralization of education has been particularly beneficial, not only to the students, not only to the teacher, but 
also to the taxpayer, because you have practically the same number of teachers, whose salaries are met by local 
taxation and grant, to teach a 40 per cent increase in enrolment. 
 
Now then, while this be so, and while we think that we are in reasonable phase with the development of the 
elementary program, I must admit that the development of the high school programs gives us a great deal of 
concern. And this is not because, Mr. Speaker, we lack the know-how, in Saskatchewan to develop such a 
program. The concern rises from forces outside of Saskatchewan, in the main. The forces I refer to are the 
development of new university and the rising enrolments within the university complexes and these rising 
enrolments will put pressure on the professorial staff. As I said last night, Mr. Speaker, we do not have facilities 
in Canada at this time, to turn out sufficient number of professorial staff to meet the needs and therefore, the 
universities will reach down and take skim off numbers of people in the high school system. We then, will have 
the rather heavy responsibility of stepping up training programs by which we can increase the total number of 
high school teachers without reducing the standard of competency. I think this will become possible as we move 
forward in our integrated training program. The house will be interested, perhaps, Mr. Speaker, in noticing that 
for the years 1964 and 1965, we do not anticipate any change in the first year program. Much of the work that has 
been done in the past, will continue during this year and there will be a strong emphasis of course, on the 
professional classes and at the end of the year and all may obtain an interim standard certificate. In 1965 and 
1966, we hope to move towards the first year of the new program by introducing an experimental class in English 
by the English Department, suited to the needs of the teachers. In the second year of the program, we hope to 
reduce the number of required classes and considerably increase the number of electives. This is thought 
necessary, because we have increasing emphasis being placed on the needs of individual students, and the only 
way we can meet the new emphasis of need, is to train teachers so that they have a greater training in counselling 
and guidance as well as the traditional training that is now being offered by the teachers. 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

557 

We think that we have to do this, if we are to successfully evolve the two streams in the high school system and 
to have maximum flexibility in that system. We must have this type of a system, Mr. Speaker, in the high school 
system, if we are able to fill these vocational schools that we have been talking about this afternoon. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, this budget allows the Department of Education, together with the educational community 
and these include the Saskatchewan Trustees and the ratepayers and the teachers themselves, to move forward 
with boldness, and yet with full realization of the responsibility to demands of a modern society; because the 
budget allows the department the type of finance that will support the efforts of the ratepayers and students and 
teachers, because this budget will allow the creation of a number of regional vocational schools that we must 
have if we are to provide our young people with the training they need, I, Mr. Speaker, heartily endorse this 
budget and will support the motion. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Hon. E. Kramer (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this budget debate, I 
wish first of all to congratulate the Provincial Treasurer on his presentation of this worthy document, and the 
sound efficient manner in which he has handled his department during the past two years. I want to add my good 
wishes and felicitations to those who have spoken in the debate thus far, and also my good wishes to those 
members who will be retiring. 
 
Speaking in this debate, Mr. Speaker, I intend to show how the good management of treasury results in good 
programs for people. I intend to show where all Saskatchewan people are benefiting from the programs that have 
been devised and how this has been made possible through wide use of government funds. I intend to show above 
all, that the tremendous programs for people that have been undertaken by my department, have not been 
undertaken simply at the whim of the minister or officials. They have been undertaken because the people of 
Saskatchewan indicated their needs and desire for these recreational programs, just as the people in the northern 
area have indicated they are ready to participate in housing and work programs for self-betterment. I will further 
show that the people of Saskatchewan are ambitious, imaginative and on-the-go and are not a dreary, depressed, 
complaining people constantly being pictured by the members opposite. Since they have built good road systems 
throughout the province and into the north and are enjoying better standards of living, better income and now 
have more security, they want the recreation facilities that will permit them to enjoy their own great outdoors 
both winter and summer. They are prepared to make their contributions as citizens, to pay for these continuing 
improvements. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are proud to have seen their province moving over onward and upward, out of the 
desert of Liberal mismanagement of the thirties, into an era of rebuilding in the late forties and throughout the 
fifties and they’re happy in the sixties to have reached that high green plateau of better living. They are ready to 
move forward to ever higher and greener pastures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I don not want to waste a great deal of time in replying to ridiculous statements, I feel it is 
necessary to correct some impressions that have been left in this house and over the air by the hon. Financial 
critic, (Mr. McDonald) the member for Moosomin. The hon. member had a great deal to say about the difficulties 
of people qualifying for the disability pension. I want to tell this house that disabled persons who cannot qualify 
under these harsh regulations, as they now stand, should know that this act was written by a Liberal government 
at Ottawa, remained on the statue books for five years of Conservative government and continue to remain there 
under this present Liberal government in Ottawa. 
 
If the hon. member from Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) his concern is genuine, I suggest that he make a trip down 
to see the federal Minister of Health and Welfare, Miss Judy LaMarsh, and I hope, yes, I hope, that Miss 
LaMarsh will give him more than the 15 minutes that were accorded the hon. Leader of the Opposition by Mr. 
Pearson. And while he is down there, Mr. Speaker, he might mention a few items to some of the Liberal party 
down there, such as $3.00 a bushel for domestic wheat, the scuttling of the pension plan, rail line abandonment, 
and he should not forget to ask the Liberals at Ottawa when they are going to get rid of their pet import, Mr. Hal 
Banks. 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
558 

Mr. Speaker, I know that we can’t expect too much from Liberal promises. We here on this side of the house 
have been pretty consistent over the years. We have presented four platforms over the years and these, every 
single plank has been carried out. But, Mr. Speaker, the attitude of the Liberals could probably be well pointed 
out and identified by the editorial in the Leader Post, June 24th, 1963, after a visit of Mr. Harry Hays, they were 
talking about some of the Liberal promises, and he said, and I quote; 
 

All this brings up the question as to how firmly does a pre-election promise commit a party? Is it the party’s 
bounden duty to honour a pledge after election of office? Reasonable persons will answer in the negative; only 
on election to office does a party come into possession of the full facts for assessing the situation. I, therefore, 
would be foolhardiness to expect a party to adhere to a promise made before it knew all the facts, if after 
learning them, it became convinced that the promise was ill-advised. 

 
Well I suppose, Mr. Speaker, if that was the attitude of the spokesman of the editorial section of the Leader Post, 
I imagine he also has been discussing this with the hon. Leader of the Opposition, and I think the people of 
Saskatchewan would be well-advised to look at Liberal promises, both at Ottawa and in Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Kramer: — We had some remarks from the hon. member from Moosomin, (Mr. McDonald) concerning the 
drug industry and the high costs that are imposed upon people. This was surprising, coming from a Thatcherite. I 
hope the people who are facing these high costs of drugs will remember each time they pay a 15 per cent 
surcharge on their doctor’s bill or the $5.00 post office fee to MSI or GMS, that they can thank the Thatcherites 
for these extra charges that are being imposed upon them. I do not blame the doctors too much . . . 
 

Mrs. Mary Batten (Humboldt): — On a point of Order, Mr. Speaker, if the hon. minister is going to report 
from his department, we don’t mind him reading his speech, but when he is reading nothing but an attack on the 
Liberals, surely he should stay within the rules of the house and at least make them up as he goes along instead of 
reading something somebody else prepared for him. 
 

Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, I am not reading my speech, and the hon. member from Humboldt, (Mrs. Batten) 
knows very well I am not. 
 
His remarks concerning the drug industry were surprising as I said, and they can certainly take credit for the extra 
charges that were made, and the bad political advice that the doctors received, certainly should not be blamed 
upon the medical college. The savings that could have been made, Mr. Speaker, under the original act could have 
gone a long way towards paying the average cost for a family in Saskatchewan. I have no doubt, Mr. Speaker, 
that the hon. member from Moosomin, (Mr. McDonald) would sincerely like to do something for the unfortunate 
people he mentions. If he does, he should seriously consider what his chances are under the leadership of the man 
who opposed raises in the old age pension, while a member at Ottawa, and at the same time propose tax cuts to 
millionaire corporations. At any . . . 
 

Mr. W.R. Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. At no time did I oppose 
increases in the old age pensions in Ottawa. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! 
 

Mrs. Batten: — I must . . . 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

559 

Mr. Kramer: — At any rate the hon. member will possibly . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — On a point of privilege . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — What is your point of privilege? 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — The minister has made a statement which I say flatly is not correct. Now I ask the minister 
either to prove it or withdraw. 
 

Mr. Kramer: — Well, all . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! The minister is trying to speak but I can’t hear what is going on with two 
people speaking at once. The hon. Leader of the Opposition is denying that he made that statement. Is the 
minister, . . . 
 

Mr. Kramer: — I’ll withdraw it from the record later . . . 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — At once! 
 

An Hon. Member: — Oh! oh! 
 

An Hon. Member: — Shut up. 
 

Mr. Kramer: — At any rate, as I said, Mr. Speaker, the hon. Leader of the Opposition also has a bad memory. 
The hon. member from Moosomin, (Mr. McDonald) will possibly get another opportunity to re-assess his health 
and resume the leadership of the party when the Liberal party once more goes out to seek another Moses after the 
election. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

An Hon. Member: — Have your fun boys; you won’t be there long. 
 

Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, I said that I was not going to spend much time on nonsensical arguments that have 
been put forth by the opposition and previous speakers. Certainly the hon. Minister of Co-operatives said enough 
last week to convince anyone that the member for Athabaska, (Mr. Guy) was desperately trying to make a case 
where none existed. 
 

Mrs. Batten: — Mr. Speaker, I must insist on a point of order, this isn’t a new member. This is an experienced 
member of the legislature who is reading his speech word for word . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I think that the hon. members will realize that it is against the rules to read speeches; this is 
correct, but I will say to both sides of the house that that rule has been broken more in this session, and members 
on both sides have been tolerant, and I have tolerated it because it has been done on both sides, regardless. 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
560 

Mr. Kramer: — I want to point out that the lack of facts in the speech by the hon. member for Athabaska, (Mr. 
Guy) was somewhat surprising. He made the flat statement, Mr. Speaker, that the Hon. Arthur Laing had to come 
to Regina to persuade me to proceed with northern roads. I never at any time, Sir, spoke to the Hon. Arthur Laing 
about northern roads when he was in Regina. On the contrary, it was myself and my department officials who 
went to Ottawa, and the records will show in attempt to secure agreements for the continuation of these northern 
roads, and no one would be quicker to back up my statement that the Hon. Arthur Laing, the Minister of Northern 
Affairs and National Resources. 
 
I want to say here that the relationship with his department has been excellent and I want to say, also, that the 
truth of the matter is the federal Liberal party doesn’t take this group across the way into their confidence; they 
know very well of their unco-operative attitude towards the betterment of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to state further, Mr. Speaker, at this time that we are pressing our case for the extension of the agreement, 
for further monies to be allocated to our roads-to-resources program. Thus far we have only received assurances 
that they will consider new agreements, when these monies that were allocated by a previous Conservative 
government have run out. Certainly it ill-becomes any Liberal or Thatcherite to talk about northern road 
development because prior to 1957, when my predecessor went down to Ottawa to talk about road development, 
the Liberal party turned a deaf ear and ridiculed the suggestion, and let it not be forgotten, Mr. Speaker, that it 
wasn’t until the Conservative government was elected that we ever got a single dollar for road development in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The hon. member for Athabaska, (Mr. Guy) also took the privilege, the questionable privilege, of taking a 
paragraph out of context in order to prove a point when he was talking about the trappers convention. I don’t 
know whether he did this deliberately or just can’t read, Mr. Speaker, but it adds up to the same thing. He 
misquoted the press statement. 
 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabaska): — He’s still reading his speech. 
 

Mr. Kramer: — You never took your eyes off your paper for one minute when you were speaking, Mr. Member 
from Athabaska. Not once. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Kramer: — Well, I quote from the press statement in the January 31st edition of the Prince Albert Herald; 
 

Less talk and more action was urged by the delegates who felt that more time should be spent on demonstrating 
trapping etc, than in listening to speeches. 

 
This is what the paper says but, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Athabaska (Mr. Guy) added the word 
―political‖ to his statement. This report has nothing to do with any government speech or any speech made by 
myself. It was a report on resolutions made at the Trappers Convention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is pretty cheap politics. I point out here, Mr. Speaker, that I hadn’t realized I had made such a 
good speech when the member spoke, he mentioned my giving credit to the northern MLAs, the member for 
Cumberland, (Mr. Berezowsky), the member for Meadow Lake, (Mr. Semchuk), the two northern members. 
Anyway I want to say this, that I’m glad he mentioned my giving credit to those two hon. members because they 
have done a tremendous job in their constituencies, not only their constituencies, Mr. Speaker, but they have also 
done a wonderful job in the constituency of the member for Athabaska (Mr. Guy), work that he should have been 
doing. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

561 

Mr. Kramer: — He has been drawing the pay and the two other northern members have been doing the work on 
behalf of the northern people. I have already spent more time on the statements made by this member than they 
deserve. However, in all fairness to our northern people, some of them may believe that they were factual simply 
because they were made in this house. I feel that these corrections must be made. I’ll make no reference certainly 
I’m not going to answer the ridiculous attacks that were made on civil servants. This kind of attack can only leave 
a dirty taste in the mouths of the people that know our northern civil servants and the Department of Natural 
Resources staff throughout the province. These people, Mr. Speaker, need no defense, and certainly no defense in 
view of the statements made by the hon. member from Athabaska, (Mr. Guy). 
 
I’m not concerned, Mr. Speaker, at what was said by the hon. member for Athabaska as I am about the continual 
applause that was given him on the other side of the house, so aptly pointed out by the Minister of Co-operatives. 
It is a tragic thing, that this kind of statement can be made and applauded by these people who would attempt to 
be the champions of northern people. We face many problems in the northern areas. The settled communities of 
Saskatchewan’s far north are native settlements which present a challenge to the government and the public, 
because of the unique situation that exists there. May I suggest that the crocodile tears that have been shed on the 
other side about the northern native are startling to say the least. Their party stood idly by until 1944 and at 
Ottawa until 1957, and did little or nothing to ease the lot of the northern natives. Many years ago when this 
government took office, the natives in the north were dying almost as fast as they were being born. There was no 
population increase to worry about then. The attitude of the Liberal party of that day was one of callous disregard 
of human needs. The federal Liberal party which had the responsibility for the Department of Indian Affairs, was 
very little better until the government changed in 1957. 
 
Going back to the provincial situation in 1944, the first thoughts of this government were to bring education and 
better health services to the northern natives. This was done. Secondly, we set out to improve the resource face, 
bringing in conservation measures for fur and fish, as well as marketing agencies that the native would get better 
returns for his labours. Thirdly, roads have been built into the north, and these again provided for better 
community development, to say nothing of the northern communications and the air services which now bring 
almost daily contact to northern settlements with the outside world. 
 
While this foundation was being, laid, the native became healthier and better fed. The population explosion with 
one of the highest birth rates in the world came about. This has created the need today, Sir, with a new general 
knocking at the door looking for jobs, for homes and for ways to provide for new families that they will be 
raising in years to come. 
 
I want to say more, Mr. Speaker, that the people of the north do not want special privileges. They don’t want 
special attention. All they want are equal opportunities and one of the first problems, Mr. Speaker, which is 
apparent in the north, is the lack of adequate housing for the majority of the metis population. The overcrowded 
housing conditions which now exist have an adverse effect on the general health of the population; they are 
detrimental to the study habits of the school children; and they generally help to keep the morale of the people at 
a low level. Coupled with this problem is the lack of credit facilities in most northern communities whereby the 
residents can improve their dwellings. During this session, legislation will introduced to provide for development 
funds which will be used for the following purposes; (a) to operate saw mills in the north and provide lumber at 
reasonable prices for house construction and other uses; (b) to give loans for construction of new homes or repair 
of old; (c) to provide credit for the development of local industry or to allow individuals to purchase better 
equipment for their work. Funds will be provided in the budget for the administration of the program, to build 
emergency house for indigents and provide outright grants for perspective home owners. 
 
Every thing that the Department of Natural Resources, through its northern affairs branch, has done throughout 
the past years has been designed to prepare the people in the northern settlements for self-government. When the 
fur conservation areas were set up in 1946, it was difficult in many areas to find people who could give 
leadership. Gradually over the years this leadership has developed. Gradually the northern people are learning to 
accept responsibility in their communities. Certainly their behaviour through the representatives they send 
annually to the Trappers Convention prove that these people are consistently moving towards the time when they 
can compete with Saskatchewan communities in staffing and electing their own local governments. 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
562 

The fact that this kind of leadership cannot be developed overnight has certainly been proven when you see what 
happened to some of the new states in Africa, where the government has been turned over to the people, who 
were ill-prepared to provide the necessary leadership. Wise planning and guidance including training in 
leadership from our northern affairs administration, has provided people in several communities with incentives 
and abilities to move forward to accept more responsibility in their own local government. The local ratepayers 
advisory councils have played no small part in preparing these people to assume greater administrative 
responsibilities. 
 
In 1964-1965 steps will be taken to give the local residents of northern communities more responsibility for 
administering their own affairs. In four communities, Buffalo Narrows, Ile a la Crosse, Sandy Bay and 
Cumberland House, the ratepayers association will become community councils, and will be given authority to 
plan and implement local improvements in their own communities. 
 
The role of the conservation officer and the present ratepayers association will thus be interchanged. The 
conservation officer will become an adviser to the community council. Since the tax base in these communities is 
not sufficient to provide for all municipal requirements we propose to make financial aid available on the 
following basis; for each $1.00 collected in taxes the government will provide a matching grant of $1.00 and for 
each person in the community we will grant $3.00. 
 
As these community councils learn by doing, they will gradually be able to provide for their own public works 
needs, fire fighting services. Roads and streets will be provided under their leadership, with continuing grants on 
the basis of need from the provincial government. 
 
There are other settlements in northern Saskatchewan which have not yet advanced to the stage where they have 
formed ratepayers associations. We will continue to provide the necessary funds in these communities for streets, 
fire halls, nuisance grounds, playgrounds, and other community services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to interrupt my speech for a moment to quote from April 24th, 1952, Hansard, and I’ll 
quote part of a speech by Mr. Thatcher: 
 

The point I am trying to make there that there are thousands of Canadians receiving this old age pension, who 
obviously do not need it, the same might be said for the baby bonuses. The taxpayers are going to spend 
$332,000,000 this year on family allowances. 

 
 I say at once that most of this money will be spent, but I cannot help wondering how badly my good friends, 
etc. etc. 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has picked a part of that out of context. I opposed old age pensions 
being paid to people with $6,000 . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! You can’t enter into the debate when he is reading back from the records 
that way. 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is not being honest, nor is his colleague . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! The minister was purporting to read from Hansard-the house records from 
the House of Commons. Now that is proper rules with in the debate . . . 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

563 

Mr. Thatcher: — He is trying to intimate that I opposed old age pensions at Ottawa. I opposed . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! 
 

Mr. Kramer: — I know it hurts the hon. Leader of the Opposition. In order to provide employment for able 
bodied persons who might otherwise be unemployed, a program of forest improvement work will be undertaken. 
This is the removal of dead, disabled and stunted trees to improve potential timber stands. Not only will it 
provide much needed employment, but it will also provide training in woods operations which will allow these 
people to compete more favourably for existing jobs in other areas. 
 
We will be providing $100,000 to get these work programs started. The coming year provisions will also be made 
for a job placement officer who will endeavor to widen the scope of employment opportunities for northern 
people. He will not only be concerned with placing graduates of the vocational training courses in Saskatchewan, 
in paying jobs, but will try to find employment for other Metis people from the northern settlements. He will be 
working closely with the National Employment Office and our own Public Service Commission. He will work 
closely with prospective employers to convince them that northerners are and do make good employees if given a 
change. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Kramer: — Our northern roads program is certainly another project that will create considerable amounts of 
work for northern people. This first part is the shared road program, the roads I mentioned earlier that are 
sharable, 50-50 with the federal government, Department of Northern Affairs and National Resources. The 
Reindeer Lake road will be undertaken this year by the Department of Highways and they will be spending 
$500,000 on this road this year. Cumberland House road and Island Falls road, and the completion of the Hanson 
Lake road will be carried out. We will be spending some $401,000 in these areas. Dore Lake road, completion of 
reconstruction there, will cost us $60,000. La Loche road, continued construction, another $50,000. This, 
incidentally, now takes you 191 miles from Green Lake, Mr. Speaker. This is, I think a feat in itself, and 
incidentally, I would like to mention at this time that a cavalcade from North Battleford and Meadow Lake will 
be going up to not only La Loche, but they will be going onto the winter access road where my department has 
set up a saw mill, right to the banks of the Clear Water River. This will possibly be the first time a bus has ever 
been on the banks of the far north Clear Water River. 
 
Smaller projects, access off the Hanson Lake road and No. 2 highway will be $30,000; Woody River and Candle 
Lake road, starting on those, $51,000; the total of all of these, including air field construction and improvements, 
$659,000. 
 
Re-organization of the Department of Natural Resources will also be undertaken this year. It will be remembered, 
a great deal was said last year about the Glassco Commission, which reported about one year ago. This was a 
once in a lifetime effort at looking at its own efficiency by the federal government. The Saskatchewan 
government, through the administration management service of the budget bureau, continues and carries on a 
review of government re-organization at all time. 
 
During 1953, at our request, such a review was made of my department. This was made necessary by the 
changing program emphasis over the past several years wherein recreation has taken a major place. The amount 
of this change is evident in that the budget for recreation in 1961, 1960-1961 was $884,000 as compared to 
$2,500,000 for the year 1964-65. 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
564 

The main changes recommended will be implemented as of April 1st, 1964. This divides our program into three 
broad groups, namely, resource programs, recreation programs, and northern programs. Each group will report to 
the deputy minister through a director, fully responsible for the administration of that group. In this manner we 
anticipate a more efficient operation with an even better service to the public as a major result. In the parks and 
recreation field particularly, the operation will be more decentralized and the local administrators will be given a 
great deal more responsibility. 
 
Growing concern over personal and property damage due to increased hunting pressure has necessitated the 
establishment of hunter safety training program. To date, 5,459 young people have received training in gun safety 
and have received their diplomas; 1,425 of them this year. We hope to substantially increase that number in 1964 
and 1965. This is an extremely important program because no effort must be spared to reduce the number of 
unfortunate accidents which occur annually– a total of 70 in 1962, of which 11 were fatal, plus 57 to date of 
which 10 were fatal. 
 
I wish at this time to give credit to the Saskatchewan Fish and Game League, the South Saskatchewan Wild Life 
Association, 4H Clubs and other volunteer organizations, as well as the volunteer instructors who gave so much 
of their time and effort to make this program a success. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Kramer: — Furthermore, if hunters throughout Saskatchewan are going to continue to use the farmers’ and 
ranchers’ lands, a great deal of education must be undertaken among hunters to improve their public relations 
with farmers, so that the posting of land will not continue to increase, as it has in the past two years. Hunters 
especially those from city areas, should understand that the farmer is proud and somewhat jealous of his own 
property, but he is also a friendly man, and the only hunter he fears is the hunter he doesn’t know, in other words, 
the faceless hunter. Hunters must learn to identify themselves before going on to the land wherever possible. This 
one act alone, will greatly improve hunter-farmer relations throughout the province. 
 
We’re also undertaking a level survey this year. This will be a new program carried out in conjunction with the 
federal government. Again, this new program is necessary as one of the prices of progress. Because of the 
municipal sewer and water programs undertaken by our Department of Municipal Affairs, in an effort to 
modernize towns, villages, and hamlets, the need has arisen for this program. Accurate level surveys will be 
carried out in certain areas of the province and base level monuments will be erected in towns, villages, hamlets 
and in selected rural areas. These monuments will be of great deal value to municipalities, corporations and 
private citizens when engineering surveys are required. This program will employ as many students as possible 
from the Moose Jaw Technical School, and this will be a very useful program in the training of these young 
survey technicians. 
 
Recreation is one of our major operations and provincial parks receive the top priority in this area. Public 
response to development of these parks has been beyond expectation, with traffic counts averaging more than 30 
per cent above previous years. In order to accommodate these kinds of pressures, the following projects will be 
undertaken in 1964 and 1965. 
 
Moose Mountain Park continues to be one of Saskatchewan’s most popular parks. Some 360,000 people visited 
Kenosee last year, and this was 36 per cent increase over 1962. We’ll be spending $44,000 on that park this year, 
the hon. member for Cannington, (Mr. McCarthy) will be happy to know. Main projects will be the continual 
improvements to the core area, through irrigation and landscaping and road and park improvements at Fish 
Creek. Running water will be installed at the Golf Club House in the main office; electrical and other renovations 
at the chalet. 
 
One hundred and twenty-two thousand dollars will be spent at Duck Mountain Park serving the east central 
section of Saskatchewan. This continues to attract more people also each year. The main project at this park will 
be additional work on the golf course which will see nine holes in operation and a good deal of work done on the 
second nine, and construction of a bath-change house for use at the main beach. 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

565 

This park already has a large dining room and good rental accommodations. Added facilities are needed to 
complete those already in existence. 
 
Expenditures of Cypress Hills Park are at a minimum at this time, because of plans to completely redevelop the 
core area. This park represents one of the unique areas in Saskatchewan, and deserves more intensive 
development than has been done to date. We will be spending $40,500 this year, but I can predict that we can 
expect great things from the Cypress Hills Park in the future. This park in case the people that are listening are 
not aware, is as I said, unique, being down in the south western part of the province, where you would hardly 
expect to find a beautiful stand of pine and spruce. As you move up out of the low lands of the sage brush and the 
antelope, you think you’re in a very arid region; all of a sudden you find yourself in this lovely park. 
 
Development in Greenwater Park is progressing very favourably, this year. Attention will be directed to 
improving and enlarging parking facilities. 
 
Pike Lake of course, serves the growing metropolis of Saskatoon, and its increasing popularity is borne out by the 
fact that visitor attendance in 1963 was 35 per cent above 1962. The main project of this park, will be the 
construction of a new camp ground. Other work will be carried out to improve the main park area and to begin 
development on the east side of the lake. Twenty-five thousand dollars is expected to be spent there; with only 
$6,000 at Good Spirit Park. The main project at this park will be the construction of extension to the camp site 
and construction of a new entrance sign. Work will be done on the streets in the sub-division and a baseball 
diamond will also be constructed. 
 
We’ll be spending $20,000 at Katepwa. Installation of the sanitary facilities will be completed by the addition of 
a sewage disposal system and further improvements will be made to the water system. 
 
One hundred and forty-six thousand dollars will be spent at Buffalo Pound Park. This lovely park, located in the 
beautiful Qu’Appelle Valley, serving the people of Moose Jaw and Regina, has had fairly minimum development 
up to the current year, despite of the fact that four times as many people used it in 1963 as did the previous year. 
Consequently additional projects for 1964-65 are a new toilet building, a bath-change house, which will include 
space for rental to a concessionaire, expansion of the camp and picnic grounds, installation of sewage disposal 
systems for all buildings and a residence for the maintenance foreman. 
 
The winter sports area which was developed this fall and winter, now known as White Track has proven to be 
extremely popular, as indicated by the hundreds of people who are already patronizing this new facility. Further 
expenditures will be made on this facility in 1964-65. Credit must be given here, to the Moose Jaw Ski Club, for 
their effort in pioneering this venture. They proved that there was enough public interest and public demand to 
warrant the government expenditure on these winter sports facilities, and, Mr. Speaker, I am sorry that the 
member opposite, the member for Saltcoats, (Mr. Snedker) raised objections to this park. We feel that if we are 
going to get full use of our park facilities, the sooner we move into a year-round operation, wherever possible the 
better return we’re going to get on our park facilities. Certainly, it makes sense, Mr. Speaker, that we should be 
moving in this direction rather than expecting our young people to sit at home, in crowded curling rinks which is 
the only winter sport we have, if we don’t move into new fields and new areas. 
 
It’s a pleasure for me to announce that further work will be done in the Battlefords Provincial Park and I am sure 
that the hon. member for Redberry, (Mr. Michayluk) will also applaud wholeheartedly, as this park lies 
completely in his constituency. This beautiful new recreation centre has become the pride of northwest and wet 
central Saskatchewan. An ever-increasing number of holidayers are coming each year to enjoy the new facilities 
being provided for their pleasure, even though this park is still in its pioneer stages. Much remains to be done, but 
I am sure that the development that has been done thus far, is beyond the wildest dreams of its early exponents. 
The main project in this park will be to complete the landscaping around the administration building, the 
bath-change houses and concession building constructed during the current year and to construct a residence for 
the maintenance foreman. 
 
Smaller projects there, will include a modern toilet for the picnic area, a new entrance sign and a lookout point, 
complete with access road. 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
566 

Moving further north to the Meadow Lake Park, this beautiful park located north of Meadow Lake, contains 
many lovely natural lakes and the Waterhen River. It is located completely within the northern provincial forest, 
where nature has been most generous with her gifts. It requires only expenditures for operating facilities. The 
administrative centre will be expanded in 1964-65, new camp grounds will be constructed and other 
improvements will be made to the general area. During the year, our park planners will be examining both the 
Battlefords and the Meadow Lake Park, with a view to developing plans for golf courses and other recreational 
pursuits. Plans are also being made for official openings of these new facilities, early in June. 
 
One hundred and fifty-seven thousand dollars will be spent on Echo Valley Park. As the name suggests, it is 
located in the Qu’Appelle Valley, between the Echo and Pasqua Lake. Adjacent to the heavily populated urban 
area of Regina, this park is extremely heavily used, especially by day travellers. The park has been under gradual 
development for some time in order to get new grass and trees established, and the development of these other 
new facilities now must be accelerated. Major project in 1964-65, will be the construction of a major sewage 
system based on a sewage lagoon. Because of the heavy use of this park, it has been determined that this is the 
most economical method of sewage disposal. Other major projects include the domestic water system, a 
bath-change house, with space for a snack bar concession, improvements to camp grounds and picnic areas and 
the construction of a park information centre. Engineering studies will be undertaken to determine the cost of 
developing a new golf course at this park. 
 
A total capital expenditure is planned for provincial parks in 1964-65 of $677,390. 
 
Another important development in Saskatchewan and unique again to Saskatchewan— we’re the only province in 
Canada that has developed this plan— has been our regional parks program. This was begun in the year 1961— 
this program of developing recreational areas in partnership with the municipality and has grown from four 
regional parks to 30, in the three years. One hundred and fifty-one rural and urban municipalities are participating 
under the act, which authorizes the government to provide 60 per cent of the capital cost of the program. By 
March 31st, 1964, they will have received grants totalling $187,000. I would like at this time, Mr. Speaker, to 
compliment the regional park organization, now two years old, whose members have been extremely helpful in 
suggesting ways and means of improving this popular program. Many of the amendments to the act passed by this 
house last week, were made on the suggestion of that association. Provision is made for extending the contracts 
beyond the original five year period, and for reviewing and where necessary increasing the capital estimate of the 
regional park authority. 
 
We expect at least eight new regional park authorities will be formed in the year ahead. Provision is made for 
assistance to the supervisor of the regional parks this year, to give better service to the authorities. You will be 
asked to approve $127,400.00 in grants for regional parks in 1964-65, which is an increase of $47,400 over the 
last year. 
 
Our trans-Canada sites are built and paid for on a dollar for dollar basis with the government at Ottawa. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to refer to these sites as the welcome mat to our visitors that come from other parts of 
Canada and the United States and other parts of the world. 
 
Tremendous use is being made of the Besant and McLean sites. Approximately 36,000 cars and 145,000 people 
visited the Besant and McLean camp sites on the Trans-Canada highway in 1963. In 1964-65, two additional sites 
at Moosomin and Maple Creek will be substantially completed by July 1st. Then four major camp sites will be in 
full operation. These facilities have evoked much favorable comment from travellers all across North America. 
Our operative sites have hosted tourists from every province in Canada and nearly every state in the U.S.A. 
including Alaska. One hundred and sixty-five thousand dollars will be spent to finish these sites or to bring these 
sites into operation this year, as well as on improvements to some of the existing ones. Besides this and this is not 
a sharable program, it is a Saskatchewan program $140,000 is provided for highway camps and picnic sites. 
Good progress is being made to provide road side picnic sites at 50 mile intervals on most of our most travelled 
highways. Plans call for development of about 25 camp sites along the major southern highways this year, and in 
addition, a camp site will be established on the boundary dam reservoir and further work will be done on the 
camp sites in the South Saskatchewan Dam area. 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

567 

Historic sites will be stepped up in order to mark and recognize Canada’s centennial year. Work will begin to 
adequately mark the site of the North-West Territory, legislature and the first site of the provincial legislative 
building on Dewdney Avenue in Regina. To adequately develop this program, a supervisor of historic sites will 
be appointed, and $50,000 is allocated for this program. 
 
Development of camp sites, beaches, boat launching sites will continue through the northern section of the 
province, with particular attention to areas being opened by roads built under the roads-to-resources program. 
Fifty-six thousand dollars is ear-marked for that program. Also $82,000 is provided for acquisition of land for the 
establishment of these new provincial parks on the new lake formed by the South Saskatchewan Dam, and this 
will be completed this year. A team of park planners will continue the development of plans for the design and 
layout of these parks. Tree planting begun two years ago, will be accelerated with 500,000 trees being set out this 
year. 
 
Our fisheries branch has made good progress this year, taking lake inventories and determining a safe quota of 
fish that may be produced each year. Many lakes and ponds have been examined. Where conditions proved 
favourable, fish have been stocked from supplies raised in our hatchery at Fort Qu’Appelle. 
 
In 1944, the Saskatchewan government embarked on a program of building fish filleting plants to serve the 
northern communities and utilize a product which was barred at that time, from sale to the American markets by 
the U.S. Food and Drug Authorities. Over the years, plants costing more than a half million dollars, Mr. Speaker, 
were built at Pine House, La Ronge, Wollaston, Deschambault, Pelican Narrows, Reindeer and Beaver Lake. I 
would point out, that these plants served Treaty Indians and other fishermen without discrimination. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Kramer: — Although the federal government was invited on many occasions and this was quite a while 
ago, way back in the forties, it is significant that only on one project did they agree to share, namely the 
rebuilding of the Pelican Narrows Plant, to which they contributed the sum of $30,000 as compared to the 
$31,156 by the province and $10,000 by the co-ops. We appreciate this assistance obtained in 1961, from a 
Conservative government, but would point out that the 44 licensed fishermen at Pelican Narrows, 40 are Treaty 
Indians. I think we certainly did our share and went the second and the third mile. 
 
In 1948, Mr. Speaker, this government introduced the floor price plan, for northern fish, designated to guarantee 
to the producers a return of at least his production costs; again the only province in Western Canada that is doing 
this. To date, Mr. Speaker, this government has paid the sum of $329,000 to fishermen under this plan. Again, 
this has benefitted all fishermen on the lakes in question, including many Treaty Indians, but though they have 
been invited, the federal government has declined to participate in this plan. 
 
Moving to forestry, Saskatchewan was one of the first provinces to complete its forest inventory under the 
federal-provincial agreement. Current program calls for the maintenance of the inventory at the rate of ten per 
cent per year, and the development of management plans to provide for sustained yield cropping in our 
commercial areas. 
 
Probably the most important job in this field is the protection of the forest from fire. I’m proud to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that Saskatchewan has one of the best, if not the best, fire protection organizations in Canada today. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Kramer: — Always in the forefront of the latest technical development, we were the first to introduce the 
now world famous smoke jumpers. I say world famous, because not a year goes by when we do not receive 
applications from all parts of the world, to join this smoke-jumping unit. Helicopters have proven their worth in 
detection and suppression and their use will be 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
568 

continued. Pumper tractor units developed by our own construction branch have served excellently, while 
pumper-trailer units are most useful for provincial parks and smaller fires that are accessible by roads. Water 
bombing has been tested in many areas and we are satisfied from our own experience that much timber can be 
saved by this method. By providing larger amounts of water that can be dumped on fires with better equipment, 
we can thus retire their advance and allow the ground crews to mop them up. We propose, Mr. Speaker, to obtain 
the services of Canso aircraft to use during the coming season as an addition to our suppression equipment. 
 
I might suggest to the hon. member for Athabaska, (Mr. Guy) that when we get that Canso operating, he had 
better be kind of careful when he starts burning trash on his back lawn. He’s the only MLA I know, who has had 
actual experience with a water bomber, but the best equipment is of little value with men who are not efficient in 
its operation. For years, Mr. Speaker, my department has conducted a training program for fire fighters. Since 
1956, we have trained over 700 fire fighters to carry out specific duties in fire suppression. In the last year, some 
225 men were trained, many of these, and some of the very best, are the native boys of Northern Saskatchewan. I 
may say too, Mr. Speaker, that they receive wages during their training period and while on fires. I just 
mentioned this in case anyone might be wondering, Mr. Speaker. Our wages to fire fighters are $5.50 plus board 
or $7.70 if they board themselves. This compares almost exactly with Alberta and the National Park Service, and 
higher than Manitoba with a minimum of $3.50 to $5.00 plus board and an extra dollar for good men. In Nova 
Scotia, the rate is $.25 an hour and Newfoundland, they rely on the woods companies to fight the fires 
themselves. Nothing is paid by the Newfoundland government. 
 

Mr. Guy: — This isn’t true. 
 

Mr. Kramer: — The hon. member doesn’t seem know. This information comes directly from the records of 
Newfoundland, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have given what I consider to be the highlights of our budget of this coming year. There are many routine 
programs that I would like to discuss. However, many of them are outlined in our annual report, and no doubt 
will be discussed during our estimates. 
 
A total of slightly over $7,000,000 will be required for the Department of Natural Resources this year. This will 
represent the investment that Saskatchewan people will make in the care and management of their resources as 
well as the recreation programs that are under the jurisdiction of my department. 
 
I said that I would show that the resources budget provided many good programs for our people. I suggested that 
these programs were brought about as a result of a demand by the Saskatchewan people for better facilities. The 
adventurous blood of our pioneers still flows strongly in Saskatchewan individuals and communities are proving 
this every day, as they continue to invest their money in facilities for better living. Everywhere you look, you can 
see and you can feel and you are inspired by a sense of growth and movement from the school rinks or church, in 
the small community to the university campus here in Regina. Saskatchewan people insist on continually better 
facilities for themselves, their families, their friends and neighbours. There is a spirit of optimism abroad, that 
cannot be denied. 
 
The old mortgages have been paid and the insurance premiums are up to date. The only direction for 
Saskatchewan henceforth, is on and up. We have reached new heights in our economic well-being, with the result 
that the people of Saskatchewan can now enjoy the fruits of their labour. It is not by accident that we have 
reached these heights, Sir. The leadership that our party has had deserves some credit for the goals that have been 
reached by the Saskatchewan people. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, good leadership is required for the organization and 
translation of the demands and desires of our people. We have been fortunate throughout the years, in the 
leadership that has been given to our party. 
 
We are fortunate today, in having the highest standard of leadership that has been provided by our present 
Premier. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

569 

Mr. Kramer: — During his two years in this office, he has made a place for himself not only in the eyes of 
Saskatchewan people, but throughout Canada. This is no accident, Sir, Saskatchewan people can note with pride 
that in this Saskatchewan born son, we find the courage, strength, and high sense of purpose that was 
characteristic of our pioneers. Our Premier has lived and knows the hardship of the early pioneers. He lived and 
struggled through the troubled thirties and as a young man in 1944, took over the guidance of one of the major 
departments in this provincial government. He has grown and matured in government administration and now in 
his sturdy prime, he is filling the highest post of our province. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, it is no accident that we have been favoured with such excellent leadership. This has been as 
natural as the planting of the wheat in the spring, followed by the green shoots growing and ripening into mature 
prairie wheat—Saskatchewan number one. Mr. Speaker, I suggest that with his record and his proven ability, he 
must continue to be number one in Saskatchewan. No man I know is better equipped for that task. 
 
I will support the budget. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak in the budget debate, I was mystified a bit 
about who this number one man was, I though for a moment it must have been the leader of this side of the house. 
I couldn’t quite recognize the Premier from the statements of the minister who has just taken his seat. In his 
reference to the remarks that have been made by the leader of the Liberal party in this province, in the past, I 
would like to clear up, one of the inferences that he made during his address with regard to the Leader of the 
Opposition. During his address in the House of Commons, Mr. Thatcher indicated to the House that his objection 
was the fact that people on high income would be receiving pensions and he felt that this money could better be 
used if it were divided among those who really required a pension, over $6,000 then, Mr. Speaker, there would be 
more money made available for those who really required it. Mr. Speaker, in relationship to arguments of that 
type, I would just like to indicate that the Minister of Social Welfare some years ago, voted against the family 
allowance legislation in the House of Commons, as well . . . 
 

Hon. A.M. Nicholson (Minister of Social Welfare): — On a point of privilege . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! 
 

Mr. Nicholson: — The hon. member has made a statement which he should know is untrue. Again I will get the 
Hansard from the Library, but in the meantime, I must ask him to withdraw the charge, that the Minister of Social 
Welfare voted against the family allowance when I was a member for MacKenzie, I voted for the family 
allowance, I spoke for them. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! 
 

Mr. Gardiner: — Mr. Speaker, I think when he gets the records, he will find that in the throne speech debate . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! 
 

Mr. Nicholson: — The hon. member for Melville, (Mr. Gardiner) has already said that the Minister of Social 
Welfare voted against family allowances when he was a member of the House of Commons. This statement is 
untrue and must be withdrawn. 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
570 

Mr. Gardiner: — I will withdraw it until I complete the statement. 
 
The statement is withdrawn for the moment, but I would remind the Minister of Social Welfare, that when sitting 
in the House of Commons when the throne speech was presented, which carried as the main item in that throne 
speech, the fact that legislation would be introduced by the government of the day to provide family allowances 
to the people of Canada, the Minister of Social Welfare stood up in the throne speech and opposed the throne 
speech. If the motion had been lost, the government would have been defeated and there would have been no 
family allowance legislation brought down that year. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when then Minister of Social Welfare desires to throw rocks at the Leader of the Opposition, he 
better look to his windows first. I would remind him that in 1949, his constituency saw that he was defeated for 
that very fact and he remembers that only too well. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Gardiner: — I would also like to congratulate the Minister of Natural Resources for his very fine effort at 
reading the document, I don’t know whether he had seen it before or not. I don’t mind, Mr. Speaker, if members 
get up in this house and read speeches that they have written themselves, but I have heard the minister speak 
before, when he was a private member and he could do a much better job without the notes that were given to 
him by the staff of the Department of Natural Resources. I would have preferred had he stood up with those 
bright, sparkling eyes of his and pointed his finger at the opposition and shook his finger so that we would 
probably think we had back the real member for the Battlefords, today he lost all his auctioneering fervor, all his 
salesmanship, and here he was reading a dull list of factual information which he knew nothing about, because 
when the minister states that Echo Valley is near Regina, and he mentions that as the main centre that it is close 
to, he forgets that the town of Fort Qu’Appelle is much closer to the Echo Valley Park. I think my friend has the 
same idea as many of his colleagues on the other side of the house, that there are only two places in 
Saskatchewan, one of them, the city of Regina and the other, the city of Saskatoon, and if you are within a 100 
miles of either point, you must belong to those two cities. 
 
I would remind the minister that when he is speaking about providing provincial park facilities for the people of 
this province, there are many farmers there are many residents of our smaller urban communities that desire to 
have the benefits of park facilities as well as the people of Regina and the people of Saskatoon. 
 
I would remind the Minister of Natural Resources that for many years parks such as Katepwa, parks that range 
along the Qu’Appelle Valley, were kept up and maintained by the people of the area surrounding those particular 
resorts and for many years without any assistance from your government, and I’m going to say this, that in many 
ways I enjoyed the life of that park at that time, much more than I think my children enjoy them going the 
provincial parks today. 
 
At that time the kids would get a tent and they could go down and there were a few trees still remaining and you 
could park your tent and you could have a heck of a good time. Today, you are lucky if the people that are in the 
surrounding area can even get near the beach site, and can even enjoy the privilege of using the resorts that they 
have become accustomed to over the years, and in many cases the kids are chased off the beach areas of the parks 
because conditions that exist in them at the present time are not favorable. It is very fine to build up fine parks for 
those who can come from the United States and from the cities to enjoy them with large cottages, with fine boats, 
but how about the little people, how about the people on the farms that can’t afford cottages? How about the 
people in the smaller centres that can’t afford cottages and want to have the right to use the facilities of this type 
as well as the people in the cities and the people that come from other provinces of Canada? How about giving a 
little thought to the little man? This is something that this present government has forgotten about entirely, they 
have forgotten about the people that originally elected them and the people that are going to defeat them in the 
election, as soon as it is called. 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

571 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

An Hon. Member: — How about your cottage down at B-Say-Tah there? 
 

Mr. Gardiner: — Mr. Speaker, in opening my remarks on the budget debate, I have just a few words I would 
like to say with regard to problems effecting the people in my own constituency. 
 
I have listened with interest to various members on the government side of the house, particularly the ministers, 
as they have read out to us reports of their departments and what they intend to do in the present year. I have kept 
both ears opened to see if there is some little thing in it for the constituency of Melville, but I was unable to find 
it until today, the hon. Minister of Natural Resources said he was going to spend some money in the Katepwa 
Provincial Park. For that I would like to express my appreciation. 
 
However, the only other department that made any reference to my constituency was the Minister of Highways. I 
want to congratulate him for placing in his budget for the third time in the last eight years, the construction of a 
piece of highway in the Melville constituency, placing it in the budget. What is the history of this particular 
stretch of road, Mr. Speaker? In 1953, the candidate for the CCF party at that time – they have now changed their 
name, they have become the CCF section of the NDP, whatever that means, at that time he was running as the 
CCF candidate, he promised the people of that constituency that No. 22 highway wasn’t just to be partly rebuilt, 
but was to be completely rebuilt. In 1956 in the budget that was handed down by the previous minister, the 
stretch of road from Killaley to Neudorf was contained in the budget; the next year they claimed that the reasons 
they didn’t build it was because they couldn’t get anybody to tender on the job. Then we come down to 1963, just 
last year and again it was contained in the minister’s report to the house, in the budget debate, that that stretch of 
road would be rebuilt in the 1963 program. You know it is strange that after being twice, that again we find that 
this is the only road work that is to be done in the Melville constituency. The excuse last year was the contractor 
was so busy he didn’t have time to complete that particular job in the 1963 program so again we have it put off 
until 1964, but I can say this, Mr. Speaker, to the people of that particular are of my constituency, that I can give 
them assurance in this budget debate that that piece of road will be constructed in 1964 because this government 
will be out of office and we will see to it that the job is completed. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Gardiner: — I also regret, Mr. Speaker, that the promises that were made by the candidate of the party 
across the way in both 1952 and 1956, were not carried out, and that the balance of the road program in that 
constituency has never been completed. I regret that in the program for the coming year that the minister had 
nothing to say with regard to No. 47 highway, which is one of the key links to the highway system in that part of 
the province, which provides service between No. 1 highway and the trans-Canada through two centres to the 
northern part of this province, two of our city centres, the city of Melville and the city of Yorkton. As well it 
provides facilities for travelling public to go from the cities of both Melville and Yorkton to the resorts in the 
Qu’Appelle Valley to the south. I am quite certain that the people of that area would appreciate having the oiling 
job completed on No. 47 between Grenfell and Melville so that these facilities would be made available to the 
people of that part of the province. 
 
I can assure my constituents that after the next election that I will see to it personally, as their member, that this 
stretch of road is completed and oil topped in order to give service to the people of that part of the province. 
 
The refusal of the present government to recognize the city of Melville has not gone unnoticed by the people of 
that centre. Almost every city of Saskatchewan and many smaller centres received a share of capital expenditures 
from the Department of Public Works. 
 

Hon. R.A. Walker (Attorney-General): — Would someone mind telling us what he is reading from? 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
572 

Mr. Gardiner: — However, this has not been so in the case of the city of Melville. I’m reading from notes, Mr. 
Speaker. This cannot be because of the fact that Melville has always been Liberal because that is not the case. In 
the last 20 years since this government has been in office, they have had a member sitting on their side of the 
house for eight of that 20 years, and I can assure them that there has been nothing done during the 20 years of 
particular importance in order to provide some facilities within the city of Melville, for carrying on the proper 
functions of government in this province. 
 
I think the true reasons is that the party that sits to your right, Mr. Speaker, feel that perhaps they can receive the 
support of the people of the city of Melville just be continually going on in their lackadaisical way and forgetting 
that the city exists. I can assure them that they are in for a rude awakening if that is the type of policy that they 
are adopting towards that particular centre in this province. The people of Melville deserve recognition from the 
government of this province and I can assure them that they will receive recognition after the election of the 
Liberal government. 
 
However, I don’t want to completely paint a black picture of what my friends across the way have done. I want to 
give credit where credit is due. They have provided natural gas extensions to some of the centres in my 
constituency, but of course, none were included in the budget that we had presented to us at the present time. As 
well, they have provided to some centres in the province of Saskatchewan funds for water and sewer extension. 
But there are many centres that have provided these services to their own without any assistance from the 
government that sits to your right, Mr. Speaker, and in my constituency, the smaller centres, two of them have 
received assistance or did receive assistance when they put their systems into effect, two of them did not. 
 
I want to give credit here today to the local people for undertaking the major portion of the job of providing these 
facilities in the smaller centres of this province. Because in many cases they are placing on their shoulders a 
burden of debt which they are going to have to pay for, for the next 20 years in order to avail themselves of the 
facilities the people of this province enjoy in larger centres. So I say there is a great deal of credit coming to our 
local people in our smaller centres for their initiative, for their enterprise, in seeing to it that these facilities are 
provided for the people in those particular towns. 
 
I think that we are going to have to extend the present program and place every centre, of a reasonable size in this 
province, in the position of receiving these facilities, and receiving them at somewhat an equal rate and an equal 
payment. We have some towns, because of the natural facilities, are able to put water and sewer into their 
communities, and charge a very low rate of payment in order to maintain them. There are other centres because 
of the natural deficiencies, find that they are unable to do this, and their people must be heavily taxed in order to 
provide these services. 
 
There must be an equalization of this tax burden, so that all the communities in this province can receive a fair 
share of and a fair right to the facilities that are enjoyed by larger centres. 
 
I would like to express at this time a few remarks with regard to our native Canadian in this province. I have had 
very many pleasant associations with the Indian people of my constituency. One member has stated that the 
Indian people are misunderstood. This, Mr. Speaker, is an over-simplification. Our native people have two 
enemies to defeat. One is the do-gooder, who always feels that he must do something for the Indian people and 
the other is the person who take advantage of our native Canadian for his own personal gain. 
 
We expect too much of the people who have only been part of our modern civilization for some 75 years. 
Seventy-five years ago they had never been acquainted, we might call it, with the civilization as our ancestors 
knew it. It had grown up through a period of 2000 or 3000 years into the culture as our ancestors enjoyed it up to 
that time. 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

573 

We have expected the Indian people to be able to climb up to the same position as people who have worked 
through the culture developments of 2,000 and 3,000 years, in a period of 75 years. This is something that I think 
every group or race would find very difficult to do. So I say that to say the Indian is misunderstood is an 
over-simplification of the problem. 
 
Our native Canadians do not desire hand-outs from our government. What they desire is the hand of friendship, 
what they desire is to be accepted as fellow citizens. They do not ask special favours. However, they do ask for 
understanding and patience. In my constituency during the past year, we have witnessed the integration of Indian 
children into the school system at Balcarres. This was not something that was forced on either race. This was a 
genuine desire on the part of both the Indian segment of the population and the balance of that particular 
community. Genuine desire to provide the best in education for all their children in working together to solve a 
problem which exists not only in that community but in many other areas of the province of Saskatchewan. I 
think that this is going to add to the education of all these children, because in the dull routine of education, we 
quite often forget that learning to live together is one of the most basic rudiments of our educational system, or 
should be. So we find that in communities such as this, that a true co-operative spirit is being realized at the 
present time in the integration of the school system as between the Indian and the white children in the 
communities in this province. 
 
Change cannot, and must not be forced on our native Canadians. We must give to these true Canadians the 
freedom of making their own way, and deciding their own destiny. We should encourage and assist, but we must 
not push in a seeming desire to do good, when in many cases, we will only harm the progress that has been made 
and is being made at the present time. 
 
Most of all we must all refrain from using our native Canadian as a pawn in the political game. They desire to be 
part of the democratic way of life, but they do not desire to become a political football. Not only must politicians 
beware of overt acts, but also the press must refrain from excess coverage of minor events, which focus on the 
differences between peoples or the unusual incidents in everyday life. 
 
To date in this debate the co-operative movement has come in for a share of the limelight during the discussion of 
problems in our province. I want it clearly understood at this time, that I am a member of the co-operative 
organizations in my community, also a member of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, and an agent of the 
Co-operative Hail Insurance Company. I have therefore, a good background in the co-operative movement and I 
take a back seat to no one in that regard. However, many members of the co-operatives movements have become 
alarmed in the last few years with the direction the movement is travelling. Like everything else in Saskatchewan, 
the co-operative movement has been carried out centralizing actions, which are removing the independent control 
of the local people over their own co-operatives. The centralizing control of Federated Co-ops in Saskatoon has 
not been good for the co-operative movement. I am not now talking about the successful financial support that 
pervaded the movement in the early days of the province and added so much to the progress of Saskatchewan. 
 
I notice that there was considerable differences of opinion at the co-operative union meeting last week. The 
brother of the Premier, Mr. Lloyd, the president of the Federated Co-operatives, would like to consolidate the 
centralization theme and gather more power at the top. This is true socialist philosophy and I fear that the fears I 
have expressed at times because of the election of Mr. Lloyd, being a political personality in this province, that 
his election would be detrimental to the co-operative movement in this province. 
 
However, cooler and more reasonable statements were made by the President of the Co-operative Union, Mr. 
E.E. Scarf, when he stated that . . . 
 

Mr. Walker: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. Would the hon. member tell us what he is reading from 
please? 
 

Mr. Gardiner: — I’m reading my speech, part of it, just like the other hon. members, the only difference is I 
wrote it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
574 

Mr. Gardiner: — However, cooler and more reasonable statements were made by the president of the 
Co-operative Union, Mr. E.E. Scarf when he stated that the democratic control in the co-operative organizations 
is being threatened by the trends towards bigness and centralization. This problem of the trend toward 
centralization of control should receive special study by co-operatives, stated Mr. Scarf, at the convention last 
week. 
 
Mr. Scarf also suggested that it is essential that the non-political nature of co-operatives be retained. I 
wholeheartedly agree with the statements by Mr. Scarf, and I hope that the co-operative movement will stay a 
good distance from government control, and also from a strong bureaucratic control within their own 
organizations. Only by strong local control, will the co-operative movement retain its strength. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I were only to vote on what has been done for my own constituency during the last 20 years, I 
would certainly have to vote against the government and against the budget that has been presented. I know my 
friends will rise in their places as they have done in the past with regard to various constituencies, they will read 
out long lists of payments, school grants, and they will read other payments, but what they forget to say is that 
you have this coming to you by statute, this is something we can’t take away from you, you will have to get these 
monies, but, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to those things that do not have to be provided by statute to all the 
people of the province, this is where the people of the Melville constituency have suffered for the last 20 years, 
whether they have had a member sitting on the government side or in the opposition side of the house. So I say 
when the election is over, I’m quite certain that the people of the Melville constituency will give their answer in 
no mistaken terms to this government as to what they think of their actions during the past 20 years. 
 
We have heard a great deal about priorities during this present session, particularly in this debate, we have heard 
remarks in both debates, the major debates, both by the Premier and the Provincial Treasurer which indicates that 
the present government has some system of priorities established to decide how payments should be made. 
 
I think that in discussing the budget we should take a look at these priorities and decide whether or not the 
government has been successful by its own standards and principles. Twenty years ago, Mr. Speaker, Tommy 
Douglas told Saskatchewan that he would provide utopia for the people, by taxing mortgage companies and by 
government development of our natural resources. At that time there was no mention of waiting for private 
enterprise to do the developing. What has been the result of socialist experiments in Saskatchewan? Mr. Speaker, 
the result has been a dismal failure. No one needs to go any further than the summary of the operations of the 
crown corporations in this province that were presented in the budget by the Provincial Treasurer to see the 
failure of socialism. 
 
During the past year, which has been one of the best, according to the Provincial Treasurer, only $711,000 has 
found its way into general revenues as a direct result of those corporations for which the government can take 
credit. 
 
I would remind you, Mr. Speaker, that the total revenues suggested in the budget were $214,000,000, so that I 
think anyone in Saskatchewan can see that the portion that has been provided by the development of industry in 
this province by the government itself, is a very small item. Very little remains of the bold experiment and costly 
experiment of socialism. Of 21 corporations begun by this government, only nine remain as monuments to 
socialism. I thought for a moment when I heard the Minister of Natural Resources talk about putting monuments 
up in all the small centres in Saskatchewan, that if he ever has the time to get them before the next election, it 
will be one mass monument for this present government when they go out of office when the election is over. Of 
the nine that are left, two this year show losses and of the other seven, only one has made money on its own in 
competition with private enterprise and that is the soldium-sulphate division. This has resulted only because of a 
renewed demand for the natural product for which the present administration can take little credit. The other six 
corporations except for compulsory features, would likely all be in the hole in 1963. As an example, if the 
government had paid a normal commission on all compulsory business written by the government insurance 
office, 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

575 

of 20 per cent, they would have shown a loss in 1963 of $3,000. If on top of this, we were to take the normal 
amount that is made when you take the difference between the premiums paid by the government for their 
properties in Saskatchewan, and the losses paid out by government insurance, government insurance this year 
would have showed a loss of close to $500,000. In fact, I believe that had all these corporations been operated by 
private enterprises, and had paid royalties and taxes to the government, we would have received more back in 
general revenues then we have through government operations. 
 
At the same time, the fact of threat of government interference, of government confiscation has hung over the 
people who would invest in Saskatchewan and has cost the treasury many millions over the past 20 years. 
 
The two corporations, the institutions that have been named corporations by this government, since they came 
into office, which show the largest profits in 1963 are of course, the public utilities. The challenge of yesterday 
was for use not for profit. That has been forgotten by my CCF friends. The two corporations that should be 
operating at cost and not for profit are the two that are showing a profit. The minister in charge of the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation takes great credit for the reduction in power rates of $2,000,000. 
 

Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, the hon. member was very vociferous this afternoon about 
people referring to their notes and I see he has been reading verbatim all afternoon from something that someone 
has written there, I suggest . . . 
 

Mr. Gardiner: — Mr. Speaker, if the Attorney-General had been listening carefully . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! 
 

Mr. Walker: — Anyone that invokes the rules of the house as often as my friend from Melville, should at least 
abide by them himself. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I would like to suggest that members on all sides have been breaking this rule frequently during 
this session, and I think it is a little late unless the house really wants me to inforce it and to make a statement. 
 

Mr. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — He was a good reader . . . 
 

Mr. Gardiner: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the Attorney-General was in the house because at the time and it 
was not the member from Melville that raised the objection, and I didn’t actually say anything at that time, when 
Mr. Kramer was speaking. However, the next time the minister does it, which he always does, I’ll perhaps bring 
him to task. 
 
The minister in charge of the Power Corporation takes credit for a reduction in power rates of some $2,000,000 
when he showed a profit last year of well over $5,000,000 and in the telephone corporation this year shows a 
profit also of over $4,000,000. 
 

Hon. R. Brown (Minister of Industry and Information): — The announced reduction was $2,250,000 and I 
would suggest that if he had read the statement he would find the earnings of the electric utility was not 
$5,000,000. 
 

Mr. Gardiner: — Well, the Provincial Treasurer, must have made a mistake in his report to this legislature 
because I copied it out of there today, and I am using approximate figures here, not exact figures, for 
simplification purposes. 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
576 

The telephone corporation as well, earned over $4,000,000 in profits during the year 1963, as indicated in the 
budget address of the Provincial Treasurer. So, the government on your right, Mr. Speaker, tries to take credit not 
only for the small reduction in power taxes but for the paltry sums that are paid to rural companies throughout 
this province to assist them in their operations. 
 
Along with the $20,000,000 or more in excess taxes collected by the Provincial Treasurer during the last fiscal 
year, he has taken out of the pockets of the taxpayers close to $10,000,000 in profits on these two corporations, 
which many years ago they would be operated for use and not for profit. 
 
The telephone corporation was started in this province in 1911 by a Liberal government, and the original 
Saskatchewan Power Commission was established in 1928 and most of the recommendations of the report that 
was made at that time are still being worked on by this government. 
 
After the election of the Liberal government, these two corporations born and matured under a Liberal 
government, will be given their rightful place in helping to build a total economy for all Saskatchewan. Service at 
cost with unnecessary waste eliminated will be the order of the day. More light for less, instead of more 
confusion for more, will be our motto. Where have the revenues been received to give the necessary priorities 
proper recognition? Why from you and me. When you shut the door to others, you’re going to have to pay the 
piper yourself, and of course, that is what has happened to the taxpayers in this province. This government has 
shut the door, shut the door to development, shut the door to population growth and for that reason, very few of 
us must pay the excess taxes that are piled on the people of Saskatchewan at the present time. 
 
This has been the sorry story of socialism in this province. The field of health services is one which has always 
held top place in the minds and actions of Saskatchewan government down through the years whether Liberal, 
Conservative or CCF. The NDP like to pat themselves on the back in regard to provision of medical and hospital 
services. However, a quick look at the budget address of the Provincial Treasurer will point out the fact that no 
one cent has been realized from general revenues to provide medical and hospital services to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Twenty years ago, complete health services were to be provided without cost and without charge. 
Let us look at the facts, Mr. Speaker, we do not have to guess at the statements I am about to make, because they 
are present for all to see. In the next fiscal year, the Provincial Treasurer has budgetted for the following revenues 
for medical and hospital services, 1½ per cent of the education and health tax for hospitalization will amount to 
some $16,000,000. The payment from Ottawa, their share of the plan is estimated at $21,000,000. The revenue 
that will be received from the Cancer Commission for care of cancer patients is over $1,000,000 and this all adds 
up to the amount of monies to be paid over to hospital services plan. So that every cent that will be used, for the 
hospital services plan, will be from the tax that is collected from the people of this province for those purposes 
and there will not be one penny from the revenues derived from the activities of this particular government, either 
in the field of natural resources or any other field that anyone would like to point out. 
 
How about medical care? About $9,000,000 will be realized from the health tax, about $5,000,000 from the 
income tax levy, and about $2,000,000 from the increase in corporation taxes. This totals approximately 
$16,000,000 which is the amount that is estimated will be turned over to the Medical Care Insurance. In other 
words, not one cent again is being spent from resource development to provide medical and hospital care. Every 
cent is coming out of the pockets of the taxpayers directly in this province at the present time. If as we all predict, 
there are to be increases in each of these revenues, the government will likely have extra revenues from these tax 
fields to spend elsewhere, rather than getting money from development in order to provide people with the proper 
health services. 
 
The surprise to me was not the reduction in the medical care tax, but the fact that it was not cancelled completely. 
The NDP government does not deserve one cent of credit for the provision of medical care and hospital services. 
The taxpayer is paying more than the total cost and nothing has been contributed from development of natural 
resources or socialist policies. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

577 

Mr. Gardiner: — The balance of the public health program is holding the status quo almost every budget in 
Saskatchewan’s history has allocated at least 12 to 15 per cent for public health purposes, and as this is the 
amount being paid this year, there has been no change in the emphasis on public spending. 
 
In his address yesterday, the member from Saltcoats, (Mr. Snedker) made reference to the fact that taxes raised 
for highway purposes were under spent by some $6,000,000, with increased revenues anticipated this should be 
much larger by the end of the present fiscal year. Originally when discussions were held between the dominion 
and provinces with regard to equalizing the contribution towards the care and welfare of the people of Canada, 
the four major departments or branches of government, that were suggested in most of the meetings that were 
held, dealt with health, highways, education and social welfare. It has been indicated that there’s been little 
change in the field of health services in the last 20 years percentagewise in the expenditures of the tax dollar in 
this province. The total revenue received for highways, and grid roads has been under spent by some $6,000,000. 
This will leave the balance of federal equalization funds to be used for education and social welfare. 
 
Our government continues to refuse to accept their fair share of educational costs. I feel sincerely that anything 
less than the acceptance by the provincial government of an equal share of the costs of the total operations of our 
schools is not a sufficient contribution in the present day and age. As the years go on, this contribution might 
have to be increased. In order to match the taxpayer’s share another $13,000,000 should have been paid in grants 
this year. Had this been done, it would have allowed our school boards to compete on an equal basis with our 
neighbouring provinces for teachers without consideration of further tax increases. The grants for the last ten 
years have been slowly frittered away in annual teachers demands. Anyone engaged in education realizes that we 
must compete for a limited supply of teachers and the only way this can be done, is by meeting the market 
demands. This problem must be met at a very early date, if we are to provide the best in education for our 
children. Only by the provincial government accepting their realistic share of these costs, can we expect the local 
taxpayer to be challenged to extend his efforts. In Education Week, I expected much more from the remarks of 
the Minister of Education than we have received during this debate. Confusion reigns supreme in the education 
field today in Saskatchewan because of the actions of the present government. 
 
The blame for this must be accepted by the minister and the government that have developed fuzzy minds and 
without proper preparation or consideration, are preparing to jump out of the frying pan into the fire. 
 
In the field of social welfare, after 20 years of socialism and millions of dollars spent, we have failed in this 
province to provide any lasting solution to the needs of our less fortunate people in this province. The 
government, only with federal pushing, acts to make changes. In a time of general prosperity, about 27,000 
people every year find it necessary to look for social aid. Lip service is presented to the problem, but no solution 
has been developed, no real challenge or leadership has been provided in this field and every year the amounts 
spent continue to rise without any perceptible contribution to the general welfare of the province of 
Saskatchewan. Many things are being left undone in our local communities, because of lack of funds. The 
$20,000,000 estimated for expenditure in the present budget if provided in any other field, would provide a better 
answer to the social aid problem. 
 
Winter-works projects have been a help in this regard, but still social aid payments continue to increase. There is 
a job to be done in the field of low rent houses. We quite often hear remarks about that, from our friends across 
the way. In every urban community in Saskatchewan, not just the large centres, but our smaller urban centres as 
well, if people were paid wages for work in such projects, social aid, except in cases of disability and the 
unemployables, and dependent relief cases, would be a thing of the past. We should be building up our people, 
not destroying them by paternalism. When things cry out to be done, let us do them and in that way we will 
provide a challenge to our people. 
 
The Liberal party under the leadership of Ross Thatcher, is prepared after taking office to provide the leadership 
to challenge the imagination of our people. This will be done: first, by creation of confidence in the government 
of the province, in the world outside the province of Saskatchewan; Secondly, by a dynamic approach to the 
problems of industries and population without sufficient industrial expansion, there is not room for population 
expansion; Thirdly, a new approach to agricultural problems with the emphasis placed on 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
578 

retaining our young farmers on the land; Fourth, a new approach to education, which will recognize fully the 
place and responsibility of the state in education; Fifth, an expansion of badly needed health services to our 
people and a new confidence in those providing the services in the administration of provincial health care; Sixth, 
a rebirth of faith in government organization at all levels, by showing confidence in local authorities, and by 
expanding local services at all levels of government leadership and assistance; and Seventh, a rebirth of local 
desire to meet the problems of the day with confidence in the future. These ends can only be realized by the 
election of the Liberal party. The NDP has lost the confidence of local government. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Gardiner: — They have lost the confidence of many who must provide the services so badly needed by our 
people. They’re suspect by all who would help in the development of our province, instead of being planners in 
spite of their highly paid experts, they become bunglers and confusion artists. 
 
Instead of operating Saskatchewan, they have become operated themselves by the boards and commissions. The 
NDP government has refused to govern and has delegated the job to others. The Liberal government under Ross 
Thatcher, will accept the job. We have leading men from all walks of life who can give Saskatchewan 
government to excite the imagination of today and produce the results for tomorrow. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Gardiner: — Mr. Speaker, in spite of remarks by some of my friends opposite, I urge an immediate election 
in this province; time for action is long overdue. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Gardiner: — We want to get on with the job, instead of being first in the prairies as we were in 1944, today 
we are last. This is not an indictment of Saskatchewan, but the NDP government that sits to your right. Because, 
Mr. Speaker, the budget continues to fritter away the tax dollars of our people, without providing either challenge 
or answers to the problems of the day, I cannot support the motion. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. C.B. Peterson (Kelvington): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate, I would like to join with 
the others in commending the Provincial Treasurer for the clear thinking that he demonstrated in the budget that 
he brought down in this session. 
 
I think I can truthfully say that no member of this legislature would object to or worry or become alarmed if his 
own household was managed so well as to have a surplus, year after year. If we were to adopt the policy of the 
members to your left, Mr. Speaker, we would be giving tax cuts during a buoyant period and we would increase 
taxes during the recession. The course that our Provincial Treasurer has taken is to do things when there are 
means to do it with. He either makes hay while the sun shines or he strikes when the iron is hot, and he just can’t 
miss. 
 
I want to commend the Premier too, for the tremendous courage he has shown since taking over the important 
post. I don’t think any premier of any province in the history of our dominion has ever shown more courage than 
our Premier did when he himself chose to face the College of Physicians at the Trianon the same morning that he 
was deserted by his former Minister of Public Health. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

579 

Mr. Peterson: — I can say without reservation that he has become a living symbol of a province that has reached 
maturity, and that we are all proud of our Premier and proud to be citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Peterson: — I would not feel right if I did not mention one of our unsung heroes of medicare. This hero that 
was called on to fill the gap, was none other than our present Minister of Public Works; he deserves a lot of 
credit for the success of our medicare insurance plan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Peterson: — I expect this will be one of the last budget debates that I’ll be taking part in and as such, I feel I 
should at least make a few remarks on stewardship in my constituency during the last four years. But before 
doing so, I would like to offer a few comparisons with other constituencies in this province. Apart from some 
very small logging operations, and lumbering operations, the constituency is entirely agricultural. I can not boast 
of the number of oil wells in my constituency as some members can, nor can I boast of hydro-electric power 
stations or endless miles of steel transmission towers, nor can I boast even of the vast mineral wealth that is 
known to exist in other constituencies such as uranium, iron ore, potash, sodium sulphate, helium and natural gas, 
just to mention a few. I cannot boast of the manufacturing such as the steel mill that produces steel plates and 
skelp for the manufacture of pipe. I cannot boast that we have in a constituency so close by this legislature the 
steel plant that is the only one of its kind west of the Great Lakes to produce skelp for the making of pipes. Nor 
can I point to the manufacture of cement nor bricks, or the manufacture of wire and plastic pipe and I could go on 
and on. But I can boast of an area in which live some of the finest and most resourceful and co-operative people 
that are to be found anywhere. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Peterson: — Among these people, Mr. Speaker, are people that are combined of several ethnic groups, but 
among them there is a bond of unity that could very well be the envy of any community. Within the last four 
years, we have seen in the Kelvington constituency, three new credit union office buildings erected, two new 
co-op store buildings, two new Pool elevators and a new co-op lumber yard building and a new co-op creamery. 
Then there is the new curling rink at Kelvington, and a new skating rink at Invermay and at Foam Lake, and a 
new community hall at Kuroki. This has all been done in the last four years, Mr. Speaker, I say to indicate the 
togetherness that exists among the people of the Kelvington constituency. 
 
The farmers of the Kelvington constituency have co-operated for a number of years to produce disease-free cereal 
crops and registered seed. Kelvington is especially noted for the smut-free barley grown there. I must say that 
much of the success of farming is due to a great extent to the assistance through the Department of Agriculture 
and the ag-rep service. This has encouraged diversification in agriculture to a point that I believe I am safe in 
saying that there is more livestock produced per square mile in that area, than in any other area in the province. In 
the last four years there have been four community pastures established there. The provincial government has 
provided some crown land and purchased some from individuals and from municipalities making a total of 
84,000 acres available for community pastures. The land value itself is in round figures of $88,850, which is 
proving to be a great help to the small farmers in the area. Now the people of our province will always be grateful 
to the Minister of Agriculture for our share of the assistance given during the year our crops were snowed under, 
and the freight and fodder assistance during the sever winter that followed. The farmers of our province received 
$5,500,000 for snowed-under crops and some $3,500,000 for freight and fodder assistance. This was an 
emergency and I would like to remind the members opposite who are always complaining about surpluses that 
this time, $9,000,000 was hard to find, it almost doubled the ordinary expenditures for agriculture in those two 
years concerned. This 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
580 

one bold step, Mr. Speaker, was a decisive act on the part of our government and saved the livestock industry of 
our province. Keeping the cattle on the farm, prevented a glut on the market, and the price of cattle was kept from 
dropping out of sight. 
 
I must say a few words about the municipal councils which are close to my heart, I say with the Minister of 
Municipal Affairs, that much credit is due to them for the way they have tackled their local problems. I will say, 
Mr. Speaker, that they have greatly appreciated the financial assistance given by the Department of Municipal 
Affairs, by way of grants to grid roads, for construction and gravelling and for equalization grants. The rural 
municipality of Kelvington will finish its grid road program this year. The municipality of Sasman and Foam lake 
will be next. However, all the municipalities in my constituency are not so fortunate; they are the ones that are 
located along the east side. In this area, submarginal land that is very low in assessment also has a very high cost 
of road building. These are the municipalities of Insinger, Invermay and Hazel Dell which has assessment of only 
$1,600,000 and I find it hard to get on with the road program in there in spite of the fact that there is a lot of 
assistance given to these municipalities by our provincial government. For instance to give you an example, the 
municipality of Insinger received grants within the last seven years amounting to some $171,000, Invermay over 
$123,000 and Hazel Dell over $176,000. This would increase the mill rate considerably, if these grants had not 
been forthcoming. It is hoped that this year’s budget will contain enough funds to provide some additional help to 
get a grid standard road through from Sheho to Invermay and on to Oakly. The reason I say this is because, there 
are some 96 resident farm homes along this route and for the most part, it is only a trail, that is impassable much 
of the time. 
 
Sheho is located about midway between Yorkton and Elfros, on highway 14, and Invermay is located about 
midway between Canora and Wadena on highway 5. Now, Mr. Speaker, Sheho is only 17 miles south of 
Invermay, but to get to Sheho from Invermay, on an all-weather road, one must travel east to Canora, south to 
Yorkton and back to Sheho a distance of some 109 miles, instead of only 17, should it be straight across. 
 
Almost the same situation applies to travel between the village of Invermay and Okla, which is also 17 miles. 
Only 11 of this 34 miles is now built to grid standard. This means that this road is only one-third completed, at 
this rate it will take another 12 years to finish the job. With this in view, Mr. Speaker, it is hoped that this road 
will either be taken into the highway system or given some extra-ordinary consideration by the Department of 
Municipal Affairs, and while I am on the subject of making requests for that area, I would like to repeat a request 
to the Minister of Highways and Transportation, who is also chairman of the board of directors of the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company, for bus services on No. 5 highway between Canora and Wadena. This 
need has come about because the suspension of railway passenger service by the Canadian National Railway, and 
I have had numerous requests from people at Kuroki, Margo and Invermay, for bus service between these points. 
I hope that the chairman will have another look at the situation in the near future, so that these people who have 
no cars, get to a larger centre, when necessary to do so. Now when I think of it, I have here a letter from the 
Minister of Highways in charge of the transportation company and he said that the requests to the transportation 
company has been referred to the transportation company’s management committee for consideration and I 
believe that this will be taken care of as soon as possible, and I want to give encouragement to the people in that 
area, knowing that we’re doing all we can do to provide wherever it is possible to do so. 
 
While on the subject of transportation, I would like to make mention the unsatisfactory connections with our bus 
and the Greyhound bus at Dafoe. Passengers wishing to go to Foam Lake from Regina, by bus can go only as far 
as Dafoe. The Greyhound passes through Dafoe 16 minutes earlier on its way east, through to Foam Lake, I have 
talked to the manager of the transportation company and I have also mentioned it to the chairman of the board 
and I sincerely hope that the schedule can be adjusted to provide this accommodation, not only for Foam Lake, 
but for all the villages between Dafoe and Yorkton. 
 
I don’t want to leave the impression that our Minister of Highways is doing nothing for Kelvington, Mr. Speaker. 
Last year highway No. 49 was oiled from Kelvington to Junction 35 and on to Wadena. This year No. 38 will be 
oiled from Kelvington to Greenwater and onto Chelan. The No. 5 highway will be oiled from Invermay to 
Wadena; last year No. 5 was oiled from Invermay East to No. 9 highway. The year before we saw No. 14 oiled 
from Foam Lake to 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

581 

to Yorkton. This will mean 93 miles of dust-free highway in my constituency during my term of office. This also 
means that all the highways in the Kelvington constituency will be oiled except about 31 miles on No. 49 
highway. 
 
During my term of office, the town of Kelvington, Mr. Speaker, and the town of Foam Lake installed sewer and 
water. The village of Invermay is well on the road to being the first village in the area to have sewer and water. I 
want to mention too, that Kelvington and Foam Lake each have a new automatic telephone exchange building 
and dial telephone service. 
 
Next year Foam Lake will be equipped for direct distance dialing and it will be the first town with that distinction 
in the Kelvington constituency. It should be noted here, Mr. Speaker, that the change-over is being accomplished 
without additional charge to the subscriber. 
 
I should also mention that pole grants for half the cost of the pole and maintenance grants of $2.50 per subscriber 
is paid to rural companies who meet the required standard of maintenance and construction. This is a measure to 
promote good service standards and at the same time helps to lower the telephone tax considerably. The returning 
of this grant is a tax concession that is ignored many times yet it is a great help to the rural people. 
 
We have heard a lot too from across the way, Mr. Speaker, about other taxes. I just want to mention some of the 
projects that have been completed in my constituency in the last four years. These are projects that are all 
necessary to the well-being of our citizens and I could mention many more, the two high schools, the addition to 
the Foam Lake hospital, our social welfare program that demands only about seven per cent of the local 
municipality. All this is our tax dollar returned to us in benefits that . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! I draw the member’s attention to the time. 
 

The Assembly took recess from 5:30 p.m. to 7:30 p.m. 
 

Mr. Peterson: — Mr. Speaker, when it was 5:30, I had mentioned some of the projects that have been completed 
during the last four years in the Kelvington constituency and I mentioned something about the two composite 
high schools, one at Foam Lake and the other at Kelvington, and I was going to say that these schools are very 
important to that area, because of the fact that there are young people there that are not in a position to take 
advantage of higher education and these composite high schools are going to equip them for better conditions 
when they leave these small towns and get out into the world. I think that you can be assured that the people in 
that area appreciate the assistance they are getting from the Department of Education in all the matters of training 
for the young people for a better position as they enter into life. 
 

As I mentioned too, that the social welfare program that has been lifted from the backs of the municipalities in 
the last four years, has also been a wonderful help in that now the tax burden has been lowered to the point where 
we, as a municipal body, are only responsible for about seven per cent of the cost of social welfare, and all these 
things I have mentioned and I have not mentioned the hospital and medical care insurance plan, which is well 
known and well accepted. 
 

I want to also mention the fact that I was pleased to hear the minister in charge of Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation announce last night that natural gas will be coming to Leslie and Foam Lake this year. Natural gas in 
my constituency is something that I have been working for, but I didn’t dare to expect too much, seeing that the 
minister in charge doesn’t have natural gas in his own constituency so far. 
 

However, I want to assure the people of the town of Kelvington, that we haven’t forgotten them, and that I have 
taken up the matter of gas for them as well. I have been given the assurance that Kelvington will be considered 
just as soon as it is possible to do so. I do feel confident too, that this goes for all the other urban areas in the 
constituency as well. 
 

There is one thing that I am sure of, Mr. Speaker, that if we see as much progress in the constituency in the next 
four years as we did in the past, there isn’t going to be too much unaccomplished in this particular area. We know 
there is a lot of work to be done, but I certainly am happy to be able to report the progress that has been made so 
far. 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
582 

Getting back to taxes that I was mentioning some time ago in my remarks, I noted that the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs mentioned a few days ago that over half the municipal cost is actually taken care of by the senior 
government. This is proof positive that no dollar is so well spent as our tax dollar. It also proves that the 
municipal mill rate would be twice as high if it were not for the assistance given by our provincial government. 
 
I had purposely avoided a lot of figures in my remarks because we have heard them time and again, and they are 
more or less boring, but I do want to say in closing that our Provincial Treasurer is doing a good job. Why 
shouldn’t we have a good budget when there is a good economic situation in the province? 
 
Before I sit down, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I’m glad to have had the opportunity to serve in this legislature 
a comparatively short time. I have enjoyed the experience, I feel that my life has been enriched. The pleasant 
associations that I have had with members from both sides of the house will not be forgotten, and I want to 
convey my best wishes to the others who are retiring from this chamber and should I say that I want to sort of 
comply now with the present-day trend toward bilingualism, so I’ll just close my speech by saying ―Au Revoir‖, I 
will support the budget motion. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. J.H. Staveley (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, I had not intended to speak in this budget debate, but after the 
hon. Provincial Treasurer brought down his budget for the coming year, and when I saw what he was doing to the 
people of this province, I decided that I would be remiss in my duty as a member of this legislature if I did not 
express some thoughts about this budget. I would like to congratulate the Provincial Treasurer on the very able 
manner in which he brought down this budget rather difficult to sell it to the general public, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now before dealing with the budget as such, I just want to make a few comments on some of the statements 
which have been made by the hon. government members during this debate. For several minutes last Wednesday 
afternoon, the hon. lady member for Saskatoon, (Mrs. Strum) proceeded to give the members of this legislature a 
sermon on provincial patriotism, complete with poetry, Mr. Speaker. Now this lesson may have been needed by 
her colleagues, I don’t know that I can speak for all the members on your left when I say that it was unnecessary 
from our standpoint. I’m just as proud of my province as the hon. lady member from Saskatoon is, but I can’t say 
I am as proud of the government of the province. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, it is the pride I have in my 
province that prompts me to work and which will continue to cause me to work to bring about sane, sensible and 
responsible government to Saskatchewan. And I am not proud of the type of government which the socialists 
have forced on this province, much of it against the wishes and the desires of the greater majority of our people. 
 
This CCF-NDP government is doing to Saskatchewan exactly what the old non-partisan league did to the state of 
North Dakota—just put us 25 to 50 years behind the rest of the country. And we realize on this side of the house 
that we are going to have a great deal of extra work when we form the government to bring Saskatchewan back 
into its proper place among the provinces of Canada. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Staveley: — Now the hon. Attorney-General was very generous to my home city of Weyburn in his 
comments, and I think that I would like to congratulate him on his perception in recognizing Weyburn as one of 
the outstanding communities in Saskatchewan. This can probably be traced back to the two important factors, 
good fortune and good people. Our good fortune, Mr. Speaker, stems from the fact that a Liberal government 
established a Service Flying Training School right close to Weyburn in 1940-41 with all of the miscellaneous 
building which could be utilized for industrial purposes at a time when their original use was no longer required. 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

583 

Another factor which contributed to our industrial development was that Almighty God in his Divine wisdom 
created pools of oil beneath our prairie lands some millions of years ago, and it ill-behooves this government, Mr. 
Speaker, or any member of the government to attempt to take credit for either one of these situations. 
 
Now our good people are known far beyond the boundaries of this province and I don’t think I need say anything 
more about them at this time. 
 
I would draw one point to the attention of the Attorney-General, Mr. Speaker. He spoke about the increased 
population in our city of Weyburn and we are pleased with this. There is no question about it. However, we do 
think of our city only as a part of our community, since we realize that our rural and our urban people are 
completely interdependent, and we are not particularly happy that from a population standpoint, our city has 
prospered at the expense of our rural people. 
 
What is that picture as far as our Weyburn community is concerned, and as determined by the boundaries of our 
Weyburn provincial constituency? I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the names on the voters list in 1960 election, 
June 1960, totalled 11,603 and in the by-election of December 13th, 1961, that number was 11,475. Now this is a 
loss of 128 people, plus a loss of 100 per cent of our natural increase by way of births over deaths and 
immigration, and I secured this information just last Friday from your Chief Electoral Officer, so I don’t think 
anyone will dispute it. 
 
The only way in which my hon. friend might attempt to justify this decrease is the fact that in the 1960 election, 
the voters list contained the names of a couple of hundred people who could not be found in the constituency the 
day after the election. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Staveley: — The Attorney-General suggested that the fewer people the province or a country has, the better 
off it is and I also . . . 
 

Hon. R.A. Walker (Attorney-General): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, the hon. member is not exactly 
quoting me, and I ask him to withdraw that remark and if he wishes to quote me to please be accurate. 
 

Mr. Staveley: — Well, I think possible I could quote him, Mr. Speaker, and if you have the record there, the hon. 
member will be able to see what I meant. I think he said this, ―If my hon. friends think that the fewer people you 
have the better off you are, then surely China and India are the best off in the world‖. I believe that is correct. 
Conversely what I have said would apply . . . 
 

Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, I said exactly the opposite, I happen to have the record in front of me, what I said 
was; ―If my hon. friends are right that the more people you have the better off you are, then surely China and 
India should be the best-off nations in the world‖. Not the fewer people, the more people. 
 

Mr. Staveley: — This is right, Mr. Speaker, the fewer people you have the better off you are, and then you say 
the more people you have the better off you are, and then you compare China and India to the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I think that you really swung from one end of the pendulum to the other. 
 
Now he also said this, if I may quote him this was last Tuesday when he said: 
 

If population figures have any significance, they should be looked at to determine what they indicate about the 
economy, what the population figures of Saskatchewan indicated. 

 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
584 

Now, Mr. Speaker, no one can deny that we have had the lowest rate of population growth in Canada, and 
certainly, my hon. friend has been doing his best to convince us that our industrial development and growth are 
the highest. About the only thing he did prove, Mr. Speaker, is that you do not have unemployment if you did not 
have people, and when you do have unemployment you have people crying for jobs. In Saskatchewan, we have 
jobs crying for people and it is not because there are so many jobs. Maybe this is just another one of the first for 
Saskatchewan, we have been hearing so much about from the other side of the house. 
 
The hon. Minister of Public Works tried to tell us yesterday that the changes in agriculture were responsible for 
our loss of population in Saskatchewan, and at least he was honest enough to admit that we did have a loss in 
population. But, Mr. Speaker, this is the province that has made such great strides in industrial development 
according to my hon. friends on the other side of the house. And if these strides were so great why were not jobs 
created to take the place of these changes in agriculture and to keep our people in our own province. Possibly this 
is another first. The hon. member from Lumsden, (Mr. Thurston) told us yesterday about three men who had 
moved to the States and not one of them had come from Saskatchewan. This is very likely quite true – maybe 
they did not, but believe me thousands of others did. And it does not matter how much my hon. friends squirm 
and twist and dodge, they just cannot get away from the fact that the rate of population increase all over Canada 
is five times our Saskatchewan rate, but they do just not like to admit it. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Staveley: — Mr. Speaker, what the hon. members of this government cannot or will not understand is that 
there are three factors which are irrevocably bound together in any future destiny of this province – jobs – people 
– and taxes. 
 
This government has failed in its duty and responsibility toward all three. This is the reason why we continue to 
bring these matters to the attention of the government in the fond hope that they will cast the blinders from their 
eyes, that they will see the light and that they will try and do something about this situation. 
 
Now I would like to turn for a few moments to the budget itself. As you know, Mr. Speaker, the members of this 
government have heard much about taxes during this session, and as far as I am concerned they are going to hear 
a lot more, because the members of this government have a most peculiar attitude towards taxes. They treat taxes 
like toys to be played with by children, and at least one of my hon. friends across the way has said that 
Saskatchewan people are proud to pay taxes and they like to pay taxes, which I do not believe, because nobody 
likes to pay taxes. 
 
And I have been very critical of the attitude of this government with respect to its taxation policy. But I don’t 
think that I really understood their true thinking about taxes and people until this last budget was brought down, 
because Shylock in gouging his pound of flesh was a piker compared to our Provincial Treasurer. 
 
Taking advantage of buoyant economic condition for which this government can take no credit or very little 
credit at least, the Provincial Treasurer has provided the mechanism to extort possibly $20,000,000 additional 
taxes from the few taxpayers we have in this province and this was after a fantastic surplus in last year’s budget. 
He states that he has reduced taxes, and he points out to the $5,000,000 reduction announced last fall. But what is 
the whole truth about the tax picture in this budget that we have been discussing for the past few days? 
 
For the next couple of minutes I am going to tell the truth about taxes in Saskatchewan and I am going to use the 
Provincial Treasurer’s own figures in so doing. If any of you want to refer to page 30 of the budget booklets for 
the fiscal year of 1963-64, you will find these figures that I am going to quote; Income tax up $4,448,000, 
federal-provincial payments which were from taxes up $1,973,000, education and health tax— up $7,200,000, 
gasoline tax – up $3,200,000, liquor profits and these are also a tax, up $1,950,000, motor licenses, another form 
of tax— $765,000, 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

585 

making a grand total, Mr. Speaker, of $19,535,000. And then the Provincial Treasurer says that he has reduced 
taxes. Now if you have something and you take away $5,000,000 and you add $19,000,000 to it, you haven’t 
reduced the amount. 
 
I believe that the Provincial Treasurer’s theme for the last budget is new horizons, and I think that a theme much 
more appropriate would be lost horizons, because certainly the hon. Provincial Treasurer has lost all perspective 
in assessing the ability and the willingness of the people of this province to continue to pay these continually 
increasing taxes, year after year, when the provincial budget shows huge surpluses and the provincial debt 
continues to mount by leaps and bounds. 
 
I wonder what is his purpose in posing this kind of a financial policy for our province. What is going to happen, 
Mr. Speaker, if we have two or three crop failures in Saskatchewan, with the interest alone on our provincial debt 
almost as great as the total provincial share of the entire budget just 20 years ago? This is not responsible 
planning. This is financial murder and the final outcome could very well be financial chaos, Mr. Speaker. This 
seems to me to be just another case of a man in public life seeing a vision, and I would respectfully suggest a 
good look because we saw not too long ago what happened to a man in public life who saw one. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, since the planning behind the budget appears to me to be irresponsible except possibly from 
the socialist’ standpoint and the budget itself represents a real danger to the economy of this province, and to the 
financial stability of the people of the province, I will vote against the motion. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Hon. A.M. Nicholson (Minister of Social Welfare & Rehabilitation): — Mr. Speaker, hon. members have 
appreciated the very brief remarks by the member from Weyburn, (Mr. Staveley). I cannot promise that mine will 
be as short, but I do want to say to the member from Weyburn that I was one of the guests who enjoyed the 
hospitality of the people of his fair city during 1963. We were greatly impressed by the generosity of the people 
and the tremendous development in that part of the province. I am sure that the hon. members would like to go 
back there for the Diamond Jubilee. 
 
I would like to say that I am sure that members on both sides of the house are glad to have had the member from 
Kelvington, (Mr. Peterson) with us during this period. He like many of us, has experienced the downs as well as 
the ups in political life. I knew the member for Kelvington before he came to this legislature. I want to tell the 
house that he is highly regarded in the community where he lives. I’m sure that he will return to that community 
and continue to make a valuable contribution to the life of that district. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Nicholson: — I would too, like to congratulate the Provincial Treasurer who has presented one of the most 
challenging budgets ever brought down in Saskatchewan. A bank manager from Saskatoon was kind enough to 
lend me a copy of a letter he wrote to the Provincial Treasurer which I believe will be of interest to all members 
of the house, since we seem to have been on our very best behaviour that day. The bank manager wrote to the 
Provincial Treasurer: 
 

This is the first time I have had the privilege of visiting the legislature when it is in session. I was very 
impressed by the manner in which business was conducted. I would like to take this opportunity of extending to 
you my sincere congratulations on the very excellent manner in which you presented the budget. It is obvious 
that you spent many long hours in preparation of your address. 

 

Mr. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — Lot of work? 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
586 

Mr. Nicholson: — The Minister of Highways referred . . . 
 

Mrs. Mary Batten (Humboldt): — Will the hon. minister tell us what bank this man represents. 
 

Mr. Nicholson: — One of the chartered banks in Saskatoon . . . 
 

Mrs. Batten: — Surely . . . 
 

Mr. Nicholson: — I’ll be glad to show the hon. member the letter, but the bank manager was . . . 
 

Mrs. Batten: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. If the hon. gentleman is going to quote a letter he has to either 
table the letter or tell us who wrote it. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I think the point the hon. lady member raised is quite correct. If a letter is quoted, it must be 
quoted absolutely, or else table it. 
 

Mr. Nicholson: — Well, I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t the permission of the bank manager to table his letter 
and I will withdraw the reference. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! I don’t think that is possible. If a member quotes it, he must table it. 
 

Mr. Nicholson: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t the letter available, but I will be glad to table it tomorrow. 
 
The Minister of Highways referred to the several events held during 1963 to mark the 25th anniversary of the 
election to the legislature of the Provincial Treasurer. Mr. M.J. Coldwell, my wife and I drove to Porcupine 
Plains and were among the guests at one of the largest banquets ever held in Porcupine Plains. The friends of the 
Provincial Treasurer in the constituency wished to be the hosts for the occasion but their member for 25 years 
insisted that he and Mrs. Brockelbank should be their hosts. He said that his Scottish born wife had agreed with 
him that once every 25 years they should stage a party of this sort. Again at the CCF provincial convention in 
Saskatchewan, later in the summer, all the Brockelbank family were together for the first time in 40 years, when 
the Provincial Treasurer was the guest of honour. 
 
Hon. members will be interested in knowing that John Brockelbank II is one of the five CCF candidates 
nominated in Saskatoon recently. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Nicholson: — It looked for some time as if he might be elected to the legislature by acclamation on his first 
try. After Herb Pinder, the provincial president of the Liberal Party, accepted nomination in the Hanley 
constituency and the other Liberals who contested the constituency in 1960, one after the other declined to let 
their name stand, it appeared as if the five CCF candidates might be elected by acclamation, thereby saving the 
expenses of an election. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

587 

Mr. D.T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Heaven forbid! 
 

Mr. Nicholson: — However, there are a number who are letting their names stand and three will be a contest. 
When the Provincial Treasurer’s son was nominated, a very impressive list of achievements was given for such a 
young person. However, the comment which brought down the house, was: He’s a chip off the old Brock. I 
believe that the CCF slate in Saskatoon will be strengthened by having the name Brockelbank on the ballot. 
 
I would like to make a few comments about the budget, referring to some details of special interest to Saskatoon, 
and I would like to reply to some of the criticism made by the opposition members during the debate. The 
Provincial Treasurer went out of his way to emphasize that neither he nor the government took any credit for the 
bumper crop in Saskatchewan in 1963, or the near famine conditions in China, Russia and other countries which 
have bought Canadian wheat. He mentioned that yields were best ever, with a wheat yield averaging almost 28 
bushels per acre for a total of 500,000,000 which is coming close to twice the long term average. In assessing the 
Saskatchewan economy for 1963, we must then give full credit to the weather conditions and the skill of 
Saskatchewan farmers, that made this crop possible said the Provincial Treasurer. He identified other favourable 
developments in the province. Mineral production reached a new high level of $280,000,000 up about 17 per cent 
from 1962; construction activities up seven per cent, set a new record of $431,000,000. The total private and 
public investment reached a record level of $744,000,000. Electric power production has continued to grow at the 
spectacular rate which has been maintained in Saskatchewan since 1950. The gross value of commodities 
produced in Saskatchewan during 1963 is estimated at $2,170,000,000 or 14 per cent above the 1962 level. 
 
Unemployment is estimated to have fallen to an average of 3.4 per cent, well below the national level of 5.6 per 
cent, at the present time one of the lowest percentages in Canada, and let me repeat again, in the view of the 
federal government, Saskatchewan is the only province in Canada without a depressed area or a serious 
unemployment problem. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Nicholson: — When it became evident in 1963 that so many records were to be broken, the Provincial 
Treasurer recommended to the cabinet that the citizens of the province benefit directly and the supplementary 
estimates contain a great number of expenditures, which have been appreciated by nearly every one in 
Saskatchewan, except hon. members opposite. The reduction by $5,000,000 of payments made by citizens for 
hospital and medical services was one of the few tax reductions which could be made without calling a special 
session of the legislature. These reduction now make it possible in Saskatchewan to have the combined hospital 
and medical premiums paid for 50 cents a week for a single person and one dollar per week for a family. 
Nowhere else on this continent are the citizens able to secure this type of protection for these amounts. 
 
The Provincial Treasurer was able to report that Saskatchewan’s crown corporations had completed the financial 
year ending 1963 with net surpluses of almost $11,000,000. Even excluding power and telephone, there was net 
profit of $1,300,000, the highest return on record. It is significant that the revenue to the Power Corporation from 
industrial electrical consumers increased by nearly 30 per cent during 1963. 
 
I’m grateful to the Provincial Treasurer for his reference to social welfare. In his budget address, he reminded the 
house that our programs in social welfare include social aid based on need; allowances for the blind; disabled and 
other handicapped persons; assistance for the aged, including the geriatric centres and grants for housing and 
nursing homes; a child welfare program which provides homes and cares for neglected children; correctional 
institutions for those who break the law; and many other programs designed to look after the needs of the 
unfortunate. It might be noted that the budget for all these programs in 1964-65 amounts to $29,363,110 an 
increase of $2,078,490 over the current year’s provision. 
 
On page 45 of the budget speech there is a table showing the increases in expenditures in the various departments 
for each year since 1954, when the expenditures of the Department of Social Welfare were slightly over 
$7,000,000. In the year 1961, the first year that I was minister, the 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
588 

expenditures were $14,300,000 and they will be up to $17,700,000 this year and $19,000,000 for the year ending 
March 31st, 1965. 
 
I will have something to say later about the criticisms which have been levelled by members opposite regarding 
these expenditures. 
 
I would like to say something about the section on education. The budget contains, among other things, 
provisions for an increased of $5,000,000 in school grants. This will bring the total of grants to $42,000,000, 
equivalent to over 30 mills of the total municipal tax assessment. I’m sure that since Saskatoon is the fastest 
growing city in Saskatchewan, we will be receiving when the estimates are approved, our share of this increase. 
Saskatoon’s share of school grants for the current year is $2,406,333. 
 
I must thank the government and especially the Minister of Agriculture and Education, for the leadership they 
have provided during the 12 months that resulted in a Veterinary College being established in Saskatoon. There 
was never any doubt in my mind as to where the college should be established, but there were several other 
centres anxious to have this new facility. I’m glad that an impartial tribunal decided that Saskatoon was the ideal 
location. 
 
The university plans a record capital development next year of $12,500,000. Of this, $4,500,000 will be financed 
directly from provincial grants, to be supplemented if necessary by provincially guaranteed loans. The budget 
also provides a $6,678,000 operating grant to the university, an increase of almost $1,500,000. This increase will 
bring the provincial operating grant to a level of $644. for each student, compared with $516. ten years ago. 
 
In addition to providing additional education facilities, special steps are being taken to assure that students should 
not be deprived of an education because of lack of funds. The budget will provide an extra $2,000,000 to increase 
the Student Aid Fund, to make a total permanent endowment of $5,000,000. 
 
The Central Saskatchewan Technical Institute which was opened in Saskatoon less than six months ago, is 
already too small to meet the immediate needs, and the budget provides for an additional $1,000,000 to be spent 
in Saskatoon to increase it’s capacity. The federal government of course, has agreed to this expenditure and will 
be providing 75 per cent of the amount. 
 
While I am speaking on education, I believe that the people of this province will be forever grateful to premier 
Lloyd for the leadership which he provided in Saskatchewan and in Canada while he was Minister of Education. 
The introduction of the larger school units which was opposed by the Liberal party, has been a major factor in 
making it possible for children in rural communities to get to high school and later to university. 
 
While the hon. member for Biggar, (Mr. Lloyd) was Minister of Education, he introduced a very sound Scottish 
concept, namely, to pay cash and to avoid going into debt if possible. When the present government was elected 
it was found that the total expenditures on the grounds and buildings at the University of Saskatchewan, at 
Saskatoon to March 31st, 1944, totalled $4,327,762. How much of this capital cost had been paid by March 31st, 
1944? Well not very much – $150,321.27 to be exact, leaving a total debt outstanding of $4,177,441. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, what’s happened since 1944? I find that total provincial capital expenditure on the University of 
Saskatchewan grounds and buildings from April 1st, 1944, to March 31st of this year will be $34,983,718.20. We 
have finally paid off the debts on the university buildings, some of them more than 50 years old. The total debt 
charges amount to $9,029,628.93. When one compares this amount on debt charges, on buildings which initially 
cost just over $4,000,000 one gets some idea of the advantages which have come to this province as the result of 
the leadership provided by the present Premier. 
 
The university hospital was one of the exceptions to the general rule. The outstanding debt on the hospital 
amounts to $972,260. Hon. members might be interested in the breakdown of some of these totals. 
 
The wise planners of nearly 60 years ago were able to get 1,980 acres for $120,000. The total expenditures for 
buildings – $26,203,741; University Hospital – $10,239,000; Nurses Residence – $2,397,000; the Laundry 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

589 

Building – $553,000; Research Council building – $885,000. The original Saskatchewan Hall was built for 
$278,000; Registration Building – $407,000; Qu’Appelle Hall – $335,000; Physics Building – $417,000; the 
Chemistry Building, one of the marvels of the mid-twenties cost only $732,000. 
 
As a citizen of Saskatoon and a member of this legislature, I believe I speak for everyone in Saskatoon when I say 
how very much we appreciate the consideration given to the needs of the university by this government and 
preceding governments. I believe that Liberal, Conservative and CCF governments have all supported the 
principle that a state university should be financed as generously as the provincial resources would permit, and 
that the Board of Governors should be free to provide the best possible education without political interference. 
 
Professor Carlyle King wrote ―The First Fifty‖ at the time of the university’s Golden Jubilee. Copies of this book 
are available in the library, should hon. members be asked to speak at Home and School meetings or conventions 
of teachers or trustees, this book, I believe would provide valuable source material. Dr. King writes: 
 

Those who have been privileged to learn and to teach at the university ought never to forget their debt to those 
who have been through successive phases of prairie agriculture – the man with the oxen, the man with the 
plow, the man on the tractor. 

 
The members for Humboldt, (Mrs. Batten), Turtleford, (Mr. Foley), Athabaska, (Mr. Guy) across the way, the 
Premier, the Attorney-General, the Minister of Education, the lady member for Saskatoon, (Mrs. Strum), the 
member for Kindersley, (Mr. Johnson) and I are all graduates from the University of Saskatchewan. I am sure 
that we will never forget our debt to the generous taxpayers of Saskatchewan. Dr. King refers to a sentence in the 
report of the first President of the University, Dr. Murray, who in his 1923 Annual Report wrote: 
 

A single improvement in seed wheat, such as the development of Marquis, or a single remedy against serious 
disease among animals or plants, such as heat rust, may produce or save enough wealth to support and endow 
not one, but all colleges to the country. 

 
In President J.S. Thompson’s 1941 report, Dr. King notes; 
 

Teaching is our first duty, we exist primarily to educate youth. 
 
While my colleague, the Minister of Health is a Rhodes Scholar from an older Canadian university, I am sure he 
will not disagree with the former professor of Dalhousie, who later became the first president of the University of 
Saskatchewan, Dr. Murray. Dr. Murray in his 1936 Annual Report wrote: 
 

Of 16 Rhodes Scholars, not one has failed, not one has received less than a second class in honours history, 
nine out of 16 received Firsts and higher degrees. No other province has been more fortunate. 

 
Dr. King writing in 1958, says that if Dr. Murray had lived for another 20 years, he could have gone much further 
and have said that in the academic achievement of its Rhodes Scholars, no state of the American Union, no 
section of the British Commonwealth, has had a better record at Oxford than Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Nicholson: — While Dr. King makes no mention of his own contributions in a great variety of fields, he lists 
a number of our distinguished graduates. The Prime Minister at the time the book was written, the Rt. Hon. John 
G. Diefenbaker, who graduated in 1915; Premier Woodrow S. Lloyd, (class of 1940) who was then Minister of 
Education; Chief Justice E.M. Culliton, who was a member of my own year, 1926. Although the chief Justice and 
I belonged to different political parties before he was appointed to the Bench, our classmates in ’26, when we 
graduated, selected him as the outstanding graduate of our year and I am sure that when we meet for our 40th 
anniversary, we will agree that we made a wise choice, that he’s still the most distinguished graduate of class ’26. 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
590 

The list contains the names of several deputy ministers of federal and provincial governments. Three 
Saskatchewan graduates are presidents of other Canadian universities – Corry at Queen’s, Thode at McMaster, 
and Leddy at Windsor. 
 
I want to repeat again, Mr. Speaker, that I think that Liberal, Conservative and CCF governments have all given 
high priority to the needs of the University of Saskatchewan. However, just as the payments to the university 
have mushroomed in the past 20 years, I anticipate that increases will be at an even greater rate during the next 
20 years. I do not believe that we will be serving the best interests of Saskatchewan by promising to reduce 
educational expenditures, as has been suggested by Liberal members. 
 
In the ―The First Fifties‖ mention is made of the rust epidemic of 1916 which resulted in the reducing of the crop 
of Marquis wheat by at least 100,000,000 bushels when wheat was selling at $2.00 a bushel. To discuss ways of 
combatting the epidemic, Dr. Walter Murray, then President of the University of Saskatchewan and a member of 
the recently founded National Research Council, took the initiative in urging a co-operative attack on the 
problem. After much indifference and inertia had been overcome, a conference was finally convened at Winnipeg 
in August 1917. It included the presidents of the western universities, the director of the Dominion Experimental 
Farms, and certain of the superintendents of the farms, the dominion cerealist and his assistant and dominion 
plant pathologist. Almost the whole time of the conference was devoted to such proposed measures as tillage 
practices, eradication of the barberry, which is the second host of the rust organism, the development of early 
varieties which might be expected to ripen before the rust attack because too severe, and studies on the life 
history of the rust in the hope of discovering some vulnerable point. Dr. W.P. Thompson, then a young scientist 
at the University of Saskatchewan, suggested that consideration be given to producing rust-resistant varieties by 
genetical methods. The proposal was made by Dr. Thompson, as a result of some observation during the great 
epidemic of 1916, when two agronomically useless varieties which he had been growing were almost free of rust 
although they were completely surrounded by varieties which were severely attacked. However, the proposal of 
the young scientist aroused very little interest. Indeed, so little was thought of the proposal that it was not even 
mentioned in the official minutes of the conference. One who later became a very well-known authority 
expressed the opinion that it was useless to expect anything worthwhile from a cross between a bread wheat and 
Durum wheat or Diciccum. The conference said in effect, ―You can go ahead if you like, but it looks to us like a 
waste of time and we will depend on other methods.‖ 
 
As a direct outcome of the work which was initiated by Dr. W.P. Thompson, rust-resistant varieties of wheat 
began to take their place on the farms during the thirties in friendly competition with a similar variety produced 
by similar methods in Minnesota. 
 
But let me repeat, the original idea was Dr. W.P. Thompson’s at the University of Saskatchewan. At present, 
approximately 90 per cent of the hundreds of millions of bushels grown annually in western Canada belong to 
these varieties, the rest being grown in western Alberta, where rust was never a serious menace. Improvements in 
the original resistant varieties with respect to other qualities are constantly being made by genetical methods. 
 
The rust problem is now solved. It may not stay solved because strains of rust which can attack the present 
resistant varieties are known an may spread; but we may reply on those who defeated the enemy before, to defeat 
it again. As a matter of insurance, they are already taking measures to produce varieties resistant to the newer 
strains of rust. The struggle may have to be carried on for a long time, but this legislature, in voting funds for 
university purposes, should take note of the direct results which have followed as a result of previous 
governments making funds available to establish and maintain a university with personnel to teach and carry out 
research in a great variety of fields. Without rust-resistant varieties it would have been impossible for 
Saskatchewan to have produced 500,000,000 bushels of wheat in 1963. 
 
I note by the press that Dr. W.P. Thompson has written a book dealing with medicare in Saskatchewan. I hope 
that before he is much older he will find time to write about his career as a teacher and a scientist. 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

591 

Dr. King has a chapter ―Research in Chemistry‖. Shortly after Dr. Thorvaldson joined the department of 
Chemistry in 1914, engineers in western Canada were becoming very concerned about the deterioration and 
failure of concrete structures, such as bridges, irrigation dams, and building foundations. Some attributed these 
weaknesses to poorly made concrete or to inferior cement or to the action of frost; others thought that the alkaline 
waters of the prairies corroded the concrete. 
 
Dr. Thorvaldson, for a ten year period, worked with a group of brilliant students, carrying on intensive research 
into chemical and physical changes occurring in concrete during disintegration in sulphate waters and into ways 
of preventing this disintegration. As a result of their work, remedies have been applied now for many years to the 
manufacture of commercial cement which is a standard product all over the North American continent. The result 
has been to increase the durability of structure from ten to 100 times and thereby to save millions of dollars. The 
data and results from their research likewise have applications to the problems of water purification and 
conditioning, of purification of alumina in the manufacture of metallic aluminium, and of the lime, sand lime 
bricks and related industries. 
 
Dr. Thorvaldson’s fundamental studies of the silicates and aluminates have established him as a scientist of 
international reputation. He was awarded the medal of the Canadian Institute of Chemistry and the Tory Medal of 
the Royal Society of Canada and was invited to lecture at International Symposia on the Chemistry of Cement at 
both Stockholm and London. I am happy to report that Dr. Thorvaldson attended all the sessions of the recent 
Resources Conference held in Saskatoon. I hope he too, before is much older, will take time to write of his 
teaching and research since coming to Saskatoon 50 years ago, with special mention being given to some of the 
outstanding graduates who have made Saskatchewan so well and favourably known throughout the world. 
 
―The First Fifty‖ was written when President Spinks was Dean of the College of Graduate Studies. The Minister 
of Education last night referred to one fact, that the School of Graduate Studies has attracted brilliant graduate 
students to Saskatchewan from all over the world. In passing, I would like to mention again, Mr. & Mrs. 
Harrington of Saskatoon who have Open House at their home on University Drive, the first Sunday of each 
month. I joined the guests last Sunday and was reminded of a visit to the United States. There must have been 
more than 50 representing at least 20 different countries. Mrs. Harrington supplies the food for all the guests each 
month. Their hospitality is one of the factors which makes Saskatoon to be remembered and favourable known in 
the countries now represented at the university. 
 
Hon. members are familiar with his outstanding work which has been accomplished since Dr. Spinks became 
President. We are probably not so familiar with the work he did in research after joining the Department of 
Chemistry at the university in 1930; however, this research resulted in his services being requested by the 
National Research Council of Canada during World War II, later being attached to the R.C.A.F. as an operational 
research officer. For the methods developed for search and rescue procedures for missing aircraft he was awarded 
the MBE. In 1944-45 he was a member of the joint United Kingdom and Canadian Atomic Energy project in 
Montreal. That is, he was one of a group of scientists assigned to the project which led up to the production of the 
atomic bomb. He is an internationally recognized authority on atomic energy, on the peacetime applications of 
which he has written extensively. Of course, his many activities since becoming President of the University of 
Saskatchewan make him a very well-known international figure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, time has not permitted me to mention scores of other research projects in every department, and 
hundreds of graduates who are a credit to themselves, their families and their university. I did want to say thank 
you to this government and to previous governments for the high priority which has been given each year to 
meeting the needs of the University of Saskatchewan. My reference to the research initiated by Dr. Thompson 
and Dr. Thorvaldson alone have paid enormous dividends. I have made these fairly extended remarks in the hope 
that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan will agree to continue to supply adequate funds for university education of 
high standards in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to refer briefly to some comments made by the financial critic for the Opposition who, 
in my opinion, did not make a very effective case in condemning the budget or indicating the type of cuts which 
would be made if, by any chance, he should be the next provincial treasurer. I am sorry he is not in the house 
today. The hon. member for Moosomin, (Mr. McDonald) on February 21st said: 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
592 

There are people in this province today that are in desperate need of some assistance and there is no assistance 
available. 

 
The hon. gentleman was in the legislature when the present Social Aid Act was passed in 1959, which is based on 
the inherent belief that it is the right of every individual, regardless of his race, creed, residence, or citizenship, to 
social aid when his need can be demonstrated, and the conviction that no individual should have to meet the test 
of moral worthiness in order to receive social aid. 
 
There are 800 municipalities in the province all responsible for granting social aid if there is need, in the 
unorganized districts and in the far north, either the Department of Municipal Affairs or the Department of 
Natural Resources have personnel who are authorized to issue social aid five days a week during office hours. 
The day-to-day decisions as to who are eligible for social aid must be made by municipal welfare officials. This 
has always been the practice since municipal government was established in these parts even prior to the province 
being formed. While the senior levels of government pay 38 per cent by the federal government and 55 per cent 
by the province, municipalities pay seven per cent but municipalities are responsible for the administration. Prior 
to the passing of the present act, municipalities paid 25 per cent. Years ago, when the Liberals were in office, the 
municipalities paid 100 per cent of social aid. 
 
The budget which we are discussing, Mr. Speaker, contains a vote for social aid totalling $12,912,160 which of 
course, will be shared by federal, provincial and municipal governments. With this amount in the budget, it is 
hard to understand the financial critic not taking the trouble to read the budget and the estimates tabled by the 
Provincial Treasurer, before saying, ―but for you to sit idly by on your hands with your eyes closed and to see 
these people with no income too proud to go on relief or social aid, and what have you done about it?‖ ―Nothing, 
not one single thing.‖ These are the words of the financial critic of the Opposition. 
 
I am sure that the mayors, reeves, councillors and welfare officials in 800 municipalities in Saskatchewan will be 
disturbed to know that the financial critic of the opposition is joining the Leader of the Opposition and the 
member for Rosthern in their attacks on social aid. I read that the Leader of the Opposition was taken to task at 
one of his meetings as a result of his speech during the throne speech debate on February 19th, 1963, a year ago. 
He didn’t exactly apologize for his irresponsible charges, but he did intimate that during the heat of the debate a 
person sometimes uses language he would not normally use. However, just to keep the record straight, these 
remarks were part of a very carefully prepared speech. There were students from the university on the floor of 
this legislature, who resented this sort of attack. After conceding that there were many people in Saskatchewan 
drawing social aid legitimately, either because of illness, death or unemployment, he went on to say: 
 

There is increasing evidence that hundreds of people are drawing social aid today who are simply not entitled 
to it. Social aid in Saskatchewan is becoming a provincial scandal. There is evidence that social aid on an 
ever-increasing scale is being given to chisellers, to deadbeats, to drunks and to people who are too lazy to 
work, to people who are frequently not even citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 
Then he went on to cite some cases. After making his charges I asked if he would supply me the names of those 
people, and he was good enough to do this. He gave me the names of those who in his view, justified his 
language of ―chisellers, deadbeats, drunks, people too lazy to work‖. They were all residents in the city of 
Regina. The charges were fully investigated, the city welfare authorities had carefully investigated each case, 
before social aid was granted, and again went over the files after the charges were made. They were all entitled to 
the social aid which had been granted. There was one – the man who had a Cadillac car. He had a Cadillac car, 
but the Leader of the Opposition did not tell the members of this house or his radio audience, that this was a very 
old Cadillac, which the Leader of the Opposition or you and I would not buy for $50.00. 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

593 

Then there was the woman, a single woman, a schoolteacher, who said she did not want to teach. The Leader of 
the Opposition didn’t tell this house or his radio audience that this very well-trained teacher had exhausted the 
life savings of her parents and herself in payment of drugs and medical services without any improvement to her 
health. Shortly after she was identified by the Leader of the Opposition over the radio stations of this province 
she was admitted to one of Saskatchewan’s hospitals, and I understand that the prognosis has not been very 
encouraging. It is true she was drawing $72.50 per month social aid from the city of Regina, but I must protest 
against the Leader of the Opposition or anyone else describing a sick teacher as a ―chiseller, deadbeat, drunk or a 
person too lazy to work‖. 
 

An Hon. Member: — Nobody would be that naïve. 
 

Mr. Nicholson: — These were the words used by the Leader of the Opposition a year ago in this chamber, 
regarding a teacher who was drawing social aid in the city of Regina. 
 

An Hon. Member: — You are playing an old record . . . 
 

Mr. Nicholson: — The financial critic referred to the federal government increasing the allowances to the old 
age assistance, the disabled person and the blind, from $65. to $75. He certainly tried to give the impression to 
his radio audience that this government has not increased the allowances for these groups. 
 
I understand that Saskatchewan was the first province in Canada to advise the federal government that we were 
increasing the allowance from $65 to $75 at the earliest possible date permitted by the legislation, namely the 
first of December. The financial critic for the opposition might well have told his radio audience that none of the 
people in these groups, in the province of Newfoundland and Quebec have yet received any increase in the 
allowances. While most of the provinces are making the payments retroactive to December first, as did 
Saskatchewan, the old, the blind, the disabled in the provinces of Newfoundland and Quebec had Christmas and 
New years and January and February and March and April without a five cent piece from the Liberal 
governments in their provinces or the Liberal government in Canada. 
 
While these allowances are announced by federal government, they are not paid until the province signs an 
agreement with the federal government, and the payments are made by the province and later the federal 
government reimburses the province. 
 
If the financial critic had taken the trouble to read his budget papers he would have found that this increase is 
going to cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan an extra $500,000 as these are all shared programs between the 
federal and provincial government. He might have told his radio audience that the expenditures over for these 
three programs he talked about would cost $4,920,501 for Old Age Assistance; $1,628,100 for Disabled Persons 
Allowances; and $381,840 for Blind Persons Allowance. 
 
The financial critic proved the point that he made, that he needed some research to help prepare his speech. He 
said; 
 

As you know, the government of Canada increased their old age assistance security, blind and disabled persons 
allowances, by ten dollars. What has this government done? They have taken into consideration this ten dollars 
increase and cut down the supplementary allowance. 

 
If the hon. member had taken the trouble to check his speech with the hon. member from Melville, (Mr. Gardiner) 
he would at least have been able to get his facts straight. The hon. member has been here long enough to know 
that these programs – the Old Age Assistance, the Blind Persons Assistance, the Disabled Persons Allowance – 
are all shared by the federal and provincial governments. The old age security is paid to everyone in Canada over 
70 years of age without any needs or means test. I’ll come back to this a little later to settle the discussion 
between the Minister of Natural Resources and the Leader of the Opposition. Everyone in Canada at 70 is 
entitled to the old age security. 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
594 

The CCF government in Saskatchewan was the first government in Canada to pay a supplementary allowance to 
senior citizens and until the federal government shared the cost of this program, no Liberal Provincial 
government anywhere in Canada provided a supplementary allowance to senior citizens. 
 
When I became minister in 1960 the average monthly payment for supplementary allowance was $5.60. The 
average is now more than four times this amount, this supplementary allowance was paid entirely from provincial 
funds, however, in 1961 the program was converted from a means to a needs tests, which is shareable by the 
federal government. We have over 9,000 citizens in Saskatchewan receiving their supplementary allowances 
which I repeat, is now shared by the federal and provincial governments, who are receiving, in addition to the 
extra ten dollars from the federal government an increase of between $1.50 to $2.50 per month in their 
supplementary allowances. 
 
Let me repeat this, there are about 9,000 in Saskatchewan, who after the federal government increased the 
allowance from $65 to $75, are receiving an increase in their supplementary allowance of from $1.50 to $2.50 per 
month. In addition there are over 3,000 receiving the supplementary allowance paid entirely by the province. The 
federal government does not share these allowances because of excess income or assets, but the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan are keeping this group on their supplementary allowance pay lists and we will be paying $247,000 
for this group in the budget year under discussion. I submit that this is almost a quarter of a million more than 
―nothing‖. 
 
At least 95 per cent of the supplementary allowance recipients received the full ten dollar increase or more. These 
over 70 and blind recipients of supplementary allowance in Saskatchewan will be receiving $2,414,000 during 
the next year. This in my view is more than ―nothing‖ as suggested by the financial critic. When I became 
minister, this amount was $1,132,000. This has more than doubled during the past four years. I don’t take credit 
for this. I give full marks to my colleagues in the cabinet who agree that these programs deserve high priority. 
 
There are about 300 recipients who are living in boarding and rooming houses whose needs are calculated on the 
basis of the cost of the board and room, plus allowance for clothing, comforts and incidentals. Previously, in 
addition to having sufficient to pay board, they had an extra $25.50 a month. This group has been allowed an 
extra $3.50 per month for incidentals. This means that they will have $29.00 per month over and above their 
room and board. How can any responsible member say, when a citizen over 70 has sufficient to pay board and 
room plus $29.00 a month, that nothing has been done, when no Liberal government in the dominion of Canada 
has made a move in this direction? 
 
There is another group of about 200 recipients who live in nursing homes and hostels other than provincial 
geriatric centres, who have their needs calculated to be maintenance, some clothing, and personal needs. The 
calculation of the cash allowance over and above the maintenance has generally worked out to be almost $25.50 a 
month. This group did not receive any extra money when the pension was increased. This decision was made, 
due to ample provision being made by the homes to meet most of the needs, and because of the limited wants of 
this group. In fact, representations have been made to the Department of Social Welfare by numerous 
administrators of homes that trust accounts were growing at an alarming rate so there was danger of these persons 
disqualifying themselves for supplementary allowances because of increased cash assets; however, a number of 
the institutions have increased their maintenance rates more than ten dollars per month since the increase to 
$75.00 became effective. When these rates are increased the supplementary allowances are automatically 
increased. In several of the nursing homes the recipients are receiving care which costs $150.00 a month, and 
there is no problem about the supplementary allowance being adjusted to make up the difference between $75 
pension and the cost of care. 
 
The financial critic used very harsh words to describe the D.P.A. legislation introduced by Hon. Paul Martin, a 
friend of the Leader of the Opposition and myself, when the financial critic said, ―I want to repeat again today 
that I think it is a disgrace the interpretation of the word, ―disabled‖.‖ I would like to enquire if this was one of 
the topics discussed by the Leader of the Opposition and Mr. Pearson, when he was in Ottawa and had a 15 
minute interview with the Prime Minister recently. 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

595 

The financial critic was good enough to say that he knew it was federal legislation, but I confess I used very 
strong language myself when this legislation was introduced in the House of Commons some years ago. To be 
eligible you have to be totally and permanently disabled, and as the financial critic said, you pretty well have to 
be flat on your back in bed, but this is federal legislation and none of the provinces were consulted before it was 
introduced, and in spite of representations by the province to liberalize these, they have continued while the 
Liberals were in office and while the Conservatives were in office. There is still a third test. You must pass a 
means test, and even so, if you are totally and permanently disabled you can be help up on a means test. 
 
However, it is quite improper to suggest that in Saskatchewan, the citizen denied any of this allowance, for any or 
all of these reasons, should starve. Municipal welfare officials to my personal knowledge are most sympathetic 
and helpful in these very difficult situations. 
 
I saw the hon. member for Melville, (Mr. Gardiner) here recently, but he is not here now, I appreciated this 
remarks this afternoon in discussing social aid, I’m sure he would say, if he were here, that as a municipal 
welfare official he would be most sympathetic to anyone in his municipality who had applied for a totally 
disabled pension and was rejected. 
 
I appreciate the fact that the very high standards set maintained by my excellent staff have resulted in the citizens 
preferring to deal with provincial welfare officials. However, I must appeal to hon. members opposite to avoid 
downgrading municipal welfare officials. They too, have established on the whole, high standards. 
 
I want to say again that we have on either side of the house members who perform this duty on a day-to-day basis 
when they are not here, and I want to say that both have people in their communities who do not share their 
political views. But no one in the Melville constituency has ever complained on the grounds that their member, 
who is the welfare officer in their town has given social aid to people because they were voting for him or has 
denied social aid because they were voting against him. No complaint has come from the Shellbrook constituency 
where the member for Shellbrook, (Mr. Thiessen) performs this duty on a day-to-day basis. It is unthinkable, Mr. 
Speaker, that either of these members who are standing for re-election would stoop to tactics which have been 
suggested in this chamber from time to time in discharging this responsible civic duty. 
 
Is money received from municipal government tainted in some way? Why do hon. members opposite maintain 
that there is a stigma attached to receiving financial aid from the municipality by people who have a legislative 
right to it? Why is it all right to receive assistance from the federal government, provincial government, but not 
all right to receive assistance when you need it from your municipal government? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this afternoon my colleague, the Minister of Natural Resources took some exception to the 
Leader of the Opposition, now posing as a friend of the old pensioners. Although he had opposed old age 
pensions in the House of Commons, the Leader of the Opposition in a point of privilege while the minister was 
on the radio, denied ever having opposed pensions. I question the propriety of a responsible member challenging 
a statement of this sort when he expected that the hon. member making the statement would not have any chance 
to consult Hansard before he finished. But I was able to go to the library and found volume two of the 1952 
session. This was when the Leader of the Opposition was a member of our Party. This was a speech delivered on 
April 24th, 1952. It was quite a long speech, so I can not read all of it, but here is part of it: 
 

But today we are paying old age pensions to every Canadian of the age of 70 years without a means test. That 
measure passed this parliament unanimously, and I was one of the members who supported it, but I must admit 
I’m beginning to wonder if certain modifications to that act might not be desired. We have had this scheme 
now for four months and I cannot help doubting the wisdom of paying old age pensions to Canadians who are 
healthy, and have no need of them. 

 
And then our mutual friend, Jimmy Sinclair, interrupted, ―You want a means test in other words?‖ 
 

Mr. Thatcher said, ―Just let me continue‖. 
 

Mr. Sinclair; ―You want a means test‖. 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
596 

Mr. Thatcher: ―I must say I find it ludicrous that taxpayers of Canada, overburdened as they are, should be 
paying an old age pension. I take this gentleman only as an example, the Prime Minister, Mr. St. Laurent, I 
cannot believe that a man in his financial circumstances needs it.‖ 

 
And then he refers to his old friend, J.S. MacLean. 
 

The point I am trying to make, (said the Leader of the Opposition) is that there are thousands and thousands of 
Canadians receiving the old age pension who obviously do not need it. The same might be said of baby 
bonuses. Taxpayers are going to spend $332,000,000 this year on family allowances. 

 
Then our mutual friend, Mr. Garson, the Minister of Justice: 
 

Would the hon. member permit a question? Would he apply a means test to the family allowances too? 
 
Then Stanley Knowles said: 
 

Over my dead body. 
 

Mr. Thatcher: ―I thank the minister for his question, I would like to answer it. I wonder if it is possible to pay 
old age pensions or family allowances to these people with incomes over $5,000 a year. 

 
And then went on to say that: 
 

Five thousand dollars a year, I take that figure out of the air, perhaps it should be $6,000, I am referring to these 
people who have no need of them. If the minister adopted this suggestion, my closest estimate is that it would 
save the taxpayers about $30,000,000. 

 
He would like to take $30,000,000 from the children, from the people. 
 

An Hon. Member: — Oh no . . . 
 

Mr. Nicholson: — Oh yes, a means test he wants to introduce the means test. 
 

Mr. R. Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — For those making $6,000 a year or more . . . 
 

Mr. Nicholson: — Well, the Leader of the Opposition is now advocating that we abolish the old age security, 
that provides the allowance at 70, we introduce a means test and no one in Canada will get $75.00, no one will 
get the family allowance until he has gone through a humiliating means test. We are glad to know that this is the 
―New Look‖ for the Liberal party come 1964. 
 
I explained, Mr. Speaker, that the supplementary allowances are a shared program with the federal government, 
that there is no province in Canada with a Liberal government that made any move to supplement the allowances 
for the blind, or the elderly, until the federal government came into the field. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I received a copy of a clipping from the Ottawa Citizen, following the visit to the capital by 
the Leader of the Opposition, our mutual friend Norman Campbell, wrote in his column in the Ottawa Citizen, 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

597 

February 29th, 1964, and he says: 
 

The National Liberal Federation will not officially take part in the Saskatchewan election. Speculation is that 
the National Liberal Federal officers and many members of the government here feel that Mr. Thatcher and his 
Saskatchewan followers lean a little too far to the right. 

 
On a visit here a week ago, Mr. Thatcher was only given 15 minutes by Prime Minister Pearson. When 
questioned in the Commons regarding the talk, Mr. Pearson would not say for sure whether medicare was 
discussed. 

 
And the Leader of the Opposition is unable to advise us whether he presented the case for revising disable 
persons’ allowance or not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, the Provincial Treasurer has authorized a gross expenditure of over 
$29,000,000 for the Department of Social Welfare for the next year. I don’t believe there is any province in 
Canada that is as generous to the Department of Social Welfare; however, neither the Provincial Treasurer nor I 
have ever suggested that the elderly, disabled, blind, social aid recipients are enjoying the luxuries of an affluent 
society. While we have a very impressive record of achievement to our credit these past 20 years, many of our 
goals will not be reached until we have in office in Ottawa a government prepared to introduce the type of 
planning in peacetime which has been so successful in wartime. 
 
Mr. Leon Keyserling, one of the bright young people recruited by the late president Roosevelt some years ago, 
completed a study in the United States to demonstrate how costly unemployment is. Unfortunately a similar study 
has not been done in Canada. Keyserling states that from the end of the Korean War to mid 1962, 24,000,000 
man years of excessive unemployment meant that United States produced about $375,000,000,000, less in goods 
and services than they should have. Keyserling states; 
 

With this additional output, we could have lifted the living standards of 77,000,000 Americans who still live in 
poverty or lesser deprivation, reduced the deficiencies in public programs, education, health, development of 
natural resources, urban renewal and housing, and carried with less strain our defence and international 
obligations. 

 
Some day we will have a government in Ottawa which will tackle with imagination, programs designed to 
provide maximum employment. Some day we will have a government in Ottawa which will introduce on the 
federal level, medicare for all our citizens, programs designed to make financially possible, desirable programs 
which are physically possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will gather by now, that I will be supporting the budget. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. David Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, this has been the second time that the hon. Minister of Social 
Welfare has spoken in this house this session and we have yet to hear the program that he is to present for the 
coming year. He has wasted practically all his time in criticizing what the members on the opposite side of them 
have said in the last two debates. He roamed all over in this last hour telling us of the University of Saskatchewan 
and recommended to us a book by a professor Carlyle King. He roamed all over the chemistry department and he 
even suggested rusted wheat and I want to suggest to him now, that he doesn’t know May wheat from May West. 
 
The Minister of Social Welfare is talking about the means test in Saskatchewan. The provincial government has 
the most rigid means test when it comes to supplementary allowance, and he need not talk about the means test 
that was suggested by Mr. Thatcher in the House of Commons to those that were receiving a $6,000 income. 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
598 

Now a striking difference of this debate as compared to previous sessions, is the manner in which cabinet 
ministers have announced their programs for the coming year. Minister after minister has risen in his place, while 
on air time and commended the Liberal party, its leaders and certain individuals on this side of the house, then 
when off the air, they would proceed in announcing their department’s programs. The other day, the hon. 
Minister of Co-ops for half an hour on air time, commended my colleague, the hon. member for Athabaska, (Mr. 
Guy). Than when he was off the air . . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Boldt: — . . . then when he was all worn out and off the air, he faintly began to expound on his department’s 
program. This has been the routine of most of the governments’ members that have spoken in this debate. When 
they have finished lashing out at us, and calling us everything under the sun, they close by saying, ―Mr. Speaker, 
before I sit down, I would like to express regret that the hon. members to your left have found it necessary to 
retire from public life‖ and they go on to tell the house what fine contributions the hon. members from Humboldt, 
(Mrs. Batten), Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. Klein), Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) and Wilkie, (Mr. Horsman) have 
made, how well they have served their constituency, how they have never questioned their integrity and sincerity. 
This line of double talk is hard for me to understand, but I was enlightened somewhat, when I heard the hon. 
member for Milestone, (Mr. Erb) speak in the debate yesterday when he related the hatred and mistrust that 
harbours in some members to your right, towards, us, Mr. Speaker,. 
 
Well, I have decided that a long time ago, to go out of politics when the time comes, I will harbour hatred 
towards none of our fellowmen. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Speaker, I want to express regret for the members of this house who are retiring from the 
political arena, for the three senior members of this house who are retiring due to age, I believe they have all 
served their communities and province well, and deserve a well-earned retirement blessed with good health and 
happiness. Those who are retiring for personal reasons, I am sure they have left their contributions with us and 
will long be remembered. We wish them well in their future undertakings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have never asked the indulgence of this house to listen to the problems we have in the Rosthern 
constituency, but after having listened to the budget speech and the programs as outlined by the Minister of 
Highways, and the Minister of Industry, relating to the Rosthern constituency I am compelled to register 
complaints. 
 
The Minister of Highways has had numerous delegations from Rosthern area, and the cities of Saskatoon and 
Prince Albert, requesting the oiling of No. 11, north of Rosthern. As late a September last, the hon. minister gave 
assurance that No. 11 would be given top priority in future projects. Mr. Speaker, do you know that this next year 
1,126 miles of road will be built or improved and not one mile or one dollar will be spent in the constituency of 
Rosthern? When the NDP convention was called in the fall of 1963, and it was announced that hon. Premier was 
to be the guest speaker, and an editorial appeared in the Saskatchewan Valley News, and I would like to read one 
paragraph from it relating to this highway. The editorial deals with both problems in Rosthern, natural gas and 
the highway. Now the editorial goes on to say: 
 

Not only does Mr. Lloyd owe the people of the area an explanation of these points, he owes it to the man, if 
there is one who has the guts to run for his party in this constituency in the next election. Without any 
commitment, it is our opinion that such a man regardless of who he may be hasn’t the chance of retaining even 
his deposits in the next provincial ballotting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

599 

Mr. Boldt: — The cities of Saskatoon and Prince Albert are also most anxious to have these 39 miles dust-free 
and I can assure the minister that strong representation will be made from these areas in the near future. This 
almost appears to be a premeditated gimmick. I will not be surprised to hear that the NDP candidate for Rosthern 
will come to Regina and the hon. Minister of Highways will bow to his requests and he will fly home, telling the 
people that he got the road for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what about the gas in this area? This is another sad story and the members of this house would be 
very interested in hearing how the hon. minister has misled the people of this area. Way back in 1961, a 
delegation from the constituency visited the minister and they were told that the iron ore deposits at Choiceland 
were now being explored and if developed a heavier pipe line would be installed and it would serve the area 
north of Saskatoon between the two Saskatchewan Rivers to Prince Albert, and to Choiceland. This line would 
then take care of the Warman to Duck Lake area, the delegation was rather pleased with the news from the hon. 
minister and left Regina confident that natural gas would be served within a year or two, if these iron ore deposits 
would be developed. While travelling home by train, they bought the Leader Post and they read a news item that 
a delegation from Govan had just recently been to see the hon. minister and he had promised the Govan 
delegation the line he had also promised to Rosthern. A few weeks later, a delegation from Wynyard were 
promised a pipe line if the Choiceland iron deposits would be developed. The Rosthern delegation after reading 
this news item, consulted the minister by telephone and spoke to him about the Govan promise, and the minister 
is reported to have said, ―Well, they’re from my constituency, I had to tell them something‖. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Boldt: — So far there is no iron mine at Choiceland and no gas line . . . 
 

Hon. R. Brown (Minister of Industry and Information): — On a point of privilege, I don’t know how the hon. 
gentleman can quote telephone conversations. He has no record of it, and he is not quoting the actual reference to 
statement which I made, but I am enjoying what he is saying, so I’m quite prepared to let him go ahead. 
 

Mr. Boldt: — So far there is no iron mine at Choiceland and no gas line for the Rosthern constituency. This is 
the way these two cabinet ministers have been fooling the people in the Rosthern constituency and the people in 
the constituency are doubting every word they utter and so do I. If the ministers have not got what it takes to tell a 
community whether they will get something or not, and give the reasons for doing so, they are not qualified for 
the high office they represent. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Boldt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture has also come under sever criticism in my area, in 
the manner in which crown lands are leased. The farmers in my constituency have come to the conclusion that in 
order to qualify for a grazing lease, you first have to join the NDP party. An outstanding example was right in my 
home constituency where a social aid recipient living in town who did not have a calf let alone a cow, received a 
grazing lease for one quarter, the northwest of 20-38-5 west of the 3rd. As far as I have been able to find out, he 
still hasn’t any cattle on it, the only qualifications he had, was that he is a strong supporter of the NDP party. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
600 

Mr. Boldt: — This case was so extreme that even the land allocation committee wanted the RM of Warman to 
approve the application which they seldom asked for, the RM council passed a resolution informing the land 
allocation committee that they would have nothing to do with this. I understand that the social welfare minister 
had his finger in this pie too. 
 

Mr. Nicholson: — On a point of privilege, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has no justification for making a 
charge, I ask him to withdraw. There’s absolutely no truth in this charge, Mr. Speaker, he must withdraw it. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! 
 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Speaker, before I withdraw, the minister will have to answer whether he was not represented 
in the Pool office at Osler at the time. 
 

Mr. Nicholson: — Mr. Speaker, I deny having made representation on behalf of any one in this province 
regarding the lease or any other matter affecting the government. I ask the hon. gentleman to withdraw . . . 
 

Mr. Boldt: — The information that I have from a municipal councillor is that he did have his finger in the pie 
and I . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! The minister states on his word that he had nothing to do with that. I think 
the hon. member must accept that statement of the minister. 
 

Mr. Boldt: — The information that I have, is that the minister had something to do with it, but . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! Does the hon. member withdraw the statement? 
 

Mr. J.E. Snedker (Saltcoats): — On a point of order, he made the statement on his own authority, he doesn’t 
have to withdraw. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! 
 

Mr. Snedker: — Mr. Douglas told me . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! I wish you would quote your section in the book which you assumed that 
rule from. 
 

Mr. Snedker: — You’ll find it in the Beauchesne. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I have the Beauchesne right here. Would the hon. member proceed. 
 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Speaker, my friend the hon. Minister of Social Welfare has stated in this house on occasion, 
and in press reports that the Liberal party 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

601 

in criticizing the social welfare department, and is casting a shadow on the integrity of social welfare officials. 
Does the minister really believe this to be so? That there are no abuses in social aid? I can hardly believe this to 
be so. What do the social aid officials and councillors say, who help administer the aid? I will read from a press 
report to show what they have to say, and this is not said by Liberals or by politicians, and I am reading from a 
report of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipality convention, a delegate said, it was at one of their 
meetings, I think a year or so ago, and its reported from the Saskatoon Star Phoenix . . . 
 

Mr. Nicholson: — Would the hon. gentleman give the date? 
 

Mr. Boldt: — I’ll read the report: 
 

The lack of initiative of relief recipients in finding employment was alleged by delegates to the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipal convention, during the discussion of social aid resolutions Thursday. 

 
and this is what he has to say: 
 

The Department of Social Welfare was asked to grant permission to issue the social aid cheques to the wife 
rather than the head of the household, when it was deemed necessary. 

 
One delegate said: 
 

The aid should be in a form of a food order rather than a cheque. 
 
It was true that the wife should have the cheque where the husband has been in the habit of going into a beer 
parlor and spending the money on drinks, rather than on food for the family. But the delegate pointed out: 
 

Now there was mixed drinking, and the husband or the wife could waste the money on drinks, so it would be 
better if the aid was issued in the form of a food order. 

 
And this was said by one of the delegates, of a R.M. Council, not a politician. Then what does Joe Phelps say 
about social aid in Saskatchewan, (a former CCF cabinet minister of this government) well he is reported to have 
said, in the August 13th, 1962 Star Phoenix, the headline: 
 

Social Aid Situation Alarming, Phelps says, should provide work. 
 
He says: 
 

If there isn’t any alternative, than the present situation could not only ruin our country, but also ruin our people. 
The answer is work, a job at a living wage and a start must be made now. 

 
He felt that able bodied people who needed or sought social aid should be organized into a paint-up, clean-up 
campaign for Canada’s centennial birthday coming up in five years. This is one of the CCF and I agree with Mr. 
Phelps. 
 
Now what does the social welfare say? The premiers only recently about eight or nine months ago met in 
Vancouver, and they tried to persuade the federal government that they should change the law in regards to work 
for aid. While their annual report, the social welfare department came out and said, it disagrees strongly with the 
proposition ―Work for Aid‖. 
 

Generally such projects tend to be of a make work nature which often permits slack work habits. 
 

Mr. Nicholson: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the hon. gentleman would be good enough to read the paragraph 
before that, so that we get the whole two paragraphs. 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
602 

Mr. Boldt: — He goes on to say: 
 

If these work projects provide useful occupation they would invariably interfere with normal deployment and 
substitute one group of unemployed for another. 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that the hon. gentleman doesn’t . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! 
 

Mr. Nicholson: — On a point of privilege, I’m sure the hon. member does not wish to mislead the house by 
taking a sentence out . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! other hon. members can read the report for themselves also. 
 

Mr. Boldt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, even the hon. Minister of Social Welfare admits that we have chiselers on the 
social aid. He tells us that we are the ones that accuse them of being chiselers, and even in the report, they have to 
come out and stoop to the level there they say: 
 

That serious allegations were made in regard to chiselers in the legislature. 
 
Well, at a meeting in Melfort, the Star Phoenix reports December 13th, 1962, and I quote: 
 

One question asked was: Do professional welfare workers promote social aid? Mr. Nicholson quickly replied: 
―They were not looking for it‖. He also stated that every time a new rule or regulation was made to protect the 
public against chiselers, 

 
Now listen to this: 
 

A chiseler was found in another loop hole. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Nicholson: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege, the hon. member raised this in public accounts, I 
denied having made this statement, I ask the hon. member to accept the statement, that I did not make that 
statement. It wasn’t I who made the statement . . . 
 

Mr. Boldt: — This statement was made in December 13th, 1962, the minister never said that it was incorrect, so 
I take it as this . . . 
 

Mr. Nicholson: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, I stated in Public Accounts that I had never made such a 
statement, I have not seen the dispatch, I still haven’t seen it, but I certainly deny having made that statement, 
anywhere in Saskatchewan at any time. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member will have to accept the minister’s statement because he is quoting from a 
press report and I think the hon. members will realize that the hon. member must accept the minister’s statement. 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

603 

Mr. Snedker: — On a point of order, why is this accepting statements, a one way street? Why must we always 
accept them from that side, and not from this side? Doesn’t it work both ways? 
 

Mr. Speaker: — It has been working both ways. 
 

Mr. Boldt: — This statement here is in quotation and the minister had every right to correct it in the Star 
Phoenix. I have never seen the correction. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! It isn’t the responsibility of any member to have to correct paper reports 
that appear from time to time. But it is the privilege of any member when he rises in the house, and denies that he 
made the statement which appears in the paper, the other members must accept their statement on it. 
 

Mr. Boldt: — Well, the minister is accusing the Star Phoenix of misrepresentation. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! I am ask the hon. member to withdraw that statement, because the minister 
denied having made such a statement, and he must accept the minister’s word in good faith. 
 

Mr. Boldt: — Well, I’ll accept his denial, but the feathers are in the air. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Boldt: — Then, Mr. Speaker, the Social Welfare Minister does not believe that the councillors of the 
divisions could administer social aid better than an official. The hon. minister is the one that maligns the RM 
councils and let him straighten out his thinking before he accuses us of doing so. And I imagine the minister will 
deny this report too, but I’ll read it; speaking in Tisdale and I hope the Minister of Finance and the member for 
Nipawin will bear this out, if he denies this: 
 

Some of those present felt that the councillor of divisions had a much more concrete idea of those who needed 
social aid and felt that possibly could be administered better on this basis. Mr. Nicholson said he doubted this 
and implied that particularly during a year, he was seeking re-election councillors might be influenced. 

 
James Cooper, secretary of the Rural Municipality of Porcupine, took strong exception to the minister’s remarks 
and in this said: 
 

He felt the minister’s suggestion was entirely wrong in this respect. 
 
That is the statement of the Social Welfare Minister and when he goes around the province telling the social 
welfare people and the municipal people that the Liberals are maligning the officials, he is just guilty and more 
guilty than we are now. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, because of the injustices of certain departments of government towards the constituency of 
Rosthern, I am compelled to vote against the motion. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
604 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — On a point of privilege, I did not want to interrupt the hon. 
member when he was speaking, but he made the statement that a certain parcel of land was disposed for 
agricultural purposes. The hon. member ought to know, because he discussed this with me. This land is not up for 
agricultural. 
 

Mr. Boldt: — I said a grazing lease . . . 
 

Mr. Nollet: — I don’t care whether you said a grazing lease or not, its not up for agricultural disposition. Its 
opposite Martinville and it is being retained for ultimate development that might take place . . . 
 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Speaker, he’s making a speech it is exactly what I said in the house . . . 
 

Mr. Nollet: — Well, you’re only being corrected. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! 
 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I understand the curtain will be coming down on this 
debate tomorrow so that if I am going to say anything, I understand that I must say it now. 
 
First before I make some comments on the budget, I should like to add my tribute to that of the others in paying 
tribute to the members who are not seeking re-election. To add further than that, I think would be superfluous. I 
was interested, though, in so many people paying tribute to these members, ―We shall miss you‖, and I thought 
that was remarkable statement, because come April, is it April, May, June or whatever it may be they may be 
joining the ranks. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Cameron: — I am going to play it safe, Mr. Speaker, I am going to say that in the years ahead, I will miss 
the association that we’ve had as members of the legislature together. I shall treasure your friendships and I shall 
consider that my life has been enriched because of our associations, and my having known you. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Cameron: — I was interested in the little cross-fire that went on, when the member from Weyburn, (Mr. 
Staveley) was speaking about population loss. I know it’s a very very ticklish and delicate subject with the 
members across the way, and I was interested in the stand taken by the Attorney-General. I just want to say this, 
in going back over history, I can remember when the former premier, the hon. T.C. Douglas rose up with all the 
passion at his command and said, ―you know when the dirty Liberals were in office, the population were 
deserting this province, until it reached a crescendo of hemmorage. He said ―you know, we haven’t stopped the 
hemmorage but we’ve checked the bleeding. And he said, ―We hope eventually to heal the wound. The 
Attorney-General from the press reports which I observed the other day, would say that perhaps we’ve stopped 
the bleeding too soon, because we still . . . 
 

Hon. R.A. Walker (Attorney-General): — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, it strains the sense of humour of 
this house to hear this tired refrain coming from hon. members opposite. If my hon. friend . . . 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

605 

An Hon. Member: — Sit him down, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — What is your point of order? 
 

Mr. Walker: — If my hon. friend wishes to quote anything I said, I suggest he quote it and not paraphrase it in 
words which are not precisely accurate. 
 

Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Speaker, may I proceed after that interjection? I want to continue by saying that the 
Attorney-General disagreed, because he says, we still have some unwholesome blood in the province and it might 
 

Mr. Walker: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, this ceases to be funny, my hon. friend should quote what I 
said, I said no such thing. I said no such thing Mr. Speaker, and I demand that he withdraw it. 
 

An Hon. Member: — He is ashamed of what he said. 
 

Mr. Walker: — I’m not ashamed of what I said, but I don’t like having things attributed to me that I did not say. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! We can’t debate this. The hon. Attorney-General denies that he made that 
statement, and I would ask the member to either substantiate it or withdraw it. 
 

Mr. Cameron: — Well, I think if he denies he spoke about the loss of blood, I shall withdraw it. 
 

Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, I never spoke about any blood . . . 
 

Mr. Cameron: — After all, if it is Saskatchewan blood, or someone else’s blood, it is all blood. The Minister of 
Industry and Information said in diagnosing the illness, we shouldn’t have a further loss of blood, what we need 
is to import a transfusion, and therefore, he is looking about, he says, to import a new transfusion of blood in 
order to give a new vitality to Saskatchewan. 
 
The debate, it appeared to me this session, Mr. Speaker, and I regret to have to say this, but I think in 16 years in 
this house, I have never seen the debate degenerate to that of an extensive reading marathon. I could expect fresh 
members, inexperienced in the legislature, to have to read speeches prepared for them or assisted with, but I am 
amazed when I see responsible ministers of the crown stand up as I witnessed this evening and again yesterday 
and the day before, and read everything that was placed in front of them, and the moment their finger lost the 
line, they couldn’t continue. Now you know, Mr. Speaker, that the reason for not permitting the reading of 
speeches in the legislature is to prevent the possibility of someone not a member to inject his thinking into the 
debates. 
 
If at any time I refer to my notes, or I should read carefully something that I have written, I can assure the house it 
is my thinking, composed in my own way and delivered in my way. 
 

Mr. Walker: — Nobody can make a mistake on that. 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
606 

Mr. Cameron: — I was surprised too at the amount of drive emanating from ministers of the crown. In place of 
dealing with their departments and the budget, which after all, Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, is to lay before the 
legislature, how we propose to raise money and how we propose to spend it. The Minister of Public Works, I 
think it was yesterday, while on the radio, spoke for 35 minutes at ten dollars a minute to the taxpayer, 
reminiscing about the wonderful enjoyment he had when Moose Jaw celebrated their Jubilee in 1963. That was 
of vital interest to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. I recall the members from the city of Regina, arising in the 
debate, pleading with the Minister of Health, to give consideration to establishing a base hospital in Regina. They 
did that, Mr. Speaker, fully aware that that decision had been made months ago. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Cameron: — I’m speaking of the hospital in the city of Regina, speaking of the hospital in Regina. You are 
aware, Mr. Speaker, from the press reports and debates in the house, that for four years both the present minister 
and the former Minister of Health had kept the Regina hospital board in a state of turmoil, they said we will grant 
you permission and we will give you financial assistance to build you hospital, or to extend it. The next time they 
turned around and said, we withdraw that privilege and we think we are going to build our own. They changed 
their minds again, and said, we think we are going to give it to you. This went on for four years, in which the 
Regina hospital board could do nothing but twiddle their thumbs and indulge in this guessing game. You know it 
reminded me of pulling petals from the daisy, you love me, you love me not. The other day the minister gave his 
answer, he loves them not. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Cameron: — And now the new twist is this. I understand that the minister has decided that we are going to 
get a regional hospital for the southern part of Saskatchewan, and I understand it may or it may not be in the city 
of Regina. It will be in or near the city of Regina. By the speeches this afternoon, I take it that Echo Lake and 
Fort Qu’Appelle and all of these areas are in the city of Regina or close to it. So I am sure you will hear the 
members again going to the people of Regina and saying, be sure to re-elect us because we will be sure to appeal 
to the Minister of Health on behalf of you that we get this hospital in Regina. They will play it right down to the 
last drop. This would be of interest and it would be amusing if it were not for the tragedy that this game of hide 
and seek has placed in jeopardy the health of thousands of people. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Cameron: — Today we have 2,000 anxious patients looking toward the hospitals in Regina for admittance 
and they are in this position because of this government’s inability to make a decision. If they had done this four 
years go this would have been corrected and now during the next four years, they can look forward to a further 
wait. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know whether it is because of my years of service in the local government level, both as 
councillor and as a school trustee and as a parent, but I never cease to be amazed at the manner in which the 
government drafts its budget. I recall that on the local level, our councillors and our trustees first sat down and 
gave serious consideration to some new service that they would like to introduce. Having done that, they then 
give serious consideration as to whether or not the tax base will support that service without undue strain. This 
government considers that approach to budgeting to be old-fashioned and out of date, to be progress in reverse. 
 
They say in order to have successful budgeting, take your brain trusts, and put them to work devising ways and 
means to raise the tax dollar and leave the spending to the lesser lights. That is evident in the budget 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

607 

last year and again this year. The tax collector has had remarkable success he has poured funds into the provincial 
coffers in such huge quantities, and at such a fast rate, that the ministers have become hard-pressed to keep up 
with it. Therefore, they are instituting each year, last year and again this year, programs of expenditures that leads 
to millions of dollars of supplementary estimates, expenditures that were not authorized by the legislature, 
knowing that they can return the following session and the back benchers will give the stamp of approval to these 
unauthorized expenditures. 
 

Mr. Cameron: — And I say, Mr. Speaker, that that type of budgeting is an insult to the legislature. It is mockery 
of parliament. Simply because they have the majority to legalize later what was already done illegally. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Cameron: — How different, Mr. Speaker, to the treatment of the local government who are creatures and 
children of the province. They say to them as they said the other day, if you should spend money in a manner 
unauthorized by the local government board, this is what will happen to you. The councillors, personally, will be 
liable to be sued in court to replace the money out of their pockets, and in addition the reeve and the over-seer, 
those poor unfortunate officials, will be dragged to court and sentenced if they should dare spend monies in an 
unauthorized fashion. They say to them, don’t spend your money as papa spends his. 
 
Now I understand, Mr. Speaker, there was talk in the air, and I believe in the budget, that some $15,000 is to be 
set aside to do it. They are going to look around for some magic figure that they call, I believe, an ombudsman. I 
understand from reading history that this is some mythical figure of the Scandinavian countries. He is supposed 
to be a figure that stands tall and straight, with dignity. He is supposed to be a figure, I understand, who stands 
between the government and the people, a sort of, shall we say, a father confessor, a weeping towel, a figure to 
whom the individual may go if he feels he has been treated unjustly by the government. 
 
Well, if they secure such a figure, then I suggest to them, Mr. Speaker, that they not place this figure between the 
government and the people, rather that they place this figure above the government. Let the government operate 
in the shadow of him, and let them still be responsible as they expect the councillors of the rural municipalities to 
be responsible. Perhaps this ombudsman would say to them, if I catch you spending unauthorized funds I will 
treat you like your country cousins, and I will bring you to the district court, and I’ll have you held responsible. 
Perhaps the Premier and Provincial Treasurer would be sentenced like the reeve and the over-seer and the 
secretaries. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Cameron: — Far-fetched as that may be, if this government continues to make a mockery of parliament, 
some day some system like that may be necessary to protect and preserve the rights of the people. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, after the long dissertation of the Minister of Social Welfare, and the flailing that he gave these 
dirty federal Liberals, I feel rather tired as I suppose he does too. I was amazed at one revelation that he made; 
why, he said, you know, that dirty Leader of the Opposition voted against pensions, voted against family 
allowances, except on a means test and he quoted what he said from Hansard, but he forgot to say that he waited 
from 1962 to 1964 to register his protest. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
608 

Mr. Cameron: — Why didn’t he quote what he said in Hansard? Why didn’t he rise then in the House of 
Commons and protest the utterances of his colleague, Mr. Speaker, silence means consent. 
 

Mr. Nicholson: — Remember I wasn’t a member of the House of Commons then. Time is passing, Mr. Speaker, 
and I understand there is a bit more of the order paper to be cleared up, I want to reserve some of my comments 
on other matters until tomorrow, so I would ask leave to adjourn the debate. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Debate Adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION RE INCOME TAX REGULATIONS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on Mr. Snedker’s resolution No. 1 as amended. 
 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — When I stopped speaking last Thursday I think it was because it was 
10 o’clock I had indicated at that time that I was fully in favour of the sentiments contained in the resolution 
before us. I pointed out at that time that those of us who were farmers could deduct certain costs and expenses, 
including travelling expenses to the farm and certain expenses for small tools, as well as deductions for 
depreciation of large implements. I pointed out also that travellers could be allowed say expenses for car 
expenses and they are allowed, for income tax purposes, deductions for board and room and things like that. 
 
I mentioned that businesses also were able to deduct these kind of expenses but what struck me as strange was 
that this motion was promoted by the member from Saltcoats, (Mr. Snedker) and I recall that it isn’t always that 
the Liberal members in this house have been friendly to labour, I must put on record, if you will permit me, Mr. 
Speaker, a paragraph or two that I have taken out of Hansard in this legislature, a former member from Saltcoats, 
Mr. Loptson, speaking in the legislature on March 23rd, 1950 had this to say about working people, and this had 
to do with discussion in the house on the resolution, I think, in connection with machinery. Here is what is said in 
Hansard: 
 

I would just like to remind this house that if they will go back a little bit, follow up the reason for these costs of 
machinery, they will find that the actual cost for a lot of that, lies at the door of the CCF party, and the 
Communist party. 

 

Mr. J.E. Snedker (Saltcoats): — He is out of order, a mile and a half . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! I think the hon. member is getting away from the debate, and the context of 
this resolution. 
 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to make a point that the hon. members opposite have not always 
been friendly to labour, and I am surprised they brought in this resolution; that they are now in favour of labour. 
Mr. Speaker, I think that I should have the right to indicate some proof this was not always so, and if I may 
continue, Sir, I would like to go on. It isn’t very long. I quote on: 
 

There has been in every strike and every agitation for increased salaries . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

609 

This resolution deals with the exemption for income tax, it doesn’t deal necessarily with labour, and I think you 
are stretching the line pretty thin. 
 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this has to do with labour and if the government of Canada, for income 
tax allows exemption . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! 
 

Mr. D.T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — On a point of Order, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that the 
member who moved the amendment, was called to order several times when he tried to deviate from the original 
motion and I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that your ruling just made would be adhered to. 
 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I think I have a right in this legislature to speak on a . . . 
 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — On a point of order, I have never in my years in this house seen the 
arrogance of members who stand up and argue on a Speaker’s ruling. The Speaker has ruled and you should have 
the . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! When the speaker has made a ruling we can’t have members get up and 
enter the debate on another pretext. I would ask the hon. member to keep his remarks closer to this resolution, I 
think his remarks on labour are not in the scope of this resolution. 
 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I wanted to make a point as I said and I ask your indulgence and the 
indulgence of this house that I be given a chance to make this point namely that the hon. members opposite were 
not always friendly to working people, and I was trying to quote a paragraph by a former member from the same 
constituency of Saltcoats as it is recorded in Hansard. 
 
Now I have another occasion where the same member on February 26th, 1953, stated, again in reference to 
working people this: 
 
 Through the unfair demand of labour . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I think the hon. member should stay closer to the dealing with income tax, and not with labour 
or to question labour disputes. 
 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think I need to go into Hansard. Everybody in this legislature 
that sat that time knows that the hon. members opposite were not friends of working people and I say this, I am 
very happy to associate myself at this time, with the resolution and with the amended resolution, and I am quite 
happy that at long last, hon. members are beginning to understand the needs and demands of labour and so I am 
happy they are joining with us and we are joining with them to see that this resolution is passed and I am 
certainly going to vote for it. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Snedker: — Mr. Speaker, I just wish to say a few brief words in connection with the motion as amended in 
closing this debate. 
 
First I wish to clarify something which I said when I was speaking for the motion when I introduced it to the 
house, I did . . . 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 
610 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! The member cannot clarify his point, he can only answer points raised by 
others, he can only answer points raised by others and he cannot add new material. 
 

Mr. Snedker: — Mr. Speaker, the point raised by others was that this strictly referred to workers in the potash 
areas of the province of Saskatchewan. And the point that I want to clarify is this that it was my intention that it 
should refer to all workers and the statute to which it applies. 
 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of Order. The hon. member . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! 
 

Mr. Berezowsky: — The hon. member from Saltcoats, (Mr. Snedker) is making a speech at this time, he is not 
answering . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! If the hon. members will just be patient I will try and get this settled so that 
we can dispose of it. It will be 10 o’clock and we won’t . . . 
 

Mr. Snedker: — Due to the attitude of the hon. member opposite, and the lateness of the hour and the time 
which I would like to take to deal with the hon. gentleman, I therefore, beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member cannot have leave to adjourn the debate, because he is the mover. 
 

Mr. Snedker: — Well, then I am going to speak to it. What I am going to tell the hon. members on the other side 
of the house is this, and in on uncertain terms, that ever since I launched this resolution in the house, the CCF 
have done everything they possibly can to . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! If the hon. member does not obey the chair, I shall have no alternative than to take 
strict action. When the Speaker is on his feet calling for order, no member has a right to try and shout the Speaker 
down. You must recognize the Speaker. 
 

Mr. Snedker: — Now, Mr. Speaker, he rose in his place and he has done everything he possible can do to make 
sure that . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! I called him to order and I ruled him out of order and I cannot allow you to 
debate something that I have ruled out of order. 
 

Mr. Snedker: — I am going to reply to everything he said and you can . . . 
 



 

March 3rd, 1964 
 

 

611 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! When I rule a member out of order, you cannot reply to something which is 
out of order. 
 

Mr. Snedker: — The hon. member on the other side of the house wandered all over debates for the last ten 
years, and mentioned my predecessor, the member for Saltcoats. I was just wondering when he was going to get 
down to . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! 
 

Mr. Snedker: — I was just wondering when he was going to get down to Newfoundland . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! That was all ruled out of order and I am ruling you out of order too, because 
you are not speaking to winding up the debate. 
 

Mr. Snedker: — In other words you deny me the right. 
 

An Hon. Member: — Okay, Jim . . . 
 

Mr. Snedker: — I demand the right to reply to him . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! The vote before the house is the motion moved by Mr. Snedker, seconded 
by Mr. Staveley as amended. Will the house take the motion as read? 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Mr. Snedker: — Recorded vote, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Only one member rose so I declare the motion carried and that is it. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 p.m. 
 


