



















































Hansard: March 16, 1964


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
SIXTH SESSION – FOURTEENTH LEGISLATURE 

28th Day 

 

Monday, March 16, 1964. 
 
The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE VICTORY OF MAIDSTONE COMETS, INTERMEDIATE “A” HOCKEY 
 
 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to announce that the 
Maidstone Comets in the Intermediate ―A‖ hockey league have defeated the Regina Monarchs in a two games total-point 
series. They trimmed the Monarchs in Maidstone 8-3 and held them off 6-2 in Regina, so they have won on overall total 
points. I hope this augurs for future things to come. 
 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Labour): — I would like to add my congratulations to the Maidstone Monarchs. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
HON. W.S. LLOYD (Premier) moved second reading of Bill No. 64 – An Act to amend The University Act. 
 
He said: 
 
The Minister of Education is unavoidably absent this morning. May I perhaps just say a few words in explanation of the bill, 
in order to advance it to the committee stage. 
 
To begin with, the bill is rather late in being introduced; it is introduced now because the university board of governors, and 
the faculty, particularly the faculty of the Regina branch were extremely anxious that the bill be introduced and dealt with at 
this time. For the most part, it is confined to some changes in procedural matters, I think the most important aspect of it is 
with regard to some re-organizations and some changing status with regard to the faculty of the Regina campus, which is in 
keeping with the growth and the maturity of development in Regina. 
 
All sections of the bill are those that have been requested by the university. I think they can be adequately dealt with in 
Committee of the Whole. With that I would move the second reading of the bill. 
 

Mr. Franklin E. Foley (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, just before you put the vote, I wonder if I could ask the Premier a 
question? 
 
Did I understand him to say that this deals only with the faculty at the Regina campus, or does it have certain effects on the 
faculty organization at Saskatoon. 
 

Mr. Lloyd: — I didn’t’ say it dealt only with the faculty at Regina campus; I said one of the major matters in the bill had to 
do with some reorganization and some, I think I might call it, some maturing of status as far as the Regina faculty is 
concerned, which is appropriate having in mind the growth of this particular part of the university. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:58 o’clock p.m. 
 
 


