



















































Hansard: February 07, 1964


5 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
SIXTH SESSION – FOURTEENTH LEGISLATURE 

2nd Day 
 

Friday, February 7th, 1964 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day: 
 

APPOINTMENT OF SERGEANT-AT-ARMS AND CLERK ASSISTANT 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Before I call the Orders of the Day I would like to inform the assembly that Archie Raymond Ponto, has 
been appointed Sergeant-At-Arms for this Legislative Assembly. I would also like to inform the assembly that Charles 
Edward Selwyn Franks has been appointed Clerk-Assistant for this session, and I would also like to lay on the table the report 
from the Librarian. 
 
Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I think that all members of the assembly would want to join in saying a word 
of welcome to the two new officials whom you have just announced and introduced to us, Mr. Franks and Sergeant-At-Arms 
Ponto. Probably at this point it is not too difficult for all of us to say that we will try not to give them any more problems than 
possible. We may vary from that theme as time goes on, but all of us would want to say welcome to them. Members will 
have noticed, Mr. Speaker, that on the desks of most, if not all of us, there reposes a rather fat looking cigar. This does not 
come from either Sergeant-At-Arms Ponto, or Mr. Franks. You will know by this time it is as a result of certain decisions, 
and other matters also, on the part of the Minister of Public Health, with some assistance, I am sure, on the part of Mrs. 
Blakeney, and you will probably have heard that this morning a son was born to Mr. and Mrs. Blakeney. We understand that 
both mother and son are doing well. The father, as far as I can tell, is doing well also. 
 
Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
We extend all of our congratulations and good wishes to the Blakeney family on this happy occasion. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Mr. Franklin E. Foley (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I wish to draw the attention of the 
members to a very fine looking group of high school students in the speaker’s gallery. They are my grade 11 and 12 class 
from the Glaslyn Central High School, who with their visit to the Legislature this afternoon are completing a very successful 
and enjoyable three day educational tour. The tour is sponsored by their own High School Student Council, and is authorized 
by the Boards of the Medstead School Unit and the Glaslyn School District. As their principal, I wish to thank all who have 
helped to make their tour such a success, particularly that part of their tour which included points of interest in our legislative 
buildings. The students are accompanied on their tour by my wife and myself, and our driver Mr. Art Wood, who is also a 
member of our own local school board. I am sure that all honorable members will at this time extend to my students a very 
hearty welcome to our legislature. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

AUTOMOBILE ACCIDENT INSURANCE 
 
Hon. R.A. Walker (Attorney-General): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, each year at 
about this time it is customary to announce the new automobile insurance rates which will apply under The Automobile 
Accident Insurance Act for the following licenses year. The Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office estimates that for 
the current license year, which will end on April 30th, 1964, the payment of benefits under The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Act would exceed the income to the fund by approximately $450,000. This will be less than half of the deficit 
incurred last year and will reduce the accumulated surplus in the fund to $2,650,000. It is proposed to hold the rates in most 
categories of vehicles at the same level as last year. For private passenger cars a new rat classification is being introduced for 
the 1964-65 model, for which the premium rate will be $43.00 for vehicles with a wheel base under 100 inches, $48.00 for 
vehicles with a wheel base of 100 to 120 inches, and $53.00 for those with a wheel base exceeding 120 inches. The premiums 
on all other models of private passenger cars will remain the same. No changes in premiums 



 
Friday, February 7th, 1964 
 

 
6 

are being made for farm trucks of a model year prior to and including 1960, with the exception that the rate for 1958 models 
is reduced from $12 to $10. The premium for 61 and 63 models will be $14 and the premium for 63 and later models will be 
$18. The rates for all other classes of vehicles and trucks will remain virtually the same, with the exception that class A and 
class E public service vehicle trucks will be subject to an increase of approximately 10 per cent in most rated categories. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, it has become a tradition in our legislature that 
on this particular occasion we take some time to note the deaths of former members of the legislature which have occurred 
since the time of our last meeting. This gives us a chance not only to report but to pay our respects, to pass on our 
appreciation to members of the family, to generally indicate the regard which we held for those who have served the people 
of Saskatchewan as members of our legislative assembly. May I, therefore, Mr. Speaker, indicate something of the history 
and record as to those members and will move: 
 

That this assembly record with sorrow and regret the passing within the last year of seven former members of this 
assembly, and express its grateful appreciation of the contribution each made to his community, his constituency and to 
this province, seconded by the Honourable Leader of the Opposition. 

 
Wilbert Hagarty, who was a member in this assembly for the constituency of Elrose from 1921 to 1929, died on August 
11th, 1963. He was born and educated in Elora, Ontario, took up a homestead in the Gilroy district in 1914, moving in 
1911 to Rosta, and in 1924 to Lucky Lake, and in 1946 to Saskatoon. 
 
Peter J. Hooge, died in Vancouver, on April 13th, 1963. The son of Dutch immigrants, Mr. Hooge was born near Winkler, 
Manitoba, and received his education there at Gretna, and later at the University of Manitoba, where he obtained the 
Bachelor of Laws degree. He taught school in Manitoba and later in Herbert, Saskatchewan, in 1914 he was admitted to the 
Saskatchewan Bar, and in 1937 he became a King’s Council. He practised law in Saskatoon, later in Rosthern, and 
represented the Rosthern constituency in this assembly from 1944 to 1948. 
 
Arnold Williams Loehr, a former member for the Humboldt constituency, died September 30th, 1963. He came to Canada 
in 1905, from Minnesota, where he had been born and educated, settled in St. Peter’s Colony in the Muenster District. He 
was secretary of the St. Francis school board from 1917 to 1942, he was reeve of the Rural Municipality of St. Peter’s from 
1931 to 1939, and he was a member of this assembly from 1948 to 1952. 
 
George William Robertson, who from 1921 to 1924 represented the Wynyard constituency, died on May 28th, 1963. Born 
and educated in Scotland, Mr. Robertson homesteaded in the Wynyard district in 1914 and was active in the organization 
of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. He resigned his seat in the legislature in 1924 to become Secretary-Treasurer of the 
Wheat Pool, a post he held until 1958. In addition to his interest in agricultural organizations, and his service at 
International Conferences, Mr. Robertson also served his community as a member of the school board, both in Wynyard 
and Regina, as Vice-Chairman of the Board of Governors of the University of Saskatchewan, as Chairman of the 
University of Hospital Board, as Chairman of the Board of Managers of the First Presbyterian Church of Regina, as 
Chairman of the Lay-Advisory Board of the Grey Nuns’ Hospital in Regina, and was a member and officer of various 
fraternal organizations. In 1954, Mr. Robertson was awarded an Honorary Doctor of Laws Degree by the University of 
Saskatchewan in recognition of his contribution to agriculture, the university, the church, and the community. 
 
Mr. George Adam Scott, died in Calgary on October 13th, 1963. He had been a member of the legislature assembly for 
Arm River from 1908 to 1028, and served as speaker of this house from 1919 to 1925. Mr. Scott was born in Winnipeg, 
and was educated and taught school in his native province before coming to Davidson, Saskatchewan in 1903 where he 
farmed. He was a member of the United Church and a member of the Masonic Order. 
 



 
Friday, February 7th, 1964 

 

 
7 

Leonard Lawton Trippe, who died January 6th, 1964, was a member of the constituency of Turtleford from 1948 to 
1952. Mr. Trippe was born in Schuler, Nebraska, 1891, and came to Prince Albert as a young boy. He enlisted with the 
53rd battery of the Canadian Expeditionary Force in 1915, and spent four years overseas. Active in the Royal Canadian 
Legion he served as President of the Summerland British Columbia Branch. Earlier in 1951 he had been presented with a 
life membership in the Spruce Lake Saskatchewan branch. Mr. Trippe was a merchant in Spruce Lake for many years 
and took an active part in community affairs. 
 
Alphonse Peter Weber, who sat for the constituency of Meadow Lake from 1956 to 1960, died on October 2nd, 1933. 
Mr. Weber was born in Minnesota, educated at Muenster in Saskatoon, and lived at Meadow Lake from 1942, where he 
was an elevator agent, and where he served on the Town Council for six years, four of which he was Mayor. He was an 
officer of the Rotary Club and of the Knights of Columbus and he was a member of the Benevolent and Protective Order 
of Elks. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement this assembly expresses its most sincere sympathies to members 
of the bereaved families. 

 
Mr. Speaker, with that indication of the record and those comments, I should like to move, seconded by the Honorable 
Leader of the Opposition, the motion which I read earlier. 
 
Hon. O.A. Turnbull (Minister of Education): — I think that I would be failing in my duty if I didn’t rise in my place and 
on behalf of the constituents of Elrose express the feeling of regret at the passing of Wilbert Hagarty, who served as M.L.A. 
for the period indicated by the Hon. Premier, from 1921-29. Any time I moved through the constituency of Elrose, I found 
that Mr. Hagarty was well regarded. He held the respect of the whole of the area, and I know the constituents of that area 
would only think it fit and proper that I rise in my place at this time and pay tribute to him and on their behalf express 
sympathy to his wife, one daughter and two sons who survive him. 
 
Mrs. M.J. Batten (Humboldt): — I would like to add a few words to what the Hon. Premier has already said about two of 
the members mentioned today. Arnold William Loehr, was a member representing Humboldt constituency. Born in 
Minnesota in 1884 and arrived in Canada to make his home here in 1905. He made his home in St. Peter’s Colony until his 
death in Humboldt at the home of his daughter on September 30th, 1963. He had ten children, forty-four grand-children, and 
three great-grandchildren. He had been predeceased by his wife and two daughters. Many of the members here, Mr. Speaker, 
and you, yourself, will remember Arnold Loehr. He was a man who represented the very best type of man in Saskatchewan, I 
think. A man who through his own efforts gained an education, he often amazed people who met him by the width and depth 
of his interests, his reading, and his understanding. His wide interest made him an active member of everything that went on 
in his community. He was a member of the Co-operative Association, a member of the Credit Union; he was a Fourth Degree 
Knight of Columbus, he was the secretary of his school district for twenty-five years, he was one of the organizers of the 
Muenster Telephone Company in the early years. He was a reeve of the Rural Municipality of St. Peter’s for a period of eight 
years, and here his life too demonstrates something that is typical of Saskatchewan where local governments are so often 
ahead of us in this legislature in bringing forth social progress – because while Mr. Loehr was Reeve of the R.M. of St. 
Peter’s, that municipality instituted in 1934, a hospitalization plan and in 1936 a medicare plan, without any fuss and to the 
satisfaction of everybody in that community. Those plans existed until the provincial plans were brought into effect. Mr. 
Loehr was employed by the Department of Agriculture in 1936. He left the employment of the provincial government in 
1944 to enter politics as a Liberal candidate. In all, Arnold Loehr, was the standard bearer for the Liberal party in five 
elections. He served as an elected member of the Saskatchewan Legislature for the Humboldt constituency for 1944 to 1952. 
Throughout his life Arnold Loehr was a farmer, he was vitally interested in farming and because he was truly interested in 
farming, he was interested in all other aspects of community and social and provincial life in Saskatchewan. He made a real 
contribution to every sphere of activity in which he partook. He was a man of strong convictions and loyalties, even when 
these were not popular with the majority. He represented the type of those self-taught independent thinking men, who so 
generously give of themselves to their families, to their communities, and who have by their devotion and self sacrifice built 
the Saskatchewan we enjoy today. I wish on behalf of all my constituents to add, to the family of Arnold Loehr, our sincere 
condolences. 
 



 
Friday, February 7th, 1964 
 

 
8 

Like you, Mr. Speaker, I was privileged to know Alphonse Peter Weber, and like Arnold Loehr, Alphonse Weber – Al as he 
was commonly know to all of us – was brought up and lived a great part of his life in the Humboldt constituency in what was 
known as St. Peter’s Colony. His family came to Canada from the U.S.A. in 1906. He was one of ten children. Al was 
educated in St. Peter’s College. He was a man of wide interests and sympathies. To his wife and seven children, he was a 
devoted husband and father. To his community he was an ever-ready and enthusiastic supporter of all causes. He was a good 
man, forward and progressive for the benefit of this community and his province. In his youth Al had been a very enthusiastic 
baseball player and throughout his life he remained an ardent sportsman, transferring his activities in later years to fishing, 
curling and sailing. He was active in all community activities. He was an office of the Knights of Columbus, and officer in 
the Rotary Club. He established his own business in Meadow Lake, and after he moved there in 1941 he was one of the 
people who helped build up that community which at that time was just starting to grow. 
 
He was the Mayor of Meadow Lake for four years, and he was on the Council for a number of years. He was elected to 
represent the Meadow Lake constituency from 1956 to 1960 as Social Credit member for the Saskatchewan Legislature. He 
demonstrated his interest in youth in many ways, particularly in establishing a Boy Scout Troop in Meadow Lake, and these 
Boy Scouts formed a Guard of Honor at his funeral. He continued to spend his time with his family and travelled extensively 
with them until two weeks before his death. He died a young man, he left behind him a fine though sorrowing family. He left 
behind him many fine community enterprises that had grown because of him, and I think he left in all of us, Mr. Speaker, 
sincere sorrow for a fine man and a good friend, and I would like to extend on behalf of the people of my district and all of 
us, Mr. Speaker, our sincere sympathy to Mrs. Weber and the children. 
 
Mr. David Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add a few words to what the Premier has already said in 
regards to the member from Rosthern, Mr. Peter J. Hooge. Mr. Hooge was born in Winkler, Manitoba, in 1886. He attended 
school there and received a law degree at the University of Manitoba. He married Miss Margaret Matchuk of Saskatoon in 
1917, and they had two children, Lois Jean and Sergeant Walter Anson of the R.C.A.F. Peter J. Hooge came to Rosthern in 
1934. Previous to this he had resided in Leader, Saskatchewan. In Rosthern he became active in provincial and federal 
politics, assisting very capably in the election campaigns of 1934, 1935, 1938 and 1940. He joined the Rosthern Board of 
Trade and was Secretary of this organization for a number of years. During this period he was instrumental in bringing 
Dominion-Provincial Youth Training courses to Rosthern for two successive years. He was a member of both the Rosthern 
and Duck Lake Masonic Lodge, and a charter member of the Rosthern Chapter of the Eastern Star. He was appointed King 
Council in 1937. He was elected to the Saskatchewan legislature in 1944, and was appointed a judge of the District Court in 
1948, and took up residence in Moosomin where he continued to live until his retirement from the Bench in 1960. He then 
moved to British Columbia where he resumed a private law practice. He died on April 30th, 1963. We extend our sincerest 
sympathy to the bereaved family and a host of friends he has left behind. 
 
Hon. Frank Meakes (Minister of Co-operation and Co-operative Development): — As Minister of Co-operation I think I 
should add a few words to what the Premier has said in paying tribute to the late Dr. Robertson. The Premier said he was 
born in Scotland and came to Canada at an early age and settled, Mr. Speaker, in what is now a part of your constituency in 
Wynyard. At this time he displayed an early interest in agricultural and educational questions. He served for a number of 
years as a director of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, his leadership helped to bring that organization to a position of great 
prominence, not only in Canada, but throughout the world. He attended all the International Wheat Conferences from 1927 
on and took a leading part in negotiations which led to the first International Wheat Agreement. He gained widespread 
recognition as a leader in agriculture, not only in Saskatchewan but throughout Canada, being one of the founders of the 
Canadian Federation of Agriculture. He served also the province with great distinction in the field of education and health, 
which the Premier mentioned. I think you could say that he had a great influence on the co-operative 



 
Friday, February 7th, 1964 

 

 
9 

movement, not only in Saskatchewan but in Canada. In short, he gave leadership and support to almost every kind of activity 
designed to help the community and the province for which he lived. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the best description of his career is found in the citation which the University of Saskatchewan 
conferred on him in the Degree of Doctor of Laws and part of this citation read as follows: 
 

Native Scot, Canadian Immigrant, one time Legislator, Agricultural Statesman, and World Citizen, in recognition of his 
varied and distinguished services. 

 
I am sure I speak on behalf of all the members of this legislature and the province of Saskatchewan, when we say how we 
regret the passing of this great man and our sympathies go to those he left behind. 
 
Mr. Martin Semchuk (Meadow Lake): — I would like to associate myself with the resolution before the house, and to join 
in expressions that have already been stated by the Hon. Premier and other members. I would particularly like to pay tribute 
to the memory of Al. P. Weber, member of the legislature for the Meadow Lake constituency from 1956 to 1960. I had the 
pleasure of knowing Mr. Weber for about twenty years. Mr. Weber originally came from the United Sates and lived I believe 
for a time at Jansen. In his younger years, he was an ardent sportsman and a good athlete. The member from Humboldt said, 
he excelled in baseball and I knew him quite well. I played ball with Mr. Weber for quite a number of years. Mr. Weber 
played ball with many teams in the southern parts of the province of Saskatchewan as well. When he came to Meadow Lake, 
he took an active part in organizing sports for young people. Mr. Weber of course, was a very community minded kind of 
person. He was active in the Meadow Lake Agriculture Society, the Racing and Sports Association at Meadow Lake, the 
Rotary and the Elks clubs and was also President of the Meadow Lake Fish and Game League. He was an active member of 
this church and had a twenty-five year membership in the Knights of Columbus. Over and above these activities, Mr. Weber 
served on the Meadow Lake Town Council and was Mayor of the Town of Meadow Lake for a number of years. This man 
did much for the people of the Meadow Lake are and for the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I add these few words to 
what has already been said and also repeat that Mr. Weber will always be remembered in Meadow Lake and elsewhere in our 
province as an individual who served his fellow men well. 
 
Mr. Franklin E. Foley (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to add words of sympathy and tribute to those of the 
Hon. Premier with reference to Leonard Lawton Trippe who represented the constituency of Turtleford in this legislature of 
1948 until 1952. As has already been stated Mr. Trippe was born in Fielder, Nebraska in 1891. He was the son of Doctor and 
Mrs. E.R. Trippe of Prince Albert. His grandfather was W.W. Trippe, a member of the American House of Representatives. 
Mr. Trippe was married in October, 1917, to Maude, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. James Wright of London, England. Mr. 
Trippe was in business in Spruce Lake from 1944 through until 1952 during which time he served in the legislature of this 
province. When Mr. Trippe left the legislature, he also retired from business and he and his wife moved to British Columbia, 
settling in Penticton two years ago. It came as a shock to all of us to hear of his untimely passing on the twenty-sixth of 
January last, and on behalf of the people of the Turtleford constituency, I wish to record our sincere regret and sympathy to 
Mrs. Trippe and the family and to all the many friends which Mr. Trippe had throughout our area. I was privileged to meet 
and to know Mr. Trippe personally and I know how well he served the people of my area. He was a very hard working 
member of the legislature. He was noted for careful research into the problems and the issues of the day, was very serious in 
his approach to his responsibilities and I know that all who knew him acclaim him as a very worthy and responsible 
representative of the people of the Turtleford constituency. On their behalf I again wish to express our sincere regrets at his 
passing and I know his memory will remain in our area. He is survived by his wife, one daughter, Mrs. John Hovorka of 
Kamsack, one son, Valmore of Summerland, a sister Mrs. Dorothy Dangerfield of Miami, and one brother, Walter of 
Glenwood, Minnesota. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. G. Herman Danielson (Arm River): — It has been my privilege to know practically all of these except one or two 
during my term in this house and previous to coming into this house and I am not going to repeat many of the things that 
have already been said. My remarks will be very brief. With Mr. Loehr from Humboldt, my 



 
Friday, February 7th, 1964 
 

 
10 

acquaintance extends way back before he came into this house. I was acquainted with him and worked together with him in 
municipal work and other activities previous to that time. And I just want to say that he was a gentleman and he was a man 
that you could depend on and he was a man who stood up and acknowledged his convictions on the topics which were before 
us, and I am sorry to see that he has passed away, but the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, has reaped a benefit from 
all his activities. 
 
Mr. Weber, I knew very slightly. My acquaintance with him was just sitting over here for four years in this house and I know 
that he was very active. He took a great deal of interest in what passed in this house and he expressed himself at various times 
on the topics which were discussed here. I don’t think that there is a man in Saskatchewan that has been better known and 
more highly respected than George Robertson was. I remember him from the very, very early days when he was sitting in this 
house and when he resigned his seat with this house to take over the position of organizer for the Wheat Pool back in 1924. 
I’ve forgotten to look at the date but everyone knows – and to him – his work and some of the boys, some of the men who 
associated with him, I think should go the credit and will go the credit before the great farmers co-operative organizations not 
only in the Wheat Pool, but in other, many other respects of the agricultural and co-operative activities in this province. I am 
sure he is highly respected and his memory will be with us a long, long time to come. 
 
Mr. Hooge, I happened to be at his convention in 1944 when he was nominated. While he was a very retiring and quite 
gentlemanly, he was well educated and I think of the members that sat with him in the house, there is not very many here for 
this session: I’m the only one. I remember when he got up here to speak in this house he always gave us a piece of 
Shakespeare before he sat down and he could do that very, very beautifully. He passed away comparatively a young man and 
he made a success and he served well during the time that he was in this house. I remember very well there was only four of 
us here, five of us on this side of the house and you know that when you have been in this house as long as I have that it is 
quite a load to meet the opposition, about fifteen to fifty-six or to whatever was on the other side. I know you had them over 
in the corner here, you couldn’t fit them in on that side so you had them over, but what I wanted to say was that for every bill 
that came before this house he took that bill, he took it down to the hotel room and the next morning we had a typed sheet on 
our desk explaining and giving us an idea of what the amendment or the bill meant and what effect it would have in changing 
any legislation that was under discussion as clear as it could be. It was a tremendous help to us four or five members on this 
side of the house to have a person like Mr. Hooge. He made a wonderful job of it. 
 
Now there is a gentleman, Mr. Scott. George Adam Scott, came to Davidson in 1903 and he was in business. He also had 
some farm land but he was in the implement business first when I knew him. He was elected as a member for Arm River in 
1908. Now, Mr. Scott wasn’t, as many people think, the first member from Arm River. In a sense perhaps he was, but Arm 
River, the territory which today is Arm River, was known as Moose Jaw County. The member for that Moose Jaw County 
was Jack Sheppard, and in 1908 of course Mr. Scott took over as a member for Arm River. He was sitting here for twenty 
years. During that time he acted as Speaker for the house for, I think, seven years, and he was highly respected. There was 
nobody else that could look into Arm River and try to get away with anything out of line so long as George Scott was in 
politics and was looking after it. And he, I think should have been a cabinet minister many times, but sometimes because of 
the forces that work, happenings on which we have no control, he could not assume the station as the Minister of the Crown. 
When he died he was 89 years old and up to a short time before this death, his health was comparatively good. He had two 
sisters at Davidson, well, not at Davidson just now, but they have their property in the old home there, and he had a brother 
who died some years ago and many of this brother’s family are living in the district today. And I would say this, that we owe  
debt to the memory of this valued citizen, all of us in Arm River, and the province of Saskatchewan and also should, and will 
I am sure, remember him. 
 
Mr. Trippe I only knew for a short time. He was in the house for four years and he was a very energetic and very precise man 
and when he came up to speak in the house he always knew what he was talking about and was able to meet any arguments 
or any questions that might be taken in regards to anything that he said. 
 
But after all this province of Saskatchewan has benefited by the activities and the work of all these men and we are the 
gainers; we, who live today reap a benefit from what has been done by those that have passed before us. 
 



 
Friday, February 7th, 1964 

 

 
11 

Mr. Ray H. Dahlman (Bengough): – Mr. Speaker, my conscience would not allow me to let this opportunity pass without 
passing my respects to the Hon. Doctor George Robertson. I am sure that the member form Arm River who has just sat down 
felt a great loss when he lost this personal friend of his. I sat as a Wheat Pool Delegate for twelve years and we used to wait 
for George to come in and direct our activities and our district meetings, he served as councilor and advisor. He was a man of 
great stature and I think few men have ever contributed so much to the farm movements and the co-operative movements in 
this province and throughout the whole of Canada. I can remember him expressing it this way when speaking to the young 
delegates who first came into the Wheat Pool. He said ―Remember boys, what we are building in this co-operative movement 
is the balance wheel in the economic life of our country.‖ And I think another few words would serve as a monument to this 
philosophy. He gave us this advice ―Live so that you may be part of an answer, rather than part of a problem‖, and this is the 
type of man George Robertson was. Friend of mankind, promoter of good things and progressive legislation for farmers. 
Indeed we call our Wheat Pool the Parliament of Farmers, and I think it was recognized by political men all across the 
Dominion of Canada that this was truly a real farmers’ organization. He said ―If you want to build well, build slowly‖ and 
this is the motto he followed. Everything that he considered and deliberated with was made with thoughts of purpose. It is 
with regret that we know of his passing, but it has been an uplift and an honour to have been associated with him. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Is the house ready for the question? Before I put the question I wonder if I could crave the indulgence of 
the members as to confer sentiments expressed on the behalf of George William Robertson who represented part of my 
constituency and I also wish to confer the sentiments expressed on behalf of George Adam Scott, who occupied the position I 
now hold I wish to go on record in conferring the sentiments expressed. 
 
Motion agreed to: 
 
Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by Mr. McDonald: 
 

That the resolution just passed, together with transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of deceased former members, be 
communicated to the bereaved families, on behalf of this assembly, by Mr. Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4 o’clock p.m. 

 


