



















































Hansard: February 10, 1964


13 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
SIXTH SESSION – FOURTEENTH LEGISLATURE 

3rd Day 
 

Monday, February 10th, 1964 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day: 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to bring to the attention of the legislature that the Meath 
Park High School girls, who recently won the Northern Championship for the province of Saskatchewan in curling, first of 
all defeated my seat mate’s team at Yellow Creak for which my heart bleeds very much, and two of the girls I might say are 
very closely related to the member from Meadow Lake, that is Sharon and Marian Wozny. I have word that the girls just won 
a game at Moose Jaw, defeating the Moose Jaw team, and I am sure all the members from the north will wish them the best 
of success in winning the championship for Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

INQUIRY – RETURNS 
 
Mr. J.E. Snedker (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to ask when we may expect 
returns to be brought down. 
 
Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, they will be checked and they will be produced as soon as possible. 
 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 
Mr. D.W. Michayluk (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to move the motion in reply to the speech from the throne, I do 
so with humility, as I am aware of the honour bestowed upon the constituents of Redberry whom I have the honour to 
represent. In accepting this task, Mr. Speaker, I did so with pride, as this is the first time that a representative of the Redberry 
constituency has been accorded this rare privilege. 
 
I am certain, Mr. Speaker, that my constituents would want me to tender sincere thanks to Premier Woodrow Lloyd for the 
privilege accorded me. My humble hope, Sir, is that I will do justice to this significant occasion. 
 
It is indeed a commendation, Sir, that through your efforts a successful fifth Canadian area conference of the Parliamentary 
Association was held in Saskatchewan last August. The many compliments of appreciation from our guests are indeed a 
tribute to the fine hospitality of the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the members of the Saskatchewan 
branch of this worthy association, may I extend to you gratifying tributes for your efforts in the success of this worthwhile 
and rare occasion for our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Michayluk: — I should like before proceeding to express my great pleasure at having as seconder to this motion the 
hon. member for Regina, (Mr. Whelan). He ahs since his election to this house in 1960, been an able and energetic participant 
in all endeavors that he has been called upon to undertake. I am certain, Sir, that the hon. member shall ably with his usual 
capability make an excellent presentation on behalf of the capital city. Thus, not only the northern part of our province, but 
also the south, are honoured on this auspicious occasion. 
 
While at the beginning of my address, Mr. Speaker, I mention the great sense of responsibility, I did so out of the awareness 
of the significance 



 
February 10, 1964 
 

 
14 

of this particular occasion. This session marks the 20th year of office first elected under the leadership of the Hon. T.C. 
Douglas. Within this period, the name of Saskatchewan has reached far beyond the confines of this province. It has become a 
synonym for freedom, a security for liberal thoughts. In a stormy, troubled, bewildered world, it has been an encouraging 
beacon that has burned bright. I want to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that democratic state socialism, not only in Saskatchewan, but 
in the world, today stands as the only bulwark against the further encroachment of communism. Saskatchewan has gotten to 
mean something very special for Canada today, something that goes much further than the boundaries of the 49th parallel to 
the south and our neighboring provinces to the east and the west. Before going on to outlining and dealing with His Honour’s 
document, I feel it necessary to touch on something of the process that led inevitably to the Saskatchewan of today. The army 
of settlers who came from the old countries to escape varying forms of oppression lived through and had a part in shaping 
their destinies. My own parents came before the turn of the century and were among these. Freedom, yes – freedom and a 
new deal was what they wanted and to achieve that they were prepared to suffer the freezing cold, the harsh life of the 
prairies, with its heat and sweat, the frost and the rust, all these scourges they were prepared to suffer if the reward was 
freedom. 
 
But they found themselves, Mr. Speaker, up against one problem they could not lick singly. Getting their wheat sold at 
compatible prices. These were the days when the railways and the grain handling companies were all powerful. Added to this 
the fluctuation of income, the variability of market prices and the uncertainty of weather, brought progressive thinking people 
like Mr. E.A. Partridge and Charles Dunning, and a host of others, for a new deal in the handling of the marketing of grain. 
Through the united efforts of these early pioneers, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan stands as the foremost co-operative province 
in the entire nation. Co-operative grain marketing organizations, such as the Wheat Pool and the United Grain Growers, 
handle up to 50 per cent of Saskatchewan’s grain, together with two-thirds of the daily produce and 40 per cent of the 
livestock. 
 
Early in the thirties, Mr. Speaker, progressive men and women of Saskatchewan and western Canada realized that in order to 
provide collective security and opportunity they must take collective political action, and the time was not long wanting. The 
day came in July, 1932, Mr. Speaker, when the western Labour Conference was joined by farmer representatives. One 
hundred delegates representing labor, farmer, white collar workers met in Calgary. A fourteen point program presented by 
Mr. M.J. Coldwell, was unanimously adopted as a statement of objectives which were all incorporated in Regina a year later. 
The day of the Calgary conference has been the most important day in Canadian history. It was conceived as an instrument in 
the fight against injustice for the economic emancipation of the great masses of our people. Also, for the laying of the 
foundation of a social structure, in which our children may have a chance which was denied our parents. 
 
All this, Mr. Speaker, I contend has been the increasing purpose of this government since its election to office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Michayluk: — All that has been achieved was despite the expectation of the sceptical and the opposition, in the face of 
propaganda devices of radio, press, and the members of the party to your left. 
 
What is the state of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, as we enter on this session to deliver an accounting before the next 
provincial election? What has happened here is because a number of Saskatchewan people looked hard at their chances to 
shape their own future. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, deep within my heart, I do know the great truth for I have lived through it all. Truly do I know the 
Saskatchewan of the tragic thirties when the grim spectre of depression and despair stalked our lives. I have the honour to 
share with our Premier, Woodrow Lloyd, memories of those years in the teaching profession, hard days. For the benefit of 
those of another generation let me say the memory of this past is unforgettable. 
 
For Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 1963 has been a banner year. Nature and Divine Providence have been kind. Our farmers 
were able to harvest the largest crop on record, I want to suggest that no other year in Saskatchewan’s history has begun with 
a more favorable prospect than 1964. Our provincial economy for the second successive year has surpassed all expectations. 
Our total commodity production is the highest ever. Predicted farm income is at an all-time high. Retail sales have surpassed 
the $1,000,000 mark for 



 
February 10, 1964 

 

 
15 

the first time in the province’s history. Yes, Mr. Speaker, 1963 has been a banner year for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Michayluk: — Because agriculture is our basic and most important his industry it has been a prime concern of this 
government since its election. Research promotion, assistance programs for increased production of livestock forage and 
grain, land clearing and breaking, drainage, crop insurance, co-operative and community pastures and a host of other benefits 
have all assisted the agricultural industry in diversifying farming operations. True, our farming population has decreased 
during and after the war for reasons of mechanization and farm price squeeze. It is for this reason that increased emphasis has 
been placed on farm management extension to keep pace with increasing size and complexity of Saskatchewan farms, and 
ever-increasing problems of the small farmers. 
 
To stabilize agriculture and agricultural income, Mr. Speaker, some one hundred and fifteen grazing co-operatives have been 
assisted, to make available over one-half million acres of land to 1,500 patrons. Last year 30 provincial community pastures 
were in use with 13 in the process of development. 
 
Agricultural representative service with assistance today, number 41. This group has also been instrumental with identifying 
and proposing many of the 52 ARDA projects of which 21 are new community pastures for new development. 
 
Veterinary research and scholarship plans for students who attend veterinary college in Ontario was initiated. The choice of 
the location of the veterinary college on the University of Saskatchewan campus in Saskatoon is a worthy indication of the 
permanency of the livestock industry, not only in Saskatchewan, but in the three western provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Family Farm Improvement Plan of this department has since 1960 provided technical advice and assistance, 
material and construction service and financial assistance to farmers to enable them to modernize their farmsteads. This 
provides farm residents with services equal to those enjoyed by our urban dwellers. Sewers and water, Mr. Speaker, are a 
powerful incentive to give permanency to rural life. It was estimated that the net cash reduction for average-medium priced 
complete installation has run close to $600. This program, together with government participation, has benefited the whole 
economy, Mr. Speaker, plumbers, contractors and electricians. New industries have been established to provide piping and 
other materials to go in conjunction with this program. On December 31st total installations approached over 9,000 farm 
homes. This program has surpassed our best expectations. It is anticipated that this program will have a stabilizing effect on 
our rural population and provide opportunity for additional amenities to our rural residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to provide highways of modern design, this government began with what could be called as ―Operation Pull 
Saskatchewan out of the Mud‖. We inherited over 2,514 miles of dirt road highways with not even a standard subgrading. 
Out of a total of over 7,000 miles, only 132 miles were bituminous surfaced. Some of these may still be seen as dormant with 
nesses to the Liberal past. Today, Mr. Speaker, almost the entire highway system has been rebuilt, consisting of over 9,300 
miles. Of this almost 4,000 miles are dust-free. Small wonder, Mr. Speaker, that our dust-free highways carry 75 per cent of 
Saskatchewan’s highway traffic. While many new links have been added to the highway system, the system is 400 miles 
shorter than it would otherwise have been if more direct routing had not been used. As an example, highway no. 11 between 
Regina and Saskatoon was shortened from 193 miles to 158. Trans-Canada no. one was shortened by some 45 miles between 
Manitoba and Alberta. 
 
In 1956, the rural municipalities, in conjunction with the Department of Municipal Affairs, undertook the building of some 
12,000 miles of inter-municipal grid on a cost-sharing basis. As usual, Mr. Speaker, some of the opposition members at the 
time were very sceptical. The users of the 9,465 miles of this road now completed certainly agree that these grid roads are of 
a superior standard than the best provincial highways were in the year when this government took over. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 



 
February 10, 1964 
 

 
16 

Mr. Michayluk: — The completion of this program will make available to the travelling public a grand total of over 20,000 
miles of all-weather roads. I am happy that His Honour’s speech indicates that additional expenditures will be made for 
accelerating and the completion of these municipal grid roads. Saskatchewan led the nation by completing its section of the 
trans-Canada highway in 1957. Noteworthy bridge structures, beginning with the Saskatchewan Landing Bridge, which must 
soon be raised or replaced to provide for a reservoir created by the South Saskatchewan Dam, the opening of the new Prince 
Albert bridge, followed in 1962 by the beautiful Petrofka bridge. 
 
Access roads to such parks as Buffalo Pound, the Battlefords, Cypress Hills, the Moose Mountain Parks have been built and 
at the same time the more northern resorts have not been forgotten, Mr. Speaker. The progress thus far is but the beginning of 
the achievements of future years. With the increase in resource development, the rising tempo of industrialization, and with 
the increasing wealth and leisure of our people, there is every indication for similar dramatic change in the face of our 
highway system. 
 
Earlier, Mr. Speaker, I made mention of inter-municipal grid roads, financed jointly by participating municipalities and the 
government through the Department of Municipal Affairs. Total annual expenditure by this department to assist the rural 
municipalities averaged four per cent of our provincial budget, compared with one per cent during the days of the Liberal 
administration. At that time a two mill public revenue tax was in effect on all property in Saskatchewan, from which revenues 
had to be turned over to the provincial government. During the last year of the Liberal government they collected from the 
tax payers over $3,000,.000 while in that same year, Mr. Speaker, they paid out less than that amount in the form of school 
grants. This tax, Mr. Speaker, was abolished in 1953 by this government, and that one action alone did as much as the 
previous government had done to alleviate the tax burden on the municipalities, to say nothing of hundreds of millions of 
dollars of school and road grants made over the years. 
 
Social Welfare programs instituted by this government have removed the financial burden from local governments, so that 
today municipalities contribute only seven per cent of these costs. The introduction of the Hospital Services Plan, the Medical 
Care Insurance and programs of this nature have kept our municipal taxes at a lower level than those of our neighboring 
provinces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Michayluk: — According to the 1961 annual municipal affairs reports from the three prairie provinces, Saskatchewan 
urban per capita tax is $81.78 compared with $99.87 for Alberta and $94.47 for the province of Manitoba. For similar 
reasons, Mr. Speaker, the rural municipal average tax levied per acre for 1961 for the province of Manitoba was $1.09, for 
Alberta 93¢ and for Saskatchewan 68¢. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the great incentives to tens of thousands of people in towns and villages have been the municipal water 
assistance programs for the installation of sewer and water. Under this program, local governments, the provincial and the 
federal governments, worked together. Last year this program assisted 116 urban Saskatchewan communities. In 1959, just 
before the program started some 70 centres with a population of 450 or more were without these facilities. Today only 8 are 
without these services. Not only provincial assistance is forthcoming the form of grants, but the government is prepared and 
willing to purchase up to 50 per cent of debenture issues, inspiring in all people confidence in the future of local communities 
and the province. 
 
In reference to industry and industrial development, Mr. Speaker, may I begin by asking several questions? What industry of 
major importance, not connected with a basic or service industry, did we have in 1944? How many war time industries did 
the federal Liberal government or a Liberal provincial government attract to Saskatchewan during World War II? 
 
Power and gas, the sinews of industry, not only essential for industry, but a necessity, were lacking. It is estimated, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Interprovincial Steel Mill in Regina, uses per day a kilowatt consumption of electricity almost equal to that 
used by the entire city of Moose Jaw. Which 



 
February 10, 1964 

 

 
17 

of our major cities had gas? The answer is very simple, Mr. Speaker. Power was important not only to our urban centres and 
to industry but to almost 65,000 rural homes scattered throughout the length and breadth of Saskatchewan. It took foresight 
and courage to provide this within a relatively short period. 
 
Saskatchewan coal, natural gas, and water were all pressed into service. The $50,00,000 Squaw Rapids Hydro Development 
assures sufficient power until the south Saskatchewan Development commences generation sometime in 1968. Had it not 
been for this undertaking and rapid expansion, what possibilities were there to provide to our rural people the amenities of 
power, the comfort and convenience of electrical appliances, television, automatically controlled heat, sewer and water, and 
the many manual and labor saving devices that are being employed and enjoyed by the rural residents because of electricity? 
 
Because of the development of power and the extension of gas, industry has come with increasing tempo. This has refuted 
long cherished notion held by the doom singers, that outside investors were scared away by a socialist government. Well, it 
has been proven over and over again, that where there is sufficient resource in sufficient abundance, so will investment 
capital be interested, providing the general climate is bound to be favorable, and investors have in Saskatchewan an 
eminently favorable climate. To demonstrate, may I quote several statements by people familiar with Saskatchewan. The 
President of a company which has invested over $40,000,000 in Saskatchewan potash development, Mr. Speaker, said, ―How 
lucky we are to find an appreciation in your wise government of the economic laws with which a company must operate, and 
to realize a host of services from your government in many other ways‖. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Michayluk: — The President of an oil company is reported as saying, ―The incentives for continuing to operate in 
Saskatchewan include favorable prices, a healthy market, and a good governmental atmosphere.‖ Not the least has been a fair 
minded government, which has bent backwards to co-operate even to the extent of establishing a Saskatchewan Research 
Council with financial assistance since 1948. The Research Council operates on a plane compatible with highly trained 
technologies in today’s industry – we talk the same language, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The establishment of the Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation is further proof of the length that this 
government will go to to co-operate with and to assist industry. All this has led to last year’s phenomenal development and 
those of previous years, but sad to relate, we have those across on your left, Mr. Speaker, who vocabulary extends in the 
dictionary to the letter ―S‖ and the word ―stagnation‖. As achievement follows achievement in this province, so do they chant 
louder and louder. Five thousand oil wells in production in 1963, Mr. Speaker – Stagnation. 
 
Another shaft to triple production at Esterhazy – Stagnation. A $30,000,000 Potash of America plant at Patience Lake, – 
Stagnation. Alwinson Potash at Lanigan, a $50,000,000 investment, and Continental Potash at Unity, – Stagnation. Booming 
business for the Steel Mill in Regina, – Stagnation. They roar as developments come in; as the B.A. Oil’s favorable Helium 
development near Swift Current, the Interprovincial Co-operative Chemical complex – with the nearby Armour Company 
plant at Saskatoon, – and just recently word of the $5,000,000 fertilizer plant of the Consolidated Mining and Smelting 
Company of Canada at Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Michayluk: — On your left, he sits Sir, the hon. proud master mind and leader of the doom singers of stagnation. He 
says he has a plan, something very superior to anything conceived on this side of the house. He has 



 
February 10, 1964 
 

 
18 

never even come close to saying what it is, but if it is opposite to the advanced legislation that had its origin on this side of 
the house and yet capable of attaining a higher goal than the route he would lead us along, it would most certainly by the 
miracle mile. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Michayluk: — The interest and possibilities for investment in Saskatchewan potash, as shown by the Canadian Prime 
Minister, the Hon. Lester B. Pearson while visiting in France with General Charles De Gaulle recently is worthy of note, Mr. 
Speaker. According to the Star Phoenix of January 17th of this year, under title and I quote: ―Pearson invites France to invest 
in Saskatchewan potash‖. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Michayluk: — Prime Minister Pearson said Thursday he had invited France to consider the possibility of investments in 
Saskatchewan potash deposits and Canadian uranium, possibly at Uranium City. We have a tremendous potash development 
going on in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker. The Canadian Prime Minister recognizes this. He also recognizes the immense 
potential in future benefits from investments. This is very commendable. I wish the Saskatchewan leader would take note of 
this too. 
 
Because of the amazing growth in mineral developments in the period ’44-’63 our mineral production increased by 
something like 1,000 per cent to lead all the provinces in Canada – also increasing from three to five times faster than the 
Liberal provinces. Last year’s oil production of 72,000,000 barrels established another record. All this gave emphasis to  
increase exploratory developmental work in this field. 
 
We must not lose sight of achievements, Mr. Speaker, that has put Saskatchewan in the vanguard of public health. As an 
example to all Canada, this province provides a larger share of its budget for health, education and welfare than any of the 
other nine provinces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Michayluk: — This government despite bitter opposition in 1947 brought in the Hospital Services Plan which was 
eventually adopted by Canadian provinces and finally in 1958 became part of the federal responsibility. I particularly would 
like to draw attention, Mr. Speaker, to the Wings of Mercy, – the Saskatchewan Air Ambulance and the magnificent service 
provided by the only publicly owned tax supported service of its kind in the North American continent. What an immense 
move this hospital on wings has been to the people in all parts of Saskatchewan, and particularly to our friends in the remote 
northern areas. 
 
It was also this province that led the way with provisions from public funds for the treatment of T.B., cancer, mental health 
and the field of Psychiatry. This government has faced up to the responsibility for our senior citizens by providing geriatric 
centres which have won universal admiration and the physical restoration which does so much for the physically 
handicapped. These are just a few of the health services provided by this government. The implementation of the 
Saskatchewan Medical Care Plan in 1962, is now accepted as one of the more desirable firsts of the Saskatchewan way of 
life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Michayluk: — Another step has been taken to advance human welfare, another great freedom has been achieved. 
Freedom from financial suffering from ill health. With its implementation, Mr. Speaker, eventually truth did prevail. 
 



 
February 10, 1964 

 

 
19 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Michayluk: — It prevailed because it was so undeniably obvious to fair minded people. I would also like to mention Sir, 
the admirable University Hospital at Saskatoon, and the well equipped College of Medicine there. I also would laud plans for 
the establishment of the new provincial base hospital in the city of Regina to adequately take care of health needs of the 
growing city in the southern part of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Michayluk: — Before leaving this important field of public health, I feel compelled to remark on the harassment caused 
by the denial of hospital privileges to certain qualified doctors. I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that only for just so long can 
Saskatchewan people be denied the right of medical treatment by qualified doctors of their own choice . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Michayluk: — . . . where are they now, who only a short time ago were concerned by the doctor-patient relationship? I 
am happy to note that his Honour’s speech makes reference to certain aspects of public health. I profoundly hope that this 
important issue of hospital privileges may be resolved by this legislature on the recommendation of Mr. Justice Woods’ royal 
commission report. In its years of administration, Mr. Speaker, this government has had to pass many tests, but I feel history 
will record that the most important test was the decision rendered in 1962 to medical-care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Michayluk: — By establishing a separate Department of Labour, the government of Saskatchewan with Labour 
Minister Hon. C.C. Williams recognised the rights of working men and women in this province and guaranteed that these 
rights would be safeguarded. Prior to 1944, labour legislation in existence was administered by a branch of another 
department. Some of the most advanced labour legislation on the statute books to be found in any Canadian province is in 
Saskatchewan. May I enumerate, Mr. Speaker, the firsts for labour? The first province to give civil servants the right to 
bargain collectively. This is unique, Mr. Speaker, in Canada. The first province to pass the Bill of Rights in 1947, pioneered 
the field of fair employment practices in Canada. Among the rights guaranteed by this bill, and subsequently by the Fair 
Employment Practices Act, is the right to employment of all persons without discrimination based on race, creed, color, or 
national origin. The first province to make statutory provisions for two weeks’ annual vacation with pay for employees 
commencing with the first year of employment. And another first in Canadian labour legislation, which provides for all 
employees for a paid three weeks’ holiday after five years. First and still the only province to provide for guarantee against 
any loss of pay on the occasion of statutory holidays. Saskatchewan has led the way in setting benefits to a full 75 per cent of 
earnings with the highest ceiling in its Workmen’s Compensation law. 
 
Adhering to the philosophy that co-operative public and private enterprises would properly function within our provincial 
economy, a number of Crown corporations were inspired by this government. None deserves high praise than the 
Government Insurance Office. The many benefits coming to the people of Saskatchewan from this, which is an example of 
people in business for themselves, have been made obvious. From a humble beginning, with a government loan of $12,000, 
this corporation has made insurance a history and built up an organization with over 600 agents dotting the entire province. 
The Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office now provides employment for over 450 workers with an annual payroll of 
over $2,000,000. During 19 years of inflationary costs, this crown corporation has reduced insurance premiums by an 
estimated 60 per cent since its inception. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Michayluk: — During this time, it has returned over $4,000,000 to the province. I note, Mr. Speaker, that the successful 
operations of the Saskatchewan Transportation Company, the Fur Marketing Service, the Saskatchewan 



 
February 10, 1964 
 

 
20 

Timber Board, Saskatchewan Minerals – sodium sulphate and clay – are all sharing in the building of Saskatchewan. 
 
No where, Mr. Speaker, has development been more rapid than in recreational resources. Increased leisure time, better roads, 
more cars, have brought demand for water access areas. New provincial parks at the Battlefords, Meadow Lake, Pike Lake, 
Buffalo Pound Lake, Rowan’s Ravine and Echo Valley have been developed with extensive improvements on older parts of 
Duck Mountain, Moose Mountain, Cypress Hills and Greenwater. The use of recreational facilities has increased very 
rapidly. In my own constituency, the development of the Battlefords Provincial Park has provided welcomed additional 
amenities for thousands of people. Since 1959, more than one quarter of a million dollars has been spent on this attractive 
area. 
 
The program of development of regional parks with 60 per cent capital funds provided by this province has resulted in 30 
smaller recreational areas to serve more local needs. Roads to La Ronge, Buffalo Narrows, La Loche and Flin Flon, Mr. 
Speaker, have brought the outside world to many northern communities. Under the Federal Provincial Roads to Resources 
Program, roads have been built connecting Smeaton and Flin Flon, Hudson Bay and The Pas and La Ronge and the Churchill 
River. 
 
The comprehensive program for the conservation of our natural resources, good highways, establishment and development of 
provincial and regional parks, good access roads and good accommodation facilities have provided a substantial increase in 
visitors from outside the province. Saskatchewan last year welcomed 700,000 tourists, who left behind to bolster our 
economy approximately $28,000,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Michayluk: — This growing and booming business almost unknown here some years ago has spread from the American 
border on the south to our remote vacation areas among the pines at Meadow Lake, in the Battleford park and in scores of 
other vacation spots dotting our vast expanse. All over the province facilities are being built and improved with millions of 
dollars of investments. Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is the only province that owns and operates its major utilities, – power, 
gas and telephones. To provide and expand the necessary services, capital borrowings had to be made. When in time the 
users pay out the debt incurred, the utilities and all the profits derived therefrom will go into providing some of the needed 
services to the people or to the reduction of rates to the users. 
 
Recently, the Liberal government of Quebec took over eleven private companies to form a Crown Corporation. The total take 
over price was $604,000,000. How did the Quebec government do this Liberal style? According to the press release in the 
Prince Albert Herald, of February 2nd, 1963, under the title and I quote, ―Quebec Hydro floats biggest loan ever in the 
United States‖ – to quote further, ―Hydro Quebec, has successfully negotiated what Premier Lesage says is the biggest loan 
ever floated in the United States by Canadian interests – $300,000,000‖ end of quote. Undoubtedly Liberal Quebec and the 
people of that province will be paying interest to American coupon clippers. No magic Liberal formula, Mr. Speaker. Capital 
borrowings will have to be paid back by the users. 
 
Our borrowings are related to three major utilities, worth much in excess of the amount borrowed. However, more important 
to the user was the tempo with which this service was provided. Our power lines span the province east to west, from north to 
south; gas extended to all our major cities and 115 smaller communities, and an unprecedented expansion in the government 
telephone system. I would add to this the magnificent power building recently opened in Regina, which is indeed a tribute to 
growth, and confidence in Saskatchewan’s greatness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech makes reference to impending changes in respect to teacher training and certain other aspects 
in the field of secondary education. This government, Sir, has regarded education as its prime and major responsibility. All 
this is demonstrated by the allocation of larger operational and capital grants to assist the tax payers. Forty-three per cent of 
all educational costs were borne by the department in 1963. An additional $5,000,000 increase forecast in His Honour’s 
speech is indeed welcomed by Saskatchewan tax payers. With the organization of the larger school units better facilities and 
opportunities became available 



 
February 10, 1964 

 

 
21 

to more and more of our people. Centralization and conveyance have given more and more of our boys and girls an 
opportunity to acquire higher standards of education. In 1953, Mr. Speaker, 23,000 grade 12 papers were successfully passed. 
Ten years later, the number increased almost to three times that many. And in the last two academic years, a combined total 
of 12,712 students completed grade twelve. Had it not been for the larger school units, school buses, better equipped staff in 
high schools, better roads, and higher grants, all this would not have been possible. The student loan fund, set up in 1949 to 
assist needy students has been increased from $1,000,000 to over $3,500,000, in 1963. Almost 12,000 interest free loans have 
been made. In addition to loans, scholarships have been made available to the grade twelves. About one out of every seven 
students taking first year university is in receipt of a scholarship. All this, Mr. Speaker, has enable more of our students to 
proceed to university. 
 
Our university enrolments have increased so that it is necessary to provide additional facilities with a laying of a corner stone 
for the first stage of a $7,000,000 building on Wascana Centre. The new Regina campus of a university is evidence of the 
effort to meet the needs of increasing enrolments. 
 
I would at this time, Mr. Speaker, take this opportunity to congratulate the people of Indian Head and the regional rural 
superintendencies on their decision to form larger units in that area. Many years of experience in other parts of the province 
have demonstrated that this type administration is better able to provide educational opportunities on a larger area basis. 
Progress, however, will depend on the type of people that are administering these particular areas. 
 
Many of us, Mr. Speaker, won’t soon forget the opposition of some politicians to this progress. Consider the improved 
qualifications of teachers, the larger number of rural and urban students that can get to high school and still live at home. All 
this has been made possible because of government leadership and the c-operation of the people. Were it not for this, there 
would be thousands of young people in Saskatchewan no getting to high school and many not finishing high school. 
 
Our technical schools at Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert make it possible for our people to train themselves for 
opportunities in a society where more and more relies on automation. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan teachers, through the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, have had a voice in practically every educational development in this province. It is 
during this period that The Teacher Tenure Act was enacted; The Salary Negotiation Act became law and helped to produce 
orderly bargaining. The Federation Act was extended so that it now provides for disciplinary powers: group insurance for the 
entire profession and the improved and enhanced teachers’ superannuation legislation of only a year ago, assures teachers on 
retirement of an enhanced income. All this, Mr. Speaker, has enabled more of our young people and teachers to live better 
and happier lives. 
 
I could go on and on, Mr. Speaker, however, nowhere in Canada was the change more dramatic and electrifying, I do mean 
electrifying, than right here in Saskatchewan. Jeanine Locke, a Star Weekly staff reporter, in the November 23rd, 1963 
edition tells the story of how men and women of foresight, progressive people in government, Mr. Speaker, have transformed 
Saskatchewan in the last ten years without the rest of Canada noticing. For the men who formed the first Cabinet and the men 
who formed the present Cabinet had a wealth of zeal, more important, they had a master plan and the end story is human 
welfare. 
 
But above all else, there is another quality that permeates the whole approach, and here I come to the basic plank of all in a 
party and government, that sets it apart and makes it an increasing rarity in this age: complete honesty of purpose. 
 
While on personalities, I would as this time, Sir, on behalf of myself and my colleagues take this opportunity to make some 
expression of our deep sense of the great good fortune in having at the head of the executive council a man of the statesman-
like calibre of Premier Woodrow S. Lloyd. We of the teaching profession, Sir, have long knows of his sincerity and abilities; 
first in the early days as President of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, when he worked hard to improve the lot of the 
teaching profession; and later during his years as Minister of Education. We long ago felt that his influence would one day be 
felt beyond the teaching profession – a feeling that has been justified. The quiet courage and dignity under great stress in his 
early days as Premier impressed everyone as did his calm patience during the crucial days of the medical care episode of 
1962. 



 
February 10, 1964 
 

 
22 

From then on, our Premier has, step by step, earned the recognition of belonging to that small group of great Canadians. 
 
From this inception, Sir, this government has scrupulously adhered to its principles and honoured its pledges, and His 
Honour’s speech further attests to this. It has kept foremost and above all other considerations, its dedication to the 
betterment of human welfare. That we have succeeded is verified by media beyond our border which concedes the truth and 
the truth is, Sir, that Saskatchewan is a better place in which to live through the existence of this government. 
 
I, therefore, consider it a privilege to move, seconded by the Honourable member for Regina (Mr. E. Whelan) that a humble 
address be presented to His Honor, The Lieutenant Governor, as follows: 
 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly, of the Province of Saskatchewan, in Session 
assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious Speech which Your Honour has been pleased to address to us at 
the opening of the present Session. 

 
Mr. Ed Whelan (Regina City): – Mr. Speaker, I rise to second the motion. The mover, the hon. member for Redberry, (Mr. 
Michayluk) by this participation and more particularly by his performance, brings honour to this legislature, credit to his 
constituency, and lends distinguished oratory to this debate. A school teacher of many years experience, his contribution 
becomes more significant in these days of conscientious biculturalism, when one knows that he could have spoken as well in 
fourth other languages. 
 
The speech from the throne was read by the Queen’s representative, His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of 
Saskatchewan. I realize that one does not refer to the Office of Lieutenant-Governor in this chamber, but this need not deter 
me from making the reference to the person who holds this office. The appointment of His Honour was made since the last 
session. May I congratulate His Honour on the democratic and distinguished way in which he, and his gracious lady, carry 
out their duties as Her Majesty’s representatives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Whelan: – Mr. Speaker, the opportunity to second the motion in reply to the speech from the throne, brings honor to the 
capital city of Regina, which I have the good fortune to represent. My constituency, largest city in Saskatchewan, has a 
reputation for progress in all spheres of community endeavor, a record of social and economic achievement beyond compare, 
and the brightest prospects for the future. 
 
It is the hub of a rich agricultural area, a wholesale distributing centre, the seat of government, the home of a 122,000 people, 
and more recently an expanding industrial metropolis. The people of my riding look forward with confidence to many more 
years of democratic, judicious, active, progressive, administration of provincial affairs under the present government. No one 
need wonder why they have chosen in decisive fashion to re-endorse the programs of this government. The answer is readily 
understood, because they live closest to it, they know it best, many work for its departments, they associate with government 
leaders, they understand the government’s objectives, Mr. Speaker, they share its achievements. People are enthusiastic 
supporters in other areas, but here in Regina, none can compare with their endorsement of this government. 
 
Eloquently the throne speech spells out three clear-cut characteristics that are essential to effective democratic government. 
All hon. members will agree, yes, they will applaud and if unprejudiced recognize these three characteristics. They are: first, 
Leadership; secondly, Good Judgment; thirdly, Democratic consideration of problems. The drawing together of three groups, 
the city, the university and the province to develop Wascana Centre, an institution of higher learning, an area for recreation, 
and the landscaping of these legislative grounds under a plan that required foresight and courage, was made possible by the 
leadership of this government. South Saskatchewan students of generations to come, sons and daughters of people who will 
come here from other lands, children of parents whose income would prevent their maintenance in Saskatoon, because of the 
facilities being constructed south and east of this legislature, will now be able to acquire a most necessary academic 
education. 
 



 
February 10, 1964 

 

 
23 

Each time I view the progress being made on the present arts building, I pay tribute to the provincial participation and 
leadership given by the three Ministers of Education, all seated here in the government group. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after more than 25 years of conscientious leadership on behalf of the working man, on behalf of all the working 
people, my colleague and friendly adviser, the senior member for Regina city, (Mr. Williams) who has been Minister of 
Labour for longer than nay other person in the history of Canada, retires. No one is held in higher esteem by the working men 
of Canada. No couple are better liked or more acceptable to Regina citizens than this man and his capable wife. No one has, 
or I doubt ever will, rival their popularity. The sincerity of the hon. member, his appreciation of others, and his humility are 
qualities often quoted, and none of these will be forgotten. History will record them. But here will be no challenge to his 
leadership in the field of labour. Undeniably, the facts will show that he leads all others with labour legislation, hours of 
work, minimum wage, equal pay for equal work, apprenticeship training, holidays with pay, compensation for injured 
workmen, and collective bargaining for public servants. Others may praise this man; some of his opponents will praise him; 
but the working people of Saskatchewan will never forget his leadership . . . 

 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Whelan: – . . . typical of his manner, without fanfare, the throne speech records one more gain for those he has always 
upheld, an increase in the minimum wage. 
 
The act that established this country provided for two public school systems. When Saskatchewan and Alberta were 
organized in 1905, legislation provided that school boards in each system could levy taxes against the property of their 
supporters. This has always been the practice in Alberta. Taxpayers have had the right to support either of two public systems 
since 1905 in that province. The right of separate schools to levy taxes against property of their own supporters without being 
taxed for the other public school system existed in the North-West Territories, and was reconfirmed in The Saskatchewan Act 
of 1905. Saskatchewan legislation, Mr. Speaker, in 1907, required Catholic separate school supporters to pay collegiate taxes 
for a collegiate district if organized. The resulting double cost to taxpayers in certain areas only, came about by virtue of The 
Secondary School Act in 1907. A change in the situation forecast in the speech from the throne is something I personally 
welcomed. I believe that such a change will commend itself to fair-minded people of the province. This will result, I have 
every confidence, in the provision of adequate funds for both systems of education, and will permit both to cope with the 
challenge of the future. 
 
About two years ago, Mr. Speaker, this government introduced medical care insurance, Forty-three years before, a federal 
government promised medical care to all Canadians. Before 1919 the pioneers of the farm movement asked for medical care. 
At conventions in Canada for two-score years, farmers, working people, women’s organizations, co-operatives and political 
parties advocated a national health plan. Medical care became a dream long sought after but refused by elected governments. 
After the second world war, as high as 70 per cent of our population indicated support for public medical care. When 
financial help from the new federal government in 1957 relieved the cost of hospitalization, the CCF government promised 
implementation of medical care. The 1960 election was won on this issue. A study of the technique began. Opposition was 
organized by friends of the members opposite. In spite of dramatics by the opposition, false statements, and half-truth 
campaigns by some of the news media, the medical care plan went into effect on July 1st, 1962. 
 
Oh! opponents tried all of the old tricks and some new ones. One political barricade after another was thrown up, but the 
steady, reliable parliamentary leadership of the government, and particularly that of Premier Lloyd prevailed. This throne 
speech holds forth the promise of legislation to assist the good operation of the plan. 
 
What is the situation today? You wouldn’t believe it! Mr. Speaker, it is beyond the wildest imagination. No one would have 
guessed it possible, but believe it or not, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are in favor of the plan. 
 



 
February 10, 1964 
 

 
24 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Whelan: – However, one hesitates to speculate on the future of medical care if by some fluke it fell into their hands. I 
predict that a review of their recorded and organized opposition will frighten anyone out of turning medical care over to their 
political consideration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the plan works. There are more doctors than before it stared. The plan is efficient. It covers people who were 
never covered before. Every day someone quotes a coverage never enjoyed under a private plan. The administration is good. 
Beneficiaries and doctors are paid quicker than ever before. It costs less than any plan in existence in North America. Let any 
critic prove otherwise. 
 
The payment of a total of approximately $21,000,000 to doctors in 1963, represents about $30,000 each to doctors of this 
province, and no one regrets this. It is fair value for services rendered. 
 
Medical care was introduced because it was necessary and because over the years the people had asked for it. In the face of 
the opposition, Mr. Speaker, in the face of distortion by some of the news media, in the face of emotions aroused, any one 
will agree it took leadership, courageous, democratic, unshakeable, parliamentary leadership to implement it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Whelan: – With the introduction of new farming methods, with the application of automation, with the full acceptance 
of a five day week, the need for recreational facilities has become evident. 
 
This government is meeting the challenge, Mr. Speaker. Development of highway park facilities, such as Besant, McLean, 
Maple Creek and Moosomin, are examples of leadership in this field, which have won the praise of Saskatchewan residents 
and those visiting our province from far and wide throughout Canada and the United States. 
 
My friend, the hon. member for Redberry (Mr. Michayluk) has set out in detail the developments that have taken plan in 
provincial parks. Camp facilities and extension of highways into the far northern areas have introduced the scenic beauty of 
our north, not only to residents, but to hundreds and thousands of tourists who enjoy outdoor holidays against the panorama 
of a landscape second to none. 
 
Two years ago I drove to Ile a la Crosse, on a good road built by the Department of Natural Resources. This settlement, the 
oldest in the province, is now easily accessible by road, nearly two hundred years after it was first visited. But it took 
leadership to develop campsites, tourist facilities and roads into these remote communities. It took leadership and planning. 
 
During the early and colorful history of the great west, we are told, Mr. Speaker, that natives camped across the railway 
tracks to prevent extension of the white man’s steel rails. In the short space of less than 100 years these rails are being 
uprooted. I am sure there are times when those who will be deprived of this essential service would like to camp across the 
rails to prevent their removal. The federal government listens with limited interest to the pleas of prairie people who are about 
to be deprived of this vital service. This government has waged an all-out battle to retain necessary rail lines that are about to 
be abandoned. It is strong, clear-cut leadership on behalf of the Saskatchewan people. The fight to retain rail lines will 
continue. 
 
The speech from the throne, Mr. Speaker, indicates that a Water Resource Commission will be established by the province of 
Saskatchewan. Last summer I had an opportunity to see a strictly Saskatchewan film, the ―Drylanders‖. It was produced in an 
area that had suffered severely throughout the drought period. During my ten years with the Provincial Mediation Board, I 
heard their story repeated many times. The film clearly depicts the unmatched courage of the farmers of that day. I would 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, that hon. members who have not done so, should see this picture, because it is an accurate portrayal of 
the situation. Hon. members will understand anew the value of water and the need for a commission as mentioned in the 
throne speech. 
 



 
February 10, 1964 

 

 
25 

True, there have been some giant steps taken to provide water projects such as the Saskatchewan River Dam, the water well 
drilling program, but if we are to locate water resources that will provide an adequate supply for the southern part of the 
province, a supply that might come from the vast lakes in the north, if we are to provide for the cities and the towns and for 
industries, if we are to provide for irrigation, if we are to provide water for electrical power, if we are to plan the development 
of water resources, the commission is a necessity. It is an example of leadership in a field that thus far has not been organised 
and developed. The need for the commission and its operation will further develop the production possibilities of the rich 
land of Saskatchewan, and guarantee industrial expansion where quantities of water are necessary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Whelan: – Saskatchewan’s future, industrial and agricultural, and it is a bright future, is tied up with the Water 
Resources Commission. This government called a meeting of Manitoba, Alberta and Saskatchewan leaders to discuss a co-
operative study of water resources. I am told, Mr. Speaker, that the conference was a success. 
 
The throne speech, Mr. Speaker, calls for endorsation of the federal pension plan. Working people of Canada, have endorsed 
and sought the security of a portable pension plan for decades. Such a plan, Mr. Speaker, on a federal basis, is practical, 
realistic, and necessary. But, with the present proposed federal legislation being emasculated, with the financial interests who 
operate private plans urging caution in the federal field, it seems to me that everything possible should be done to promote a 
federal portable pension plan. Our Department of Labour research program, and our pension legislation, is indicative of our 
leadership in this field, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are some examples of leadership, good sound practical leader, planned and that will be carried out. The type of 
leadership that has built Saskatchewan, that has developed our highway system, that has developed tourist facilities. This 
leadership will further increase the productive wealth of our rich natural resources. It is complemented by leadership in 
providing facilities for education, training and know-how for Saskatchewan’s resourceful, energetic and ambitious citizens. 
No throne speech, Mr. Speaker, in any other province to date, exhibits or sets out in such clear terms so many examples of 
good sound practical leadership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might turn to one or two examples of good judgment and planning by this government. The 
clearing and breaking policy in the north, community pastures that have been developed throughout the province are 
examples of good judgment by the Department of Agriculture and the hon. minister (Mr. Nollet). Judgment so good in fact, 
that the Leader Post of October 21st, 1963, made the following statement and I quote: 
 
 NORTH SASKATCHEWAN’S ECONOMY AT AN ALL TIME HIGH 
 

In the area west from Prince Albert to and through the Meadow Lake country, there is universal satisfaction with the things 
the government is doing in the way of pasture development, and some of it may rub off in the way of votes when the next 
provincial general election rolls around. It could meant that opposition parties might have a tough time winning seats from 
the CCF government in the north-western area. 

 
and further down near the end of the article it says: – talking about the effects of this program: 
 

They may make it rough for narrow margin Liberal winners like David Boldt, in Rosthern, and Franklin Foley in 
Turtleford. Mr. Nollet’s $5 million program of water conservation and development for regional pasture development, land 
acquisition and development, might help deliver a dozen northern seats for the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t have said it any better. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Whelan: – Time will tell. The increase in school grants will assist communities like Regina city. New schools, more 
teachers, and modern facilities have increased costs. These increased grants will be welcomed by all exponents of good 
educational facilities. 
 



 
February 10, 1964 
 

 
26 

Recently the teaching profession set out in careful detail the need for more federal assistance. Their position must be 
supported. All members of this legislature will join them in their earnest representation, I am sure, for federal help. Federal 
recognition of this national problem, accompanied by federal financial assistance, would lighten the load and contribute 
toward the unity of this country. 
 
Completion of the Yorkton Psychiatric Centre introduces a new method of care for the mentally ill. On a long term basis this 
will be a scientific investment in the mental health of the people of this province. In a previous debate I urged construction of 
this institution. At this time, I would like to express my congratulations to the minister and the department responsible for the 
successful completion and operation of this hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, almost since the day I was elected I have been approached by people in my constituency concerning renovations 
to Regina General Hospital. After discussions with persons who have been interested in hospital facilities, Mr. Speaker, after 
discussions with the hospital board and a review of their plans, after discussions with Regina architects, after talking with 
construction people, after reviewing the out-of–town addresses of patients hospitalized in this centre, and after considering 
the heavy capital expenditure expected from Regina taxpayers, I have come to the conclusion and I am firmly convinced that 
the renovate Regina General Hospital at a cost of $11 million would be unwise, that it would not provide the facilities 
needed, that it would be an unfair burden on the taxpayers of my constituency. 
 
There is a need for additional hospital facilities in Regina, hospital facilities which will serve the entire southern part of the 
province; facilities which will provide rehabilitation treatment and programs for injured workmen; facilities which will 
provide research equipment; facilities for complete cancer treatment; facilities built in such a manner to encourage 
progressive hospital care. 
 
This hospital, Mr. Speaker, should belong to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Whelan: – Mr. Speaker, it should be built by them and it should provide them with the best care available and I contend 
that it should be located in Regina city. These are my own convictions; it is my hope that the reference to this matter 
contained in the throne speech will provide a board of directors who will proceed as fast as possible with building of such a 
hospital centred in the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when a basic steel industry came into this province, and the people in our government underwrote and 
guaranteed it financially, we received criticism at great length. Unfair criticism that almost caused the collapse of the basic 
industry itself. Time shows and clearly indicates that the government exhibited good judgment. 
If you need any evidence of the wisdom of their decision, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that you turn to the province of Quebec, 
where we are told by the Financial Post of November 9th, 1963, that they are considering underwriting a basic steel industry 
to the tune of $200,000,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hold in my hand the financial Post of November 9th, 1963, and here is the headline: 
 
 WE WANT A STEEL MILL AND WE SHALL HAVE ONE 
 
the province of Quebec speaking. 
 
A member of their steel committee speaking and I quote from the article: 
 

A member of the steel committee says that every steel plant built in the world today since World War II, has been built 
with government help in one way or another. Whoever owns the capital will operate this plant, it will be subject to the 
market, it is a pure business proposition. 

 
Further down in the article: ―The Liberals in Quebec have been talking about a steel mill for ten years and Premier Lesage set 
the project as a definite goal in 1960‖. 
 



 
February 10, 1964 

 

 
27 

We quote further down: 
 

Quebec now has the worst employment situation in Canada, and figures heavy industry is one of the major factors in easing 
this situation. 

 
Just imagine the criticism that would have come from members opposite if they lived in the province of Quebec. Just imagine 
when you recall the noise they made over the IPSCO plant. 
 
Others now plan to imitate what we have done to a much greater degree, indicating that our government has exercised good 
judgment. There is an old saying ―Imitation is the highest kind of flattery‖. 
 
Over and over again, magazines and newspapers from out of the province, quote the economic stability of the province of 
Saskatchewan. The economic future of our province never looked brighter. Allow me to quote, Mr. Speaker, from Time 
Magazine, December 20th, 1963, one short paragraph by that magazine in reference to the province, they say, talking about 
Saskatchewan: 
 

It is now the only province with neither federally designated depressed areas, nor winter works projects. Winter 
unemployment is a negligible two per cent, with a second highest income in Canada, ($1,929 versus Ontario’s $2,000), 
Saskatchewan has turned in an unprecedented $1,000,000,000 year on four different fronts, agricultural, and non-
agricultural commodities production, total persona income and retail sales. 

 
The only thing about this article, Mr. Speaker, is that it is not up-to-date. I understand the winter unemployment figure is now 
less than one per cent. 
 
The good administrative judgement of our Provincial Treasurer, and of the economic advisory people and the treasury staff, 
is recognized throughout Canada. National publications frequently quote the economic strength of this province. 
 
In the federal field, Mr. Speaker, by comparison, we have a faltering performance by a finance minister form big business 
who has tried even the political patience of the Leader-Post. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that paper has demanded that he be fired. 
 
Some critics say that we should have more businessmen in government. This provincial government has businessmen, but it 
also has farmers and teachers, lawyers, housewives, tradesmen and engineers. A cross-section of Saskatchewan’s people and 
their judgement together has proven to be economically sound 
 
Recently, a new helium plant went into production in Saskatchewan the first of its kind outside of the U.S.A. and the Soviet 
Bloc, clearly indicating the possible development of rich mineral resources of this province. The good judgement and 
planning of our Department of Industry is paying off. It one looks about, one sees plants opening their doors on all sides, and 
the industrial utilization of the minerals of a province whose resources have scarcely been tapped and whose potential is 
unknown. One must admit that it is good sound judgement to have established an Industrial Development Office and later a 
Department of Industry and Information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are examples of good judgement that cannot be challenged. They speak for themselves. They are part and 
parcel of the way people of this province do things and the shrewd manner in which they carry out effectively and efficiently, 
and with imagination, decisions made after careful and judicious consideration. The early history of our province, Mr. 
Speaker, is a remarkable achievement. When one considers that the province will be 60 years of age next year and the 
country a as whole is not yet 100 years of age, one must conclude that it was the methods practised by the citizens of our 
province down through its 60 years of history, which have made this achievement possible. 
 
There are many methods, but probably the most important and the most widely adopted is the principle of democratic 
participation by the resourceful people who live and who are living here. 
 
This government has assisted and accentuated the practise of democratic participation. No better example exists than the 
organization of the 



 
February 10, 1964 
 

 
28 

Department of Co-operation and Co-operative Development to provide technical facilities to assist co-operatives in credit 
unions. During the pas year, assets of credit unions exceeded $200,000,000. New co-operative places of business opened 
their doors throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the early history and the early resourcefulness that demanded co-operative activities has been applied and is a 
clear-cut endorsation by this government of the principle of democratic participation. 
 
More recently, Mr. Speaker, as the need for industrial developments was recognized, the people of the province again turned 
to democratic participation to develop industry in our communities. The organization of the Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation and of the Industry Advisory council composed of members of Saskatchewan’s business 
community, labor and government is, I contend,. Mr. Speaker, a continuation of the principle of democratic participation and 
augurs well for the success of the industrial development program. 
 
The speech from the throne forecasts a legislative committee to study the possible needs for parliamentary commissioner of 
―ombudsman‖. The Ombudsman in Scandinavian countries and New Zealand is effective and it gives the average citizen an 
opportunity to appeal against any action or gives the average citizen an opportunity to appeal against any action or unfair 
decision within the jurisdiction of the government. The idea of a parliamentary commissioner is yet another example of 
democratic participation and originated in a democratic socialist country. The study by a legislative committee to decide the 
method scope and other factors such as the appointment of the parliamentary commissioner, is something I approve, for it 
will accentuate democratic participation by members of this house. 
 
We are told, Mr. Speaker, that in our province, and among our people, there are more democratic organizations and groups 
than any other province in Canada. As reference material, Mr. Speaker, I quote a leadership study of a town in the north-west 
portion of the province of Saskatchewan. In a Saskatchewan town with a population of 2,700 people, a study made in 1960-
61 showed that there were 140 voluntary democratic community organizations in the town. The report, published by the 
Centre for Community Studies, divides the organizations into 13 types, the most numerous being religious, recreational, 
athletic, occupational and community service. These voluntary democratic organization, Mr. Speaker, have molded together 
the thinking, the resources, the intelligence, the initiative, and the philosophy of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
After the last session and during the months that followed, Mr. Speaker, the study of public accounts procedures, the 
committee to review regulations and the study of expropriation by a legislative committee, all are prime examples of the 
effectiveness of parliamentary government and uphold the theory of democratic participation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the honor and the privilege of chairing the committee to examine expropriation. This was a rewarding and 
gratifying experience. The sincere contribution made by all members of the committee, government members and opposition 
members, and their attendance at all meetings produced an objective study of the problems at hand. I anticipate the 
committee’s unanimous report will commend itself and when the report and the accompanying legislation is submitted to the 
hose, I shall deal at length with the committee’s recommendations. I should like, Mr. Speaker, to pay tribute and express my 
thanks to the committee for their c-operation, and for the excellent and democratic manner in which they received and dealt 
with the members of the public, representatives of organizations, and the civil servants who appeared before us. 
 
The speech from the throne and the practises and policies of this government are representative of their dedication to 
democracy, clearly exhibited by the people of this province since the days it was first inhabited. 
 
Recent examples such as farm management clubs, ARDA, provincial water and drilling clubs, are recent innovations, but 
they all use the same approach, the application of democracy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Whelan: – It is part of our way of living. This government practices and promotes democratic participation. The throne 
speech will further develop this great province, it will enhance its prospects for the future, it will safeguard our gains in the 
field of social legislation. Our province has never looked better, its affairs have never been in better hands. The throne speech 
guarantees the future of our province – in writing. Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to second and support the motion. 
 



 
February 10, 1964 

 

 
29 

Mr. W. Ross Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, my initial remarks this session, of course, must be to 
congratulate the mover and the seconder of the throne debate. We did think on this side of the house, that their remarks were 
somewhat partisan. However, I will say that they ably performed the task which they were given. I should like to refer to one 
subject that the hon. member who has just taken his seat talked about, I would like to associate myself with him. He indicated 
that many members and many citizens of Regina and Saskatchewan were sorry that the Hon. Minister of Labour is leaving 
politics and that he would not be with us again, when the house meets. I think the minister will be missed, not only by his 
own supporters, but he will be missed by all citizens of Saskatchewan because in his job, he has been fairminded and honest. 
I think he has done his best, I don’t tell the minister that we were terribly disappointed when he announced that he wouldn’t 
be running again, but I can tell him, that he will be missed. I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that he will be missed by no one 
more than the hon. member who just took his seat, on election day. 
 
The hon. member for Regina said that he was a bit worried about Turtleford and Rosthern. May I suggest that he be even 
more worried about Big Atch in North Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — Well, now, Mr. Speaker, members on the other side of the house repeatedly are inclined to talk as though 
all the good ideas, all the social reforms, all the virtues originated with them. Apparently their opponents never have a good 
idea, and are really tools of the monied interests. I say that this is pretentious poppy cock. There have been good, honest, 
independent Canadians in all political parties, and I don’t think that the NDP has any particular monopoly on that category of 
citizens. 
 
There are some items in the throne speech which members of the opposition will support, and I can tell you that there are 
other features of the throne speech which leave us unenthusiastic. The past year has probably been the most prosperous 
period that Saskatchewan has ever had. Why is it so prosperous? There are three reasons: First, because we had a bumper 
crop; secondly, because we had a Liberal government at Ottawa, which could sell the wheat; thirdly, because the farmer has 
been able to get the highest price for that wheat in 43 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — All of these factors have meant that the Saskatchewan government has unexpected revenues. I think the 
budgetary surplus this year could easily have reached $20,000,000. Surely our citizens in this province might have expected 
my hon. friends opposite, in view of the very heavy taxes that we now have, to have either given us tax reduction, or debt 
reduction; one or the other. There is no sign of that kind of a policy in the throne speech. Perhaps tax reduction will come 
down when the budget is tabled, but certainly our people can only conclude that the socialist spending spree is going to 
continue apace. The NDP in recent months have fallen all over themselves in a frantic search for ways to spend more of the 
taxpayers money in order to buy enough votes to try and win the next election. 
 
We on this side of the house say that the first major failure of the throne speech is that it has neglected to give the hard 
pressed Saskatchewan taxpayer any sign of tax relief. Secondly the throne speech states, I use its own words: ―Industry 
continues to expand at a sustained high rate.‖ Both the speakers this afternoon enlarged on this fanciful piece of fiction. Why 
to hear hon. members talk, one would think that we were almost in utopia, here in Saskatchewan. There are smoke stacks 
springing up on every horizon. I think the hon. member for Regina said that, what were his exact words? ―The doors are 
opening on all sides.‖ Well, of course, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has expanded in recent years and we don’t deny that, but 
any economic comparison that one wants to make would indicate that our industrial expansion in this province compares 
most unfavorably with the rest of Canada, and particularly with Manitoba and Alberta. The NDP boasts of high industrial 
expansion. I have three very interesting documents on my desk: 



 
February 10, 1964 
 

 
30 

 One – The manufacturing industry of Canada, section E, Prairie provinces. (1959) 
 
I refer the Honorable Premier to page 24, if he cares to check my figures: 
 
 Two – Manufacturing industries of Canada, section A. (1960. 
 
That is the latest book I could obtain there: 
 
 Three – The government’s own publication, ―Saskatchewan Economic Review.‖ 
 
While the minister is looking it up, I would suggest that he turn to page seven. What do the charts in these three government 
publications indicate? The most recent DBS figures indicate that there are only 840 more jobs in manufacturing today than 
there were when the NDP took office almost 20 years ago. An average increase of 42 or 41 per year. What else can I tell you 
today, Mr. Speaker, about this great expansion? 
 
Well, in the period of 1944 to 1960, (the latest figures in the library) figures show that the number of manufacturing 
establishments in Saskatchewan at the end of 1960 were 167 fewer than when the NDP took office. Now., Mr. Speaker, what 
kind of industrial expansion is that? This is 20 years of progress. While the rest of Canada has been growing, there is no 
department in this legislature which has been so ineffective, as the department of the Hon. Minister of Industry and 
Information. I am going to have something more to say about that tomorrow. 
 
The throne speech talks about the quickening pace of our economy. Goodness knows the opposition agrees it is about time it 
did quicken. Certainly in the past year, the pace of people leaving this province quickened. If industry is pouring in, if 
development is proceeding apace, if new jobs are being created, I ask the Premier and I ask the cabinet, why has 
Saskatchewan’s population growth again been the lowest in all Canada? I say that population figures are the acid test of 
growth. This government took office around June 1st, 1944. How has the province grown since that date? 
 
Canada as a whole has gone up 59 per cent; British Columbia has grown by 83 per cent; Alberta by 75 per cent; Ontario 64 
per cent; Quebec by 57 per cent; Newfoundland has gone up by 41 per cent; N.B. by 33 per cent, Manitoba by 32 per cent; 
Nova Scotia by 25 per cent; little Prince Edward Island has grown by 18 per cent. The Yukon has increased 220 per cent. The 
North-West Territories has increased by 108 per cent. But the province of Saskatchewan under the socialists, with their kind 
of industrial expansion, has only gone up by 12 per cent. 
 
I notice the Commonwealth the other day suggested that North Dakota and South Dakota hadn’t done much better. I say that 
the throne speech fails to give any indication how this trend is going to be reversed. It offers no solution as to how new 
investments, new industry, and hence new jobs can be brought to Saskatchewan. 
 
The hon. member for Redberry (Mr. Michayluk) this afternoon was talking about development in the north, the are of the 
country where he comes from. Mr. Speaker, I have been in the north on numerous occasions recently, I haven’t seen any 
particular evidence of great growth in the north from Socialist policies. When one visits Uranium City, you find mine after 
mine closed down. The only one still going is Eldorado, or will be in another week or so. The town is rapidly on its way to 
becoming a ghost town. I don’t know whether that is the CCF idea of 20 years of progress. All over the north we still have no 
pulp mill. You can look over the length and width of the north, there is lots of timber, but no pulp mill. 
 
Now just before another provincial election he says if those federal rascals don’t stop it, we will get a pulp mill. Base metal 
production on the Manitoba side of the border, Flin Flon is increasing and at Thompson Lake lots of nickel being produced. 
In the province of Saskatchewan, our base metal production is going down, down, down, year after year. In 1958-59 we 
produced 172,000,000 pounds; 1959-60, 163,000,000 pounds; 1960-061 we are down to 139,000,000; 1961-62 down to 
122,000,000 pounds. What kind of development is that? Mining exploration in northern Saskatchewan today is virtually at a 
stand still. Not only are new mines not being found, even prospecting is down substantially. So I say that as far as 
development in the province of Saskatchewan is concerned, as compared to the rest of Canada there is little to be encouraged 
about. 
 



 
February 10, 1964 

 

 
31 

Mr. Speaker, I think that this throne speech is significant, because it marks the end of an era in Saskatchewan. After two long 
decades it is fairly evident that the socialists have come to the end of the road in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — As a matter of fact all across Canada, Mr. Speaker, the NDP is a fading force. In fact it is almost no force 
at all. We have had a provincial election in every single province except Saskatchewan in the last year or year and a half. I 
think it is interesting to see how the NDP have done. 
 
Over in Newfoundland the socialists tell us that the Liberals are reactionary, that progressive people should vote for the NDP. 
Three per cent of them did that in the last election. 
 
In Ontario, one of their strong holds, a few months ago the NDP vote dropped to 16 per cent. 
 
In Manitoba . . . 
 
One of the Hon. Members: — How are the Liberals doing? 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — . . . the Liberals are doing fine. In Manitoba their elected members fell from ten to seven, and the popular 
vote in Manitoba fell from 22 per cent to 15 per cent for the NDP. 
 
In Nova Scotia . . . 
 
Mr. Nollet: — How about the Liberals? 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — Oh, the Liberals are doing fine. We’ll do better even in this province. In Nova Scotia, the NDP – that’s the 
former province of my hon. friend the Provincial Minister of Health, I think, is it not, Sir? – lost the only MLA they had, and 
their share in Nova Scotia of the vote went down to four per cent. They must have been reading about the 20 years of 
progress that we have had out here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Out in B.C., which is supposed to be the NDP bastion, numbers dropped from 16 to 13. The popular vote went down from 33 
to 29 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Alberta, the NDP vote was down to nine per cent. In Quebec and N.B., P.E.I., the NDP were so weak that 
they couldn’t even get candidates to run. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the same trend is evident here today in the province of Saskatchewan. The socialists won the last election in 
1960 with 41 per cent of the votes. Since that time they have lost one deferred election and three by-elections, each one with 
a bigger minority. As we get ready for an election next April or next June, whenever the Premier gets his courage up, what is 
the state of the once mighty socialist party in Saskatchewan? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I could be biased, but I think it is falling apart at the seams. With their former cabinet greats departed, 
men like Douglas, Fines, Bentley and a few others, and now Williams, their cabinet is composed of tired and weary men. 
Men grown old and inept in office. Why, Mr. Speaker, as they get ready for this election, they can’t even make up their mind 
what their name is . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — . . . one part of the province of Saskatchewan, they call themselves NDP. When they get out with the 
farmers they are CCF. When they are talking in Regina they are the Labour Party. When they are talking to a few other 
people they are the Socialist Party. Small wonder that everywhere one travels in Saskatchewan today, you hear the words ―In 
Saskatchewan it is time for a change‖. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move the adjournment of this debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:30 o’clock p.m. 
 


