



















































Hansard: February 06, 1964


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Sixth Session – Fourteenth Legislature 

1st Day 
 

Thursday, February 6, 1964 
 

3:00 o’clock p.m. 
 
This being the day appointed by Proclamation of His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor, dated the Fifteenth day of January, 
1964, for the meeting of the Sixth Session of the Fourteenth Legislative Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan, and the 
Assembly having met: 
 
Mr. Speaker informed the Assembly that he had received a communication from the Private Secretary to His Honor the 
Lieutenant-Governor stating that His Honor would open the Session at three o’clock p.m. Today, Thursday, the Sixth day of 
February, 1964. 
 
3:05 o’clock p.m. 
 
His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor entered the Chamber and, having taken his seat upon the Throne, was pleased to open the 
Session with the following Speech: 
 
Mr. Speaker, 
 
Members of the Legislative Assembly: 
 
It is my privilege to welcome you to the Sixth Session of the Fourteenth Legislature of Saskatchewan. 
 
The year just ended will be long remembered in Saskatchewan. The bountiful harvest and the record export sales of wheat 
represent achievement and fulfillment long sought after by our farmers. 1963 was also highlighted by the rapid expansion of 
our general economy and a further broadening of our economic base. 
 
Agricultural production exceeded $1,000,000,000 for the first time; the number of cattle on farms set a new record; 
community pastures increased in a number to a total of 207. 
 
The value of non-agricultural production also exceeded $1,000,000,000 for the first time in our history; capital investment 
was never greater; industry continued to expand at a sustained high rate; new jobs were created and employment increased; 
unemployment dropped to its lowest level in many years; mineral production exceeded all previous records; potash came into 
continuous production; a chemical industry was established; hydro-electric power from the Saskatchewan River system 
became a reality; Saskatchewan helium became available for export to the markets of the world; a record number of tourists 
visited our province. 
 
The quickening pace of our entire economy focuses new attention upon the great diversity and potential wealth of our natural 
and mineral resources. The future development of this heritage in such a manner as to assure maximum benefits to the people 
of our province was the concern of a Saskatchewan Resources Conference held in the City of Saskatoon last month. This 
conference, organized by the Industry Advisory Council and co-sponsored by the Saskatchewan Research Council, the 
Saskatchewan Economic Advisory Council, the Rural Development Council and the University of Saskatchewan, brought 
together 300 business and community leaders, technical experts, administrators and special visitors from other parts of 
Canada. Their discussions and deliberations have suggested important guidelines in the conservation and development of our 
resources. 
 
My government considers it essential that the rate of economic expansion in Saskatchewan be encouraged to the maximum 
possible extent. You will be asked to participate in this by approving important proposals which provide new and improve 
existing government programmes designed to facilitate and sustain this growth. 
 
Legislation will be introduced to authorize a broader programme aimed towards the further development of the agricultural 
industry of the province, including the provision of credit, adjustments in land use and rehabilitation of rural areas. 
 



 
February 6, 1964 
 

 
2 

You will be asked to approve legislation which will authorize the Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation to 
broaden its field of activities. The management training programme designed to assist small business will be expanded. 
Legislation which will provide technical, administrative and financial assistance to communities faced with municipal 
problems brought about by extra-ordinary industrial growth will be proposed. 
 
During the next few years the South Saskatchewan Dam will be completed the associated hydro-electric power plant will be 
in operation; a good start will be made on recreation facilities on the reservoir and on the irrigation programme, and division 
of water into the Qu’Appelle basin will begin. This period will see an intensive examination of several other major projects 
including the reclamation of a million acres of arable land in the Saskatchewan River delta; another major power project on 
the Saskatchewan River; a comprehensive multi-purpose scheme to augment water supplies in south-eastern Saskatchewan; 
and expanded programmes of small water development for agricultural, municipal, industrial and other purposes. Plans are 
being made in co-operation with the Government of Canada, Manitoba and Alberta to study the water resources of the 
Saskatchewan-Nelson basin, including potential additional supply by diversions and storage. Growing demands on our water 
resources in the years ahead make necessary a more comprehensive approach in water resource planning, development and 
use. Accordingly you will be asked to approve legislation which will establish a New Saskatchewan Water Resources 
Commission. 
 
In recent years My Government, in co-operation with the Government of Canada, has provided for a broader programme of 
vocational education and development. New and enlarged technical training facilities have been built. It is now apparent that 
plans should be made for a significant expansion of programmes, facilities and opportunities in vocational education and 
technical training, designed to serve the needs of young people and adults alike. 
 
Significant results are now apparent from the government’s long-term plans to improve transportation and communication 
facilities. Today approximately 75 percent of provincial highway traffic is accommodated on 4,000 miles of dust-free surface. 
Major emphasis will continue to be given to extending the dust-free highway mileage. The urban assistance policy, which has 
aided municipalities to improve streets that serve as highway connectors, will be extended. Additional funds for this policy 
and its application to other urban streets, including main streets in centres whose population is less than 1,000, will be 
recommended. 
 
To date some 290 Rural Municipalities, 11 Local Improvement Districts and 104 towns and villages have participated in the 
grid road programme. Approximately 9,500 miles of all-weather municipal roads have been built. Use of the Municipal Loan 
and Development Fund, together with other funds which will be recommended for your approval, will enable municipalities 
to accelerate their grid road programme. 
 
More resource access roads are being built in Northern Saskatchewan. The Otosquen Road, linking Hudson Bay and The Pas 
was opened last year; The Hanson Lake Road now provides Saskatchewan access to Creighton and Flin Flon. Construction of 
the Uranium City Road will continue from the Churchill River to Reindeer Lake. Work on a road linking Squaw Rapids and 
Cumberland House has commenced. Plans to construct other northern roads will be recommended. 
 
Provincial telephone service has been extended to a total of 215,000 customers. Direct Distance Dialing gives homes and 
businesses in the Regina area direct connection with millions of telephones in North America. This modern communication 
facility will be extended to some other areas of the province in the coming year. 
 
Electricity supplied by the provincial power utility increased by 17 percent in 1963. The corporation now serves 200,000 
consumers with electric power and 100,000 consumers with natural gas. Natural gas service will be further extended this 
year, and the integration of the City of Regina power system with the Saskatchewan Power Corporation network which has 
now been agreed upon, will provide mutual savings and benefits to all customers in the province. 
 
Improved productivity in every phase of our economy has permitted the people of Saskatchewan to undertake programmes 
which have improved living conditions, made more opportunities available for all and made more adequate provision for our 
senior citizens and unfortunate families in need of help. Because of resulting improvement in provincial revenues, it has been 
possible to reduce by $5,000,000 the personal premiums for Medical Care and Hospitalization. 
 



 
February 6, 1964 

 

 
3 

 

The Family Farm Improvement Programme ha assisted in the installation of water and sewerage systems in thousands of 
farm homes. The Municipal Water Assistance Programme has aided in making water and sewer services a reality for 
thousands of citizens in our smaller communities. Within the last four years there has been a three-fold increase in the 
number of urban centres in Saskatchewan served by water and sewer facilities. 
 
Improved and extended provincial parks have added interest and enjoyment for many Saskatchewan families and visitors. 
One hundred and fifty-one municipalities have received assistance for the establishment of 30 regional parks. Camping and 
picnic sites were established along the Trans-Canada Highway and other provincial highways You will be asked to make 
provision to maintain and expand these programmes. 
 
My Government has approved a recommendation of the Minimum Wage Board for an increase in minimum wages. 
 
A new Provincial Geriatric Centre has been opened at Swift Current. Grants continue to be paid for the construction and 
maintenance of housing for senior citizens. Today over 5,000 aged persons are cared for in modern comfortable housing 
units. Following the increase in the Old Age Security payment of $75.00 per month effective December 1st last, increases 
were authorized in the Province’s Supplemental Allowance Programme effective the same date. My Government also 
welcomed the decision of the Government of Canada to share the cost of increasing Old Age Assistance Pensions and 
pensions for blind and disabled persons. 
 
To meet the need for better housing and economic development in Northern Saskatchewan, you will be asked to create a 
housing and development fund. This will facilitate the expansion of development programmes designed to improve income 
opportunities, to create employment and to encourage new economic activity. Emphasis will be laid on the use of co-
operative housing methods where feasible. 
 
An increase of $5,000,000 in school grants together with substantially increased grants for the University will be 
recommended. Amendments to The Secondary Education Act respecting the levying of local taxes for the support of 
education at the high school level will be proposed. You will be asked to approve legislation to provide an integrated 
programme for the training of all types of teachers. 
 
An extended programme of bursaries to assist in the training of dentists has met with marked success. More than 50 such 
bursaries have been awarded to students whose professional services will be available to the people of Saskatchewan during 
1964 and subsequent years. A continuation of this programme will be recommended. 
 
1963 also marked the inauguration of awards of medical scholarships and bursaries to over 125 Saskatchewan medial 
students. It is expected that this programme will further enhance the interest in medicine which was evident in this year’s 
increased enrolment. 
 
The latest action taken by My Government to strengthen legislative procedures was the proclamation of The Regulations Act, 
1963. This act provides an improved method of notifying the public of the enactment of regulations of a legislative nature 
and will facilitate legislative examination of such regulations. 
 
Procedures designed to protect the position of the individual when it is necessary for him to surrender property for public 
purposes was the subject of a study by a Special Committee of this Assembly appointed at the last session. This committee 
met throughout the summer and fall months and heard representations from many individuals, organizations, and government 
departments. Consideration will be given to the report of this committee with a view to introducing legislation at an early 
date. Another Special Committee concerned itself with examining ways and means of improving the ability of the Legislature 
to scrutinize, on behalf of the citizens of the province, the expenditure of public funds. The report of this committee will be of 
considerable value to Members of the Legislature. The Legislature will wish to express its appreciation to those of its 
members who have contributed to the valuable work of these committees. 
 
Study has been given to measures adopted, notably in the Scandinavian countries and in New Zealand, which provide citizens 
with direct and easy access to appeal from administrative decisions thought to be arbitrary or unjust. It will be suggested that 
a Special Committee of the Legislature be asked to inquire into the best means of providing similar access for Saskatchewan 
citizens. 
 



 
February 6, 1964 
 

 
4 

During the past year My Government has been disturbed by frequent reports that citizens were experiencing difficulties in 
being treated in publicly supported hospitals by the medically qualified physicians of their choice. Mr. Justice Mervyn 
Woods was appointed a Commissioner under The Public Inquiries Act to investigate this area of difficulty. The 
Commissioner’s report and recommendations have been received and legislation will be proposed based in part upon these 
recommendations. 
 
Some months ago the Government received from the Health Service Planning Commission the report of the Hospital Survey 
Committee appointed by that Commission. Among its recommendations was that My Government establish a hospital in the 
Regina area to provide the facilities of a base hospital to the residents of southern Saskatchewan. Legislation is proposed to 
establish a board to study this recommendation and, if deemed feasible, to proceed with establishing a hospital centre to 
provide certain hospital services to residents of southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Last year several of My Ministers attended Federal-Provincial Conference at which fiscal arrangements, a municipal loan 
programme, the proposed Canada Pension Plan and other topics were discussed. The opportunity for such discussions were 
welcomed. Some progress was made in certain areas of mutual concern. 
 
Saskatchewan welcomed the decision of the Government of Canada to assist municipalities to obtain additional investment 
capital. Legislation authorising the province and municipalities to participate fully in this programme will be recommended 
to you. 
 
While regretting recent retrogressive changes in the proposal to institute a portable pension plan for Canadian citizens, My 
Government is still of the opinion that the modified plan merits support. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan expresses some disappointment in the new federal proposals respecting tax-sharing 
arrangements. These proposals represent a departure from desirable principles of equalization of major provincial revenues. 
Saskatchewan will continue to urge that important equalization principles be reinstated in future federal-provincial fiscal 
arrangements. 
 
The Government has had frequent consultations with the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians and with officials of 
appropriate departments of the Government of Canada on matters of mutual concern. As a result some provincial 
programmes in the field of education and health, and, in some areas, of grid roads and power and telephone service, have 
been made available to our Indian people. At a recent Federal-Provincial Conference My Government indicated its 
willingness, subject to adequate consultation with Saskatchewan Indians and to the continued availability of federal financial 
assistance, to extend such programmes and to do some more rapidly. Plans for extended consultations are under way as are 
plans for further federal-provincial discussions early in 1964. 
 
Emphatic representations have been made to the Government of Canada regarding proposals to abandon many miles of 
branch railway lines in Saskatchewan. Steps are also being taken to assist local communities in assembling information 
concerning the effect of such proposed abandonment. My Government will continue to take the position that railway services 
must not be abandoned without consideration of the total economic and social impact on the communities and services 
affected. 
 
Provisions will again be made for an extensive programme of public works in the Province. As in the past these works will be 
staged to maximize as far as possible the employment of labour during the winter season. In addition, the Government will 
continue to pursue a policy favouring to the greatest extent possible the use of materials manufactured in Saskatchewan. 
 
Amendments to The Automobile Accident Insurance Act will be introduced to provided uniform and convenient proof of 
public liability insurance for Saskatchewan motorists travelling in other provinces. 
 
An Act will be introduced giving the Courts jurisdiction to modify unduly harsh provisions of contracts securing repayment 
of money. 
 
The Public Accounts for the last fiscal year, together with estimates for the year beginning April 1, 1964 will be submitted. 
 
I leave you now to the business of the Session with full confidence that you will favourably discharge your duties and 
responsibilities. May Divine Providence continue to bless our Province and guide the Legislature in all its deliberations 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 3:35 o’clock. 


