



















































Hansard: March 13, 1964


773 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
SIXTH SESSION – FOURTEENTH LEGISLATURE 

27th Day 

 

Friday, March 13th, 1964. 
 
The house met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

DEW LINE RADAR TOWERS 
 

Mr. Franklin E. Foley (Turtleford): — Before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I would like to draw to the 
attention of the Assembly what in my opinion is a breach of official secrecy on the part of a minister of the province. 
 
On two occasions the Minister of Natural Resources in this Assembly, has made reference to the tearing down of Dew Lines 
or radar towers in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
We were told this morning by the Minister of Labour and Telephones that this matter cannot be discussed. He warned the 
press not to make use of any of the statements and that this was top secret. I believe in view of this, Mr. Speaker, the Minister 
of Natural Resources, owes an apology to this Assembly and should be reprimanded in this regard. 
 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Premier): — Am I allowed to comment, Mr. Speaker? I have not enquired very closely into it, but I 
cannot quite see how it could be a matter of secrecy when actually the destruction of these towers is underway and is being 
commented on by the press outside of the Minister of Natural Resources. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I don’t think we want to debate it but I will allow you to say a word. 
 

Hon. C.C. Williams (Minister of Telephones): — All the correspondence that the Saskatchewan Government Telephones 
has on this is marked ―secret‖. As a matter of fact, I don’t think we have any correspondence at all; it has been telephone calls, 
but in any case, as far as S.G.T. was concerned, it is a matter of secrecy. It has been in the papers, I don’t know what all the 
fuss is about. It has been in the papers; these towers have been toppled over; they are worthless to us; they are not worth the 
price of hauling them away. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I don’t think we can debate the issue at all as to what the towers . . . 
 

Mr. Foley: — Mr. Speaker, if I might be permitted one comment, the inference was cast that these towers might have been 
useful to the government . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! We can’t debate the pros and cons of it . . . 
 

Mr. Foley: — I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this inference was cast . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! Will the hon. member take his seat. We can’t debate it on the Orders of the Day. 
 

Mr. Herman Danielson (Arm River): — Does that apply to all members on both sides? 
 

Mr. Speaker: — It applies to all members; it cannot be debated. 
 

Mr. Foley: — Mr. Speaker, I believe this is in the public interest . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! 
 



 

March 13, 1964 
 

 
774 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE ORDER OF BUSINESS ON MONDAY 
 

Hon. W. S. Lloyd (Premier): — While I am on my feet, Mr. Speaker, a word about Monday’s order of business. We will 
want to go into Committee of the Whole on Monday morning to deal with in particular, Bill No. 48 – An Act to amend The 
Hospital Standards Act. I mention this specifically because I know some members of the opposition have a particular interest 
in it and I want them to be aware that it will be called at that particular time. 
 
With regard to Supply, we will continue with Social Welfare; following Social Welfare we will go to Municipal Affairs and 
Municipal Road Authority and then to Highways. In that order, perhaps more, if time permits. 
 

ADJOURNMENT – FRIDAY TO MONDAY 
 

Hon. W. S. Lloyd (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, may I then, seconded by Mr. Walker, move: 
 

That when the Assembly adjourns today, it do stand adjourned until Monday next at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:32 o’clock p.m. 


