



















































Hansard: February 11, 1964


33 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
SIXTH SESSION – FOURTEENTH LEGISLATURE 

4th day 

 

Tuesday, February 11, 1964 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 p.m. 

on the Orders of the Day 

 

QUESTION RE: NO. 14 HIGHWAY 

 

Mr. James E. Snedker (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with I would like to ask the 

Provincial Treasurer if the pre-budget announcement, made by the Minister of Agriculture, as reported in the press of 

February 10th, regarding the spring re-building of no. 14 highway, is correct? 

 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to say I haven’t 

seen the report. 

 

WELCOME TO THE STUDENTS 

 

Hon. A.M. Nicholson (Minister of Social Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are called, I would like to 

draw the attention of the hon. members the fact that we have with us today the students from the University of Saskatchewan, 

Saskatoon and Regina campus, and also quite a number of international students, who are studying in Saskatchewan. I would 

like to welcome especially Mr. & Mrs. Harrington, who for a number of years have taken a keen interest in the international 

students who come to Saskatchewan. I hope that some of the young people will be interested in a political career of some 

kind, and that their visit to the legislature will be profitable to them and for the members. 

 

Dinner is being served at 5:30 with Your Honour presiding as usual. Room 267 is available after the house adjourns in case 

any of the students have questions they would like to direct to members of either side of the House. I hope some of the hon. 

Members from both sides will be available to answer questions, that the students might have. 

 

Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

TRIBUTE TO FRANK BAILEY RINK 

 

Mr. Gordon T. Snyder (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with I think it 

would be appropriate at this time to pay tribute to the Frank Bailey rink of Central Collegiate Institute in Moose Jaw, who 

yesterday won the Saskatchewan Curling Championship for the high school boys, and I am sure that all members of the 

House will want to join with me in expressing our congratulations to them, and wishing them every success in their 

endeavors beginning with the Canadian Curling Championship, which starts in Regina on this coming Monday. I am sure that 

all members will want to join with me in extending to them our best wishes and congratulations on their achievement. 

 

Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 



 

February 11, 1964 
 

 

34 

Mr. David Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with I would like to draw your 

attention to the presence in the gallery to your right, to the students from the Waldheim High School. They are accompanied 

by their teacher, Mr. Clifford Jansen. I am sure that we all will give them a cordial welcome and hope that their stay will be a 

pleasant one. 

 

Mr. A.T. Stone (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with I would like to welcome 

a group of some 50 school children from the Christ the King School, in Saskatoon, along with their teachers. I am sure all 

members will join with me in saying how delighted we are to have them here, we hope their stay will be an informative and a 

pleasant one. 

 

Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with I think it would be 

appropriate for me to say how happy we all are that the girls from Meath Park, their curling team, did win the Saskatchewan 

Championship as I had hoped they would, and I am sure the hon. Members of this house wish them the best of success in any 

future competition. 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Michayluk for an Address in Reply. 

 

Mr. W.R. Thatcher (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, my first remarks this afternoon, must be to associate 

myself and my colleagues, with the remarks which were made a few moments ago by the Minister from Saskatoon, in 

welcoming the university students who are with us today. Governments of course, at all levels are playing an increasing role 

in the lives of all of us. For that reason, it has never been more vital for young people to take some interest in government. No 

doubt, a few of our visitors, before very long will be occupying seats in this legislature and in the parliament at Ottawa. So 

we in the opposition, join with the government members in hoping that their visit will be enjoyable and fruitful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the debate was adjourned yesterday, I had been speaking about the NDP, and indicating that in my 

opinion, it was a fading political force across Canada. I pointed out how we had had nine provincial elections in the past year 

or year and a half, and how in each of those elections NDP strength had dwindled to a very considerable degree. I pointed out 

that in the two bastions of Ontario and British Columbia their popular vote had gone down materially. I pointed out how in 

Newfoundland their popular vote had gone to three per cent – how in Manitoba it had fallen from 22 to 15 per cent – how in 

the Nova Scotia election it had dropped to four per cent. How in the Alberta election the NDP figure was down to nine per 

cent. I reminded my hon. Friends across the way that in Quebec, New Brunswick, and Prince Edward Island, the NDP were 

so weak that they cold not even field candidates. Since I spoke in the house yesterday, we have had two more federal by-

elections and I think hon. members would be interested to know how the NDP fared in those elections. I remind you that the 

Liberals were declared elected, by Canadian Press, ten minutes after the polls were closed. In the Laurier constituency the 

NDP vote fell from 2,379 to 863, the popular vote for 13.2 per cent to 8.2 per cent. In the St. Denis riding the NDP strength 

fell from 2,637 last April to 606 yesterday – from 11.5 per cent down to 3.9 per cent. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to be fair; the NDP yesterday did accomplish one thing, it was nip and tuck all night but they did 

defeat finally the Rhinoceros Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — And so I say, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP across Canada, and including the province of Saskatchewan, is 

fast going into oblivion. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Will the hon. member permit a question? 

 



 

February 11, 1964 
 

 

35 

Mr. Thatcher: — Why certainly. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — When did the Liberals first win those seats? 

 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): — They never lost them. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Whey they never them and their majorities are getting bigger all the time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the duty of the opposition in this House and in any parliament is primarily to point out and criticize any 

weaknesses there may be in government policies. Sometimes in carrying out that task our actions are misinterpreted. Some 

people wonder if we are too harsh, others wonder if we are too destructive. There are a few who wonder if perhaps we are a 

bit unfair. However, I think that most people, regardless of their politics would agree that good government does require a 

hard working and I hope an alert opposition. I think that such opposition is the best safeguard that we have for our democratic 

way of life. This session of the legislature in all probability is a pre-election session. Within a few months the people of 

Saskatchewan will decide whether or not they want a change of administration. We on this side of the House believe that the 

election which is coming up is not an ordinary election, because the ballots cast next June will decide much more than which 

political party will win. The voters by their decision will either commit this province to the tighter grasp of socialism, perhaps 

for years to come, or swing it back into line with the rest of an expanding Canada. 

 

Now as we prepare for the coming election, I think I speak for my colleagues when I say that the Liberal Party is cautiously 

optimistic. In the 1960 election some four years ago, we won 16 seats in this legislature. Since that time, apart from their 

defeat in the rest of Canada, the NDP in this province have met four successive defeats at the polls, each one with a larger 

figure. Perhaps I could remind you today that the Socialists lost the Athabaska deferred election by a 171 votes. I am sure 

every one remembers they lost the Turtleford by-election by 612 votes. They lost the Weyburn election by 874 votes, and by 

a resounding margin of 2,522 votes the NDP lost Prince Albert. In addition since 1960, the former Minister of Health has 

been welcomed to Liberal ranks. In short, Mr. Speaker, the NDP have had since 1960, five humiliating defeats. At the same 

time, strength on this side of the house has gone up by five seats, to where we have 21 members. I remind you that time and 

again in the past, ever since this province was formed in 1905, the government which lost by-elections, was invariably 

defeated when the main election came along. 

 

I can tell you that since this province was formed, never was there a government that has lost so many by-elections as this 

one. I say that the lessons of history would indicate very clearly that the days of the NDP in office are numbered. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are many reasons shy people have become disillusioned and disenchanted with the NDP. I’m not 

going to take much time on that subject this afternoon. However, I think there is one reason that does deserve mention. That 

is the amalgamation several years ago of the old CCF with the Canadian Labour Congress. From the very beginning of that 

merger, farmers in this province have been apprehensive of that kind of a tie-up. They have realized that in the NDP across 

Canada, labour has an overwhelming number of members. They have realized here in Saskatchewan that the farmer in this 

new alliance is a very junior partner, a very minor partner. Farmers know that in this NDP group, labour contributes most of 

the funds. Because of that fact labour leaders today dominate the NDP. Now the socialists have claimed for some time that 

the interests of labour and the farmer are the same. The farmers of this province simply haven’t bought that proposition. They 

know that frequently the interests of the farmer and labour are different. They become more convinced of that fact last fall. 

Farmers in Saskatchewan, as everyone knows, raised the biggest grain crop in history this past year. Simultaneously the 

wheat board, the federal Liberal government, embarked on one of the most effective selling programs since Saskatchewan 

became a province. They sold hundreds of millions of bushels of wheat. But just as that wheat was starting out to market last 

fall, first the longshoremen, then the Seafarers International Union, went out on strike, endangering the very livelihood of the 

markets of our farmers. This naked interference in the movement of grain by eastern union bosses, and several American 

union leaders, was keenly resented by farmers in all political parties. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 



 

February 11, 1964 
 

 

36 

Mr. Thatcher: — The NDP has been touted as a union of farm organization, of co-operatives and of trade unions. Surely it 

is significant, that not one farmers’ organization, not one co-operative organization, has seen fit officially to join the NDP. 

Mrs. Speaker, I can tell you also that there are many prominent trade unionists who have wanted no part of the NDP. They 

have believed very strongly that when unions are politically independent they are wooed by all political parties. But as part of 

a small minority political group, particularly a socialist group, their influence has been diminished with the major parties. 

There are many trade unionists, particularly those who are Liberal or Conservative, who have resented being obliged to 

donate to the party of my hon. friends opposite through the political check-off from their pay envelopes. For these reasons, 

Mr. Speaker, I say, the NDP has been a failure. So much so that in the last federal election in the province of Saskatchewan, 

the vote of my hon. friends fell to a little more than 18 per cent. Now in the face of these facts, socialists are desperately 

trying to retrieve their strength by reviving the old CCF name. In their television broadcasts, in their overall publicity, the 

word NDP is now avoided like the plague. One would almost think my hon. friends consider the label a dirty word, Mr. 

Speaker, as I said yesterday afternoon, the people of Saskatchewan will not be fooled or misled by party name juggling. They 

are not going to align themselves with a class party. If the Premier and his associates feel that they are unable to garner the 

farm vote by calling themselves NDP, then we on this side challenge them to openly repudiate the NDP, until they do this I 

believe they will continue to lose adherents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that in the province of Saskatchewan today, two-thirds of our people, at least, 

would like to see this government defeated. Repeatedly in the past the socialists have been elected on a minority percentage, 

because the anti-socialists split their votes. I say that this must not happen again. Those who wish a change of government in 

the province of Saskatchewan today, must ask themselves a very simple question. Which party has the most realistic change 

of accomplishing this task? 

 

Let us examine the alternatives. First of all, could Social Credit defeat my hon. friends? Well, last April, Social Credit 

candidates in this province were able to garner 3.6 per cent of the federal vote. Since that time both Mr. Thompson and Mr. 

Caouette have been feuding in Ottawa to such an extent, that they appear to have torn their party asunder. Their own leader 

Mr. Kelln has announced that Social Credit will only field a handful of candidates. Unless my hon. friends opposite can 

persuade them to do other wise, I suppose we shall only have a handful of Social Credit candidates. So I think I am not being 

unfair when I say that Social Credit is a negligible political force in Saskatchewan today. 

 

What about our Conservative friends? It is now more than 34 years since the Tories elected a single member to this 

legislature on their own. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — What about the hon. member for Moosomin? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — He was elected with a Liberal convention and a Conservative convention, and became a Liberal as any 

sensible person would do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — In the 1960 election, the Tories received 13.6 per cent of the vote. Conservative candidates lost their 

deposits in all but a handful of seats. It seems very probable that the same thing will happen in 1964. 

 

Now the leader of the Conservative party said he would prefer an NDP government if he can’t elect a Conservative one. I 

don’t think his view is shared by very many Conservatives. I sincerely believe that by supporting their own candidates, the 

only role that the Conservatives can play in the coming election, is to split the vote, and perhaps disastrously again make 

possible the re-election of the socialists. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what about the Liberals? Surely the Liberals with 21 members in the legislature, are the only realistic and 

practical alternative to the socialists. We need nine more seats and we are going to get far more than that number. 

 



 

February 11, 1964 
 

 

37 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — In some constituencies, local Liberals have expressed willingness to co-operate with the Conservatives, to 

make sure that the wishes of the majority are realized, and to ensure that this province gets the kind of government they want. 

I regret that fact that the Conservative leader has shown no interest in such overtures, although, of course, I recognize his 

right to take such an attitude. However, it does seem to me that there are times when the interests of a province should 

transcend the interests of a party. I believe that in this election the very well being of our province is at stake. If 

Saskatchewan is to begin a period of expansion and development, it is vital that the NDP be replaced by a government 

capable of changing the economic plan. 

 

I say that Liberal-Conservative co-operation would have made certain the defeat of my hon. friends opposite. Since that co-

operation has been rejected, I suggest that the only other alternative is for the anti-socialists to unite behind the Liberals. The 

issue in the 1964 election is already crystal clear – our people must choose either the socialism of the NDP or the reform 

policies of the Liberals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — There is no other practical alternative. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the house, believe that the NDP has not made a good job of developing Saskatchewan 

these past few decades. We don’t suggest that things are terrible but we do think – (a) that they are not as good as they could 

be – and (b) that they are worse than conditions in other provinces with similar or fewer resources. 

 

This afternoon I could spend a good deal of my time discussing the sad and sorry socialist record in Saskatchewan. Believe 

me there is nothing I would like to do better. However, I feel that our people are not particularly interests in the past. They are 

far more interested in the future. They want to know how Saskatchewan’s development compares to development in other 

parts of Canada. Not yesterday – but today. They want to know about employment opportunities, here and in the rest of 

Canada. Young people in our agricultural communities want to know what kind of assistance they can obtain to go farming 

or into business. As far as politics are concerned, I think they want to know which party has the best program to promote 

development and expansion in Saskatchewan. For this reason, Mr. Speaker, I propose to devote most of my time this 

afternoon in outlining the reasons why Liberals believe – (a) that a change of administration is needed, – (b ) that the Liberals 

have a vigorous program which is vitally needed by the people of Saskatchewan at this critical time. 

 

As we prepare for the campaign, the NDP have tried to spread dire warnings to the people of Saskatchewan, as to what will 

happen if the Liberals take office. Among other things they have suggested that many civil servants will be fired. They have 

suggested that social welfare measures will be discarded, that crown corporations will all be sold, that legislation favorable to 

labour will be repealed. Mr. Speaker, I think that any unbiased person will agree that all governments have some good 

programs and all governments have some ineffective programs. 

 

Just as the NDP left on the statute books, when they took office, many good pieces of legislation introduced by the Liberals, 

so also when we form a government next June, will we leave on the statute books any beneficial legislation which was 

introduced by the NDP. 

 

The Liberal party is not interested in tearing down, ware interested in building up. Now, Mr. Speaker, what is the basic 

philosophy of the Liberal party? 

 

Down through the years, the Liberals have been a reform party. As a matter of fact, most of the major social welfare 

measures introduced into this country, were brought in by Liberal governments. I think for a moment of old age pensions. I 

think of the $10. increase the Liberal government just gave our pensioners a few months ago. I think of family allowances. I 

think of unemployment insurance. I think of PFA. I think of many aspects of PFRA. 



 

February 11, 1964 
 

 

38 

These are things brought in by a reform Liberal government. I say that the Liberal party traditionally has never been content 

to remain static. It has been the party of new ideas, and the party of the fresh approach, and I hope it will maintain that kind 

of an outlook. Mr. Speaker, the Liberal party has been something more. The Liberal party has been a party of responsibility, I 

believe very sincerely, that more and more people have come to realize that there is no magic in government finance. Before 

any administration, regardless of its policies, can take a dollar from the pocket of one person, it must take that dollar from the 

pocket of another person. I think that most of our tax payers are coming to realize that all political promises, ultimately must 

be paid for out of his pocketbook. 

 

Therefore, the Liberals have always related their reforms to the economic capacity of the taxpayers. Last November the 

Liberal party held their annual convention. I am sure my hon. friends would be interested to know that it was perhaps the 

biggest convention that the Liberal party had ever held in this province. Certainly, the biggest in latter years. Twelve hundred 

and fifty delegates, plus several hundred visitors. Now this convention was a gathering of Liberals from all over the province. 

It included young Liberals, it included Indians, it included wives and mothers, it included trade unionists, and at that 

convention, the delegates formulated the program which will form the basis of our appeal in the next campaign. Personally I 

feel that it is a good program, bold, imaginative and constructive, designed to meet the needs of our people now. We don’t for 

a moment say that our program overnight will solve all the problems which are facing the people of Saskatchewan, but we do 

believe that our platform contains honest, businesslike, practical answers which are so urgently needed in Saskatchewan 

today. In a general way I can say that the Liberal party does not intend in the months ahead, to try and buy political favour by 

outbidding the socialist in various giveaway programs. We don’t intend to try seek election by trying to out-promise the 

NDP. In the first place one couldn’t do so, even, if one wanted to try. Those who are seeking the spectacular and the 

sensational, will not find it our platform. Our main objective may be very simply stated. Mr. Speaker, the Liberals wish to 

give Saskatchewan good government. The Liberal program envisages sound administration of the province’s affairs; major 

tax reductions; the pursuit of policies, which would bring about the industrial expansion to which we are entitled and a stop in 

the steady, steady population exodus. 

 

I propose this afternoon to outline some of the major features of the Liberal program. In so doing I should like first of all to 

turn to finance and taxation. 

 

In 1943 and 1944, the last Liberal government spent $33 million. In 1963, overall expenditures under the NDP will exceed 

$380 million. When the Liberals left office in 1944, our provincial debt was $234 million – that is the gross debt. Just before 

Christmas, the Provincial Treasurer, made one of his amazing speeches. He said ―We wiped out all the provincial debt‖ Isn’t 

that typical socials arithmetic? 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege the Leader of the Opposition is misquoting me. I never said that 

we wiped out all the provincial debt, and I want him to stand corrected. What I said was, ―Saskatchewan now had no net 

debt, but had net assets.‖ 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t blame the minister for correcting such a silly statement as he made just before 

Christmas. Anyone who looks into the into the picture, knows that the gross provincial debt is $580 million . . . 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — The hon. Leader of the Opposition must recognize my correction, not of the statement I made last fall, 

but of the statement he made just now. That he misquoted me, and he was incorrect, and I have corrected him and he must 

not get up and infer that I was correcting myself. I was not doing that. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . Mr. Speaker, before the hon. minister gets high blood pressure, I’ll let him play his record as he 

wishes. 

 

Interest in the provincial debt in the last year of the Liberal administration was $5.8 million. This year it will exceed $27 

million. 

 



 

February 11, 1964 
 

 

39 

The history of the administration opposite for 20 years has been a long and steady increase in virtually all old taxes, and in 

the imposition of hundreds of new levies. As we sit here this afternoon, I say it is virtually impossible to think of any 

opportunity or any excuse for taxation, which has not been fully exploited by the socialists. Why in this session we weren’t in 

the house for five minutes before the Attorney General got up and announced that we were going to have higher car insurance 

rates. Today, I remind the people of Saskatchewan of a return tabled by my hon. friends in the legislature, February 27th, 

1961. That return by their own admission indicated that since 1944, 600 completely new taxes have been imposed by my 

hon. friends, and 650 other taxes have been increased. Of course, some of the increases were of minor nature, but some of 

them were of a very major nature. Back in the last election, my socialist friends campaigned on the slogan, ―Support the party 

that keeps its promises‖. I would like to remind them today of some of the promises they made about taxes. What about land 

taxation? According to the Regina Leader Post on June 2nd, 1944, the then leader of the socialists said this: 

 

 Gravelbourg – the CCF will shift the basis of taxation from land and consumption to profits on mortgage companies. 

 

Well there has been a shifting all right, Mr. Speaker, a shifting of more and more taxes on to the farmers and the property 

owners. Today, rural and urban property taxation on an average is four times higher than it was in 1944. I repeat today, what 

I have said on previous occasions, that if taxes on land go very much higher in Saskatchewan, our farmers won’t have any 

land left for my hon. friends to socialize. 

 

―Support the party that keeps its promises‖ they said. What did they promise about sales tax? In 1944 the NDP or the CCF 

damned the sales tax, which was then two per cent, from one end of this province to the other. Mr. Douglas said they would 

wipe it out, as soon as they found new revenues. As soon as they achieved office, they first of all increased the sales tax to 

three per cent, then a year or so ago, they put it up to five per cent. Instead of taking $4,250,000 as the last Liberal 

government did from the sales tax, this year the NDP will take more than $40,000,000. At a time when our fellow citizens in 

Manitoba and Alberta have no such thing as sales tax. Then I think of income tax . . . 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — What about the Liberal government? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — In a few weeks we will be preparing our income tax. Once again our farmers and citizens will find that the 

people of this province pay 6 per cent more income tax than the people of all the other provinces in Canada, with the 

exception of one, another penalty of having socialist government. I could mention the increase in corporation taxes; I could 

mention the gasoline tax, raised from seven to fourteen cents a gallon by my hon. friends. I could mention the diesel tax 

which has gone from seven cents to seventeen cents. The last Liberal government took $3-3/4 million from the people of 

Saskatchewan for gasoline tax, this year my hon. friends will take $28 million. One could go on and on, all afternoon 

enumerating the various new taxes that this administration has introduced. The main result of these impositions has been that 

taxation in Saskatchewan bears more heavily on individuals and on families, than in any other province in Canada, according 

to a Canadian Press despatch, Wednesday, July 24th, page 21, in the Leader Post: 

 

The ironic features of all these increased levies, is that they have been brought in by a government which promised more 

abundant living. 

 

More abundant living – all we have been given is more abundant taxes. 

 

Nineteen hundred and sixty-three has been one of the most prosperous years in Saskatchewan history. The NDP, as I said 

yesterday, are running around taking credit, or trying to take credit for all this prosperity. Actually, everybody knows that we 

are prosperous this year just because we had a bumper crop, secondly, because we had a government in Ottawa that could sell 

our wheat, and thirdly, because, the price of wheat has gone up very substantially. We say that our hon. friends could have 

had a surplus this year of $20 million. We think that surplus should have been used either for tax reduction or for debt 

reduction. Instead, the socialist are running around and trying to find all kind of different ways to spend the money to buy 

votes. 

 



 

February 11, 1964 
 

 

40 

Mr. Speaker, I assure the house and the people of Saskatchewan, that if the Liberals form a government next June, one of our 

primary, consistent and determined purpose, will be major tax reduction. One, we will reduce the five per cent sales tax 

immediately to four per cent, and in our first four years in office, will endeavor to get it back to three per cent. Two, we will 

increase the list of goods exempt from sales tax, to include such items as clothing, shoes, which are after all necessities of 

life. Three, we believe that some method must be found for reducing taxes on land and property, and we will find some 

method. Four, we will permit farmers to use purple gas in their farm trucks. Something my hon. friends, year after year have 

refused to do. Five, we will reduce personal and corporal taxes to a level where at least they are not higher than similar taxes 

in other provinces. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I turn to industrial development – truly one of the saddest stories, one of the greatest fiascos of the NDP 

across the way. I can tell you that Liberals certainly feel that one of the major issues in this campaign will be the lack of 

industrial development in Saskatchewan these past two decades, as compared to the rest of Canada. We maintain that for 20 

years development in this province has been held up and retarded by hon. friends opposite. The NDP of course, are running 

around –Saskatchewan, as the two members who spoke yesterday did, saying that we never had it so good. I can hardly 

believe that the socialist slogan in the next election will be ―20 years of prosperity‖. What are the facts? Does the NDP record 

indicate progress? Does it indicate industrial development? 

 

Today, I would remind the people of Saskatchewan that the socialists in talking about the industrial progress, always like to 

apply a peculiar yardstick. For comparisons, they reach invariably back to the dark, bitter days of the depression. My hon. 

friend, the member for Canora (Mr. Kuziak) is particularly adept at such tactics. They point to the depressed thirties, and they 

say, ―Look at those years, see how much better things are today under our administration.‖ Mr. Speaker, of course, 

Saskatchewan has made some industrial progress since the socialists took office. Of course our economy has grown. It 

couldn’t help but develop any more than a seven pound baby, just must grow. 

 

But I ask this question today, how does our industrial development since 1944 compare with other parts of Canada? In 

particular, how does our progress compare to Alberta and Manitoba? We say that is the acid test. Well, Mr. Speaker, any 

statistics on industrial progress that you want to use from DBS show up unfavourably for our province. Manufactured goods 

in 1962, the latest figures available. Alberta 976 million, Manitoba 856 million, and Saskatchewan a poor third, 381 million. 

New investments in manufacturing industries – 1963, Alberta 56 million, Manitoba 47 million, and Saskatchewan 21 million. 

Again a very poor third. 

 

What about jobs in manufacturing? Jobs are after all the main reason why we need industry. The NDP talk about the 

spectacular progress in Saskatchewan. Yet statistics show that in September 1963, Manitoba had 42 thousand jobs in 

manufacturing, Alberta had 36 thousand, and Saskatchewan had 12 thousand. Again a poor third. Mr. Chairman. I want to 

repeat the figures that I used yesterday afternoon, because I think they are crucial figures. When the socialists took office in 

this province, according to the Dominion Bureau of Statistics, there were 12,360 people engaged in manufacturing,, 

(industries with 15 people or over). After 20 years, of so-called progress, we find that according to their own figures at the 

end of 1962, there were only 13,200 people engaged in manufacturing – 840 jobs after 20 years. Is that the kind of progress 

my hon. friends want for the people of Saskatchewan? If that isn’t stagnation, I ask the Premier, just what better word could  

be used to describe what we have had in this province. What about the number of factories, Mr. Speaker,? The hard facts are 

most revealing. From 1944 to 1960, the number of manufacturing establishments in Alberta increased by 683, the number of 

manufacturing establishments went up in Manitoba by 302, but in Saskatchewan at the end of 1960, after 17 years of CCF-

NDP government, there were 167 fewer manufacturing establishments than when my hon. friends took office. If that isn’t 

stagnation, what is it? Or take new construction figures, January to June this year, in Alberta, there was $116 million invested 

in new construction, Manitoba had $50 million, and Saskatchewan had $35 million. In the city of Edmonton alone, during the 

first six months of this year had $5 million more was spent on new construction than the whole province of Saskatchewan. 

The city of Calgary had as much. Is this what my hon. friends would call a booming economy? 

 



 

February 11, 1964 
 

 

41 

This is the reason, Mr. Speaker, why about 260,000 young Saskatchewan citizens have left our province to move elsewhere, 

since my hon. friends took office. Yesterday, two speakers who participated in this debate, painted a glowing picture of 

development in this province. Why to hear them speak, one can see smoke stacks springing up on every horizon. Eastern 

industrialists are rushing into Saskatchewan. Well, if there is all this kind of prosperity, why is it that year after year, our 

province has the lowest growth rate in all Canada, as far as population is concerned? The figures for last year, showed the 

kind of growth we’ve had in Saskatchewan. Canada as a whole last year grew by 1.8 per cent. Newfoundland grew by 2.3. 

per cent, Alberta 2.3 per cent, British Columbia 2.3 per cent, Quebec 1.8 per cent, Ontario 1.8 per cent, Manitoba 1.7 per 

cent, Nova Scotia 1.6 per cent. Tiny Prince Edward Island grew by .9 per cent. Little old Saskatchewan 4/10th of 1 per cent. 

―Booming prosperity‖ they say, and yet thousands of our citizens have left the province year after year. I remind my hon. 

friends opposite, that since 1944, the population of British Columbia has grown 83 per cent, the population of Albert has 

gone up by 75 per cent, the population of Manitoba has gone up by 32 per cent, and Saskatchewan brings up the rear with 

only 12 per cent. Why we haven’t done as well percentage wise as the Yukon or the North West Territories . . . 

 

Mr. Mc Donald: — They haven’t got socialism. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, Liberal refuse to accept the proposition that our slow growth is caused by a lack of 

resources. We say it has been caused primarily by the theories, policies of this socialist government. I hope my young friends 

who were here from the university today, will look at these population figures, they’re the people who in a year or so, will be 

out looking for jobs. If past history means anything, three out of four of them will have to leave Saskatchewan, in order to get 

the kind of jobs they want. As has been said by many people, our socialist government is like a dog in a manger. Or rather it  

is like a dog in a hen house; it can’t itself lay eggs, and it won’t allow the hens to do so. Twenty years ago the CC-NDP 

claimed that social owned crown corporations were the answer to the industrial program. They tried to produce dozens of 

products in their own factories and mills. I wish I had time to go into the long and sad history of the crown corporation fiasco. 

The past several years, the hostility of my hon. friends opposite towards business and industry has softened somewhat. The 

Minister of Industry has tried to do a little bit about getting some new businesses here recently. The last session of the 

legislature, hon. members will recall that the government established an agency called SEDCO, and it enlisted the support of 

some of our leading businessmen who are endeavouring to seek out new industry. A year ago the NDP put aside $2 million 

by a vote in this legislature for this purpose. I remind hon. members that Nova Scotia has put aside $50 million, for the same 

purpose, and they’re getting some new industry. SEDCO is one more of a series of similar attempts that have been made by 

the NDP over the years to obtain new industry. In 1946, the economic advisory and planning board was constituted. This was 

their job, and I quote: 

 

 To formulate long term plans for the industrial development of this province. 

 

The board didn’t accomplish, much so in 1947, they tried again. They set up the Industrial Development Fund. The purpose, I 

quote: 

 

 To encourage the establishments and development of industrial plants and projects. 

 

That agency didn’t work very well either. So in 1960 they tried again. They set up a new department of industries and 

development. The purpose, I quote: 

 

 To promote the industrial and commercial developments of Saskatchewan. 

 

Those three agencies and SEDCO, Mr. Speaker, have been unable to overcome the fundamental handicap rising out for the 

fact that we have a socialist government. So far the results obtained by SEDCO have been bitterly disappointing. Recently a 

delegation headed by my hon. friend the Minister of Industry and Information too, a jaunt to Japan at the taxpayer’s expense. 

Now, we hope no less than they, that this trip will have some tangible results. 

 

We all welcome investments from abroad, and I hope we get some. When the minister returned and he called a press 

conference, he said this trip to Japan was a wonderful success. I wish we could see some evidence of that success in new 

industry. I say, Mr. Speaker, that SEDCO and socialism will mix together as well as a republican senator and a Russian 

commissar. 

 



 

February 11, 1964 
 

 

42 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — A few months ago, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Industry and Information dusted off the old speech he 

makes repeatedly before an election, announcing that we might soon have a new pulp mill. That of course, is a perennial, I 

just happened to be perusing my files here a short time ago and I was looking at some of the other provinces. Here’s a pledge 

they made before the 1956 election, 

 

 Pulp mill for P.A. City selected as key centre of biggest industry in Saskatchewan. Announcement of plans to build a $60 

million pulp mill were made at a press conference attended by Honourable J.H. Brockelbank, L. MacIntosh, and C.M. Fines, 

costing $50 or $60 million. He said this mill would soon employ 3,000 people. 

 

Well, I haven’t been up to Prince Albert lately, Mr. Speaker, but I haven’t heard that the pulp mill has yet arrived. Maybe the 

member from Prince Albert (Mr. Steuart) might be able to enlighten us. 

 

Well, it wasn’t very much longer when my hon. friend the Minister of Natural Resources, here’s a report that the Star 

Phoenix carried of his speech: 

 

Forty million dollar pulp mill in Meadow Lake area starts work this year. The second million dollar pulp mill operation in 

Northern Saskatchewan opening 12,000 square miles of virgin timber, was disclosed early today, when Natural Resources 

Minister, A.G. Kuziak, confirmed in tela-interview, the signing of an agreement last September. 

 

and he goes on to say: 

 

 there were to be 1,500 people working at that particular mill. 

 

A while later we came into the 1959 election or just before the 1960 campaign. Nothing had happened about those two, but 

were the NDP dismayed? Not at all. Soon they announced another. Regina Leader Post, April 14th, 1959-headlined 

 

New Pulp Mill Proposed 

 

Answering questions from opposition leader A.H. McDonald in the legislature on Monday, Natural Resources Minister 

A.G. Kuziak, said, Churchill Forest Holdings Limited have taken an option on 9,800 square miles of land in the Island 

Falls area, north of Flin Flon and Mr. Kuziak said the government would be negotiating with the company and with 

Swedish Cellulose Limited in the next few days. 

 

We haven’t heard much about that pulp mill either. 

 

A few weeks ago, the Minister of Industry and Information got up again. He said, we are working on another pulp mill, and 

we will soon be able to announce it, unless those rascals in Ottawa prevent it. 

 

Hon. R. Brown (Minister of Industry and Information): — The only announcement of the pulp mill came from Mr. 

Pederson of the Conservative party. I have never announced the pulp mill yet. Let’s get the record straight. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You have announced so many that everybody starts laughing, when you come up with one. Well, as I say, 

most people will say that seeing is believing. The Liberal party says, Mr. Speaker, that we can’t wait much longer for 

industrialization to happen. A Liberal government will take action to bring about industrialization, and if given a mandate, we 

will at once institute the first phase of a four year program to regenerate the economic face of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 



 

February 11, 1964 
 

 

43 

Mr. Thatcher: — We are convinced that the next four years can be fruitful and exciting years for our province, years when 

once more the political climate of this province will encourage the revival of individual initiative of vigorous enterprise and 

diversified expansion. Our four year program will have a minimum objective of $20,000 industrial jobs. We will proceed 

systematically and progressively to fill the many gaps in our industrial structure. We say that these goals are not unrealistic. 

They are already the normal growth pattern in all other provinces except Saskatchewan a pattern of growth that has missed 

our province under the socialists. The Liberal party offers Saskatchewan a program of challenge to obtain new industries and 

new jobs. I say to the people of Saskatchewan today, we can’t very well do much worse than the NDP, why not give us a 

chance to do better. 

 

Well, what specific legislation will we use to attract new industries. First of all, a Liberal government will introduce tax 

consessions to new industry or new mines locating in this province, with, if necessary, major tax holidays to those 

corporations. Secondly, the rates of royalties on natural resources will made competitive with other provinces and, where 

feasible, lower. Thirdly, we will see that electric power and natural gas rates are made competitive with other provinces. 

Fourth, we will remove all unfair competition from government subsidized corporations. Fifth, in cooperation with the 

municipal governments we will endeavor to provide land for industry at cost and sewer and water on a local improvement 

basis. Sixth, we will make loans available to new industries on a comprehensive and far-reaching basis. 

 

This program of action is the Liberal answer to stagnation in Saskatchewan today, to Saskatchewan unemployment, 

population exodus and lack of development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about agriculture. Agriculture still remains the most important industry in 

Saskatchewan. As I said a moment ago, our province has recently experienced the biggest crop in her history, and we think 

the federal Liberal government, by obtaining such huge wheat sales, by increasing the price of wheat from $1.95-3/8 to $2.08 

in a short time, has done an effective job. What about the provincial government? The chief accomplishment of the CCF-

NDP in agriculture, as I pointed out a few moments ago, has been an almost unbelievable increase in taxes the farmer has to 

pay. 

 

Under the socialists in Saskatchewan, we have seen a mass exodus of young farmers, and other farmers, off the farms. In the 

1944 census, there were 130,700 farmers in Saskatchewan. By 1951, according to DBS, the number of census farmers was 

down to 112,000. By 1951, the number was down to 94,000 and it is still going down. Think of it, 28-1/2 per cent of all our 

farmers in Saskatchewan, have left their farms since my hon. friends took office. We have seen many of our small towns and 

villages become virtually ghost towns. Is this what the Premier calls 20 years of progress? The Liberal party believes that 

there are a number of things that could be done on a provincial basis for agriculture today. What is the Liberal program for 

agriculture? 

 

First of all I refer to long-term credit. In our opinion long-term credit which would permit a young farmer to purchase land 

over a long period of time is most inadequate in Saskatchewan. That lack has caused major difficulties. Back in 1944, the 

CCF government introduced a bill called The Farm Security Act. The effect of that legislation was to prevent lending 

institutions obtaining security on the home quarter. No doubt this legislation was introduced in good faith. However, the 

lending institutions feeling that they no longer had security, moved out of this province, lock, stock and barrel, as far as farm 

lending was concerned. The result in Saskatchewan today, is that it is almost impossible for a young farmer, or any other 

farmer to borrow money to buy a farm from a private lending institution. That is not the case in other provinces. 

 

Under the old Liberal government, we used to have a provincial farm loaning board, called the Saskatchewan Farm Loan 

Board. One of the first acts of this government when they took power was to discard that legislation. Now these two acts on 

the part o the CCF-NDP have meant that in Saskatchewan today about one farmer in 50 can get the kind of loan that he needs 

to buy a farm. It is quite true that we have a federal act, and it is a good act. But its provisions are too stringent, the interest 

rates are too high, and not enough farmers can qualify. Other provincial governments have recognized this problem, Mr. 

Speaker. The province of Quebec has an act where young farmers can borrow money at 2½ per cent interest over a 40 year 

period. The government of Ontario has an act where young farmers can borrow money at four per 



 

February 11, 1964 
 

 

44 

cent. Alberta and Manitoba have long-term credit acts for young farmers. A few years ago this government did recognize the 

problem. They set up an act which was called The Family Farm Credit Act. By working through co-ops, some funds are 

loaned to young farmers. The Liberals contended at the time that the provisions would be inadequate. They pointed out that 

the interest rates were too high. They pointed out the fact that farmers over 40 couldn’t borrow under this act. This act has 

been in effect for a little over three years. In the first three years of operation, do you realize, Mr. Speaker, that only 420 

farmers in all Saskatchewan were able to borrow money under its provisions? An average of a little over 106 farmers per 

year. 

 

So we say that something has to be done about long-term farm credit in Saskatchewan. I wish to assure you, Sir, that a 

Liberal government will rectify this situation. We believe that the family farm is vital to the very future of Saskatchewan. We 

are determined to make it possible for farmers, and particularly young farmers, to borrow money on reasonable terms to 

commence farming. We will make farm loans available on a much more extensive basis, with lower interest rates, and over a 

longer period of time. We will work closely with the federal government in order to avoid duplications. Personally I would 

hope, that these new loan arrangements could be made through the banks, through credit unions, with the government 

guaranteeing a high percentage of the loans. But if satisfactory arrangements cannot be made along those lines, the Liberal 

government will be prepared to set up a government loaning agency. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — That is the first plank in the Liberal agricultural program. Our second plank has to do with grazing leases 

on crown land. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if you realize, and I am sure you do, that the crown today in this province, holds 

almost six million acres which are leased to farmers for a nominal fee. The purpose of the program is three-fold, as I 

understand it. First, to help farmers form an economic unit. Secondly, to promote livestock production, thirdly, to see that the 

best possible use is made of the sub-marginal land, and in the opinion of this party, I think the department has done a useful 

and effective job over the years. However, Mr. Speaker, form the Manitoba border to the Alberta border, from the state line 

to the north, you will hear farmers and ranchers complaining that far too often leased land is given out for political reasons 

rather than for other considerations. 

 

If the Liberal party forms a government, we will change certain aspects of the provinces’ leasing programs. First, where a 

farmer is today leasing land from the crown and wishes to purchase that land to make an economic unit, we believe that 

under normal circumstances, the land should be sold. Safeguards of course, would have to be taken to see that unsuitable land 

was not cultivated. Secondly, a Liberal government under certain circumstances would favour the breaking-up of large leases 

into smaller units in order to give the small operator a better change of becoming a successful farmer. Thirdly, a Liberal 

government would take the leasing of crown lands out of politics. It would set up an independent board or commission to 

allocate all grazing leases. Representatives of such organizations as the Saskatchewan Livestock Association, The Farm 

Union, The Wheat Pool, and others would be out on that board. Four, what would we do with the cultivation leases? I think 

you will realize, Mr. Speaker, that the crown owns about 845,000 acres in cultivated lease land. A good deal of this acreage 

in the northern areas, was leased out to veterans at the end of the war on a 33 year period plan. There are a great many 

Saskatchewan citizens who are located on this kind of land, who would like to be able to purchase it. I quite realize that 

veterans today have that privilege. As I understand it, other citizens have not got that privilege, or if they have it, Mr. 

Speaker, the department makes it so difficult that they can’t afford the down payment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Personally, I believe and the Liberal party believes that this kind of land should be sold. We would favour 

a down payment of about 10 per cent, we would favour a low interest rate, we would favour a 30 year repayment period. But 

above all, we say that rental payments that have been made, should be credited against the purchase price. That is the Liberal 

program. 

 



 

February 11, 1964 
 

 

45 

I would like to say a word about feed and fodder reserves. Liberal government believes that some action must be taken in 

favorable years to build up major fodder reserves for dry years. We thought the government had such a program a few years 

ago, and then the drought came, and there wasn’t a bale of hay on hand. Repeatedly in the past when drought strikes, the 

government has been obliged to pay subsidies amounting to millions of dollars to bring hay from Manitoba or from Alberta. 

The Liberal party believes that encouragement should be given to farmers throughout the province, and particularly in the 

northern parkland areas, to sow higher acreages of feed grain and forage crops. 

 

We believe government itself, if necessary, should put aside hay reserves from some of the hayland which it owns. But if it is 

going to do that first of all it must build some kind of suitable warehousing facilities, to protect the hay from rain and so on. 

 

The Liberal party believes that farm diversification is still eminently desirable in this province. Large population of cattle, 

hogs and sheep can only help promote stability in Saskatchewan. Today, there is no branch of agriculture probably that has 

such a bright future as the livestock industry. The population of United States and Canada is growing so rapidly that most of 

our experts say that in the next 20 or 30 years, we will have no trouble in absorbing the beef which will be produced. I 

commend the government on the community pasture program, which they have expanded in conjunction with the federal 

government, to a point where we now have two and half million acres in community pasture. The Liberal would like to see 

the program continued and expanded. 

 

Sheep production has slipped very badly in Saskatchewan. I don’t know if there is an easy answer to the sheep problem, but 

we do know that today, we are bringing in a great deal of mutton, from New Zealand and Australia. Personally, I would like 

to see the department experimenting with one or two community pastures solely for sheep. Perhaps such a policy is not 

feasible, but I would like to see it tried. 

 

These are a few suggestions which the Liberals have for agriculture. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn for a moment to highways. In the prosperous years since the war, the government has built 

a great many highways. I do not in any way detract from the improvements which they have made. However, I would remind 

the people of Saskatchewan, that every other province has also made improvements since the war. As a matter of fact, most 

have been spending a good deal more on the highways, than the government of Saskatchewan. For example, last year British 

Columbia spent $95 million on her highways, Alberta spent $64 million, Manitoba spent $34 million, and Saskatchewan 

spent only $29 million. This has been the case year after year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have always maintained that tourist business is closely related to the condition of the province highways. I 

was rather interested in hearing the hon. member for Redberry, (Mr. Michayluk) talk about the tremendous tourist 

development that is taking place in northern Saskatchewan. Why, he said, with all our new roads, with all our new parks, the 

tourists are pouring in. This is a tremendous asset to Saskatchewan. Twenty years of progress. I was rather interested also to 

read a story in the last Saskatchewan Commonwealth, about the tourist industry. Here it is, in case you gentlemen haven’t 

read it; What is the heading? 

 

Tourists Flock to Saskatchewan 

The province of Saskatchewan showed the greatest increase of all provinces, in American traffic entering the province in 

1963. 

 

The announcement was made by Harvey Dryden. Mr. Dryden said; 

 

The Dominion Bureau of Statistics year end reports, show that Saskatchewan experienced an increase of 17.1 per cent in 

United States tourist traffic over the previous year in 1963. The national average was only 5.5 per cent. 

 

Mr. Dryden said he was very pleased with the figures. What are those figures? Well, I looked them up – 20 years of progress. 

DBS shows that on the first nine months of 1963, U.S. entries by plane, bus, rail and boat, Canada as a whole $1,400,000. 

British Columbia – 217,000, Manitoba – 27,000, Alberta – 16,000, Saskatchewan – 2,800, or 1/5 of one per cent. One fifth of 

one per cent. Twenty years of progress. 

 



 

February 11, 1964 
 

 

46 

DBS also shows U.S. vehicles entering Canada as a whole – the first nine months of this year – 8,329,000. British Columbia 

505,000, Manitoba – 155,000, Alberta – 89,000, Saskatchewan – 69,000. Saskatchewan’s share of the Canadian total U.S. 

vehicles entering Canada – 4/5ths of one per cent. The socialists boast about a 17 per cent increase in the tourist business, the 

highest in Canada, they claim. Well, may I remind the house that twice nothing is still nothing, and that 17 per cent increase, 

a very insignificant figure is still a very insignificant figure. Saskatchewan’s record for tourists is one that my hon. friends 

opposite shouldn’t talk about very much in the next 16 weeks of the campaign. If Mr. Dryden is happy with those figures, I 

can assure hon. members that a Liberal government certainly will not be very happy with them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, the Liberal party believes that if we are going to have American tourists come into 

Saskatchewan, something must be done to improve the highways that come from the border. A few weeks ago I went down 

to the United States on highway No. 2. It is supposed to be the second best highway in Saskatchewan. Sir, I can tell you that 

from Rockglen, 60 miles to the border, I have seldom seen such a rough, dusty dirty road. Why if an American got on that 

road, he would think he was on a back lane. Small wonder so few Americans visit Saskatchewan. I want to point out to you, 

Mr. Speaker, and to the Minister of Highways, that I believe there are either 12 or 13 border points where you can go through 

customs in Saskatchewan. Only one of them has a paved road. Three others have oiled roads. The rest of them have gravel 

and dirt. I say that those roads, and I have travelled on most of them, are a provincial disgrace. I also say that we are not 

going to get any substantial number of tourists, until we pave them. I wish to say flatly on behalf of the Liberal party, that a 

Liberal administration will bring highway No. 2 to trans-Canada specifications, from the border right up to the northern park 

areas, and we will do it quickly. Moreover, I would like to say that we are going to hard-surface roads from border, No. 4, 

south of Swift Current, No. 37 highway, south from Gull Lake and Shaunavon. 

 

May I also say a word about divided highways. I don’t know exactly how many miles we have on either side of Regina, but I 

suppose it is about 35 miles of divided highways in Saskatchewan. All over this continent, I travel a fair amount in other 

provinces and other states, you will find that governments have built many miles of divided highways. This government, as 

usual, lags far behind most of the rest of the continent. I say that a Liberal government would be very interested in building a 

double highway from Moose Jaw to Regina, from Regina to Saskatoon, in our first four years in office. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — You should have . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Oh – there he is back to the depression again. You know the Provincial Treasurer never wants to compare 

Saskatchewan’s progress to the rest of Canada. 

 

Something else, the Liberals would like to have in this province is a second trans-Canada highway. We believe such a 

highway is needed, and an influence we may have with the federal government will be used to see that we do get a second 

trans-Canada highway in the province of Saskatchewan. We believe additional assistance should be given to grid roads. In 

consultation with municipal officials we will place in the provincial highway systems, those parts of the grid roads bearing a 

high percentage of the provincial traffic, as compared to local traffic. Finally, we will pay 50 per cent of the cost of paving 

the main streets in towns and villages. I say again, that as far as highways are concerned, we have made some progress, but 

our progress is not impressive when you compare what has been done elsewhere in Canada. 

 

I want to say a word or so about the Liberal program for small business. The Liberal party believes very strongly that small 

business in this province has been neglected, if not forgotten by the present administration. The government spends hundreds 

of thousands of dollars yearly to develop co-ops and I don’t necessarily criticize those expenditures. However, the small 

businessman is still the backbone of our province, commercially. Many of our people, particularly many of our young people, 

would like to have a small business if they could find funds to commence operations. Small business development will have a 

positive place in the Liberal program. 

 



 

February 11, 1964 
 

 

47 

We believe that financial assistance should be made available in the form of loans, where they can be economically used, to 

help young people become established in business. If we form an administration, we will open up a branch of government, 

who primary purpose will be to assist small business in all its phases. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I turn to financial aid to private high schools. I refer to the proposal, which was made in the throne speech 

in connection with financial aid to separate high schools. Of course, until we see the government’s legislation, we cannot 

comment in detail on this legislation. Let me say at once, however, that the Liberal party supports the principle of financial 

aid to private high schools of all denominations. We hope that the criticism made by Saskatchewan Lutherans last week, to 

the effect that Protestant or private schools will be discriminated against by the legislation which is proposed, is unfounded. 

If such should be the case, in our opinion, it would be inexcusable. It is a well known fact that for some years most private 

high schools in Saskatchewan, whether they be Mennonite, whether they be Lutheran, Anglican or Roman Catholic, have 

found themselves in serious financial difficulties. They must depend almost completely on fees and donations for support, 

because they receive little or no public monies. We think that today in Saskatchewan, the private high schools are doing a 

sound, outstanding, educational job. They are teaching the same curriculum and operate under the same standards, as our tax 

supported high schools. In general they are inspected by the departmental high school superintendents, and their students as I 

understand it, write the regular examinations. Today the supporters of these private schools are obliged to support the public 

education system, and in addition pay for the education of their children in the private schools. 

 

To us, this seems unfair. Repeatedly, representation from the private schools authorities have been made to the government 

for assistance. Repeatedly, their requests have been turned down. Now, on Tuesday, March 13th, 1962, the Minister of 

Education told the Catholic School Trustee Association, and I quote the Star Phoenix: 

 

Separate high schools in Saskatchewan were a possibility, said Hon. Mr. Turnbull, here Monday, but he was personally not 

in favour of them. The idea was opposed to current government policy. 

 

Some months later, the Premier made this statement, according to the Regina Leader Post, and I quote again: Premier 

Woodrow Lloyd said: 

 

The government did not contemplate taking any action in the legislature, which would allow tax support for Roman 

Catholic high schools. 

 

This attitude appeared to Liberals as being unfair and unjust. Separate schools at the elementary level already receive tax 

support and public monies, from grade one to grade eight. If it is fair and just to give separate schools that kind of support 

from grade one to grade eight, why isn’t it fair and just to give it to them, from grade nine to grade 12? Last November, the 

Liberal attitude was made very clear on this subject. I would like to quote the resolution which was passed by our annual 

convention, 

 

Liberal government will provide approved private high schools, with an equitable and fair share of tax revenue. Such 

assistance will be made in manner that it will be economically sound. Care will be taken to protect the taxpayer from 

unnecessary duplication of facilities. 

 

We on this side of the house, admit that we do find it strange that just before an election, the government has abruptly 

changed course. For 20 years in office, they have had an opportunity to deal with this issue. However, always they flatly 

refused to take action. Now, a few months before the election, we witness a death-bed repentance. 

 

Our main object is to assure the children of Saskatchewan equal opportunities for a good education, and justice to the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer. Our prime concern is to see that this important issue is kept out of the field of politics. In any event, 

Mr. Speaker, as we debate this issue, I believe there is no place in the house for either prejudice or intolerance. 

 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Hear! Hear! 



 

February 11, 1964 
 

 

48 

Mr. Thatcher: — I now turn to labour. Our socialist friends are frequently telling the people that, if the Liberals form a 

government, we will be anti-labour, that we will take away the gains which our working people in Saskatchewan have made 

through the years. I say that those charges are simply not correct. Liberalism in Canada and in Saskatchewan has always 

identified itself with the just, desirable aspiration of our working people. My hon. friends opposite can’t deny that a very 

major portion of the labour legislation which was placed on the statute books, either at Ottawa or in Regina, was place there 

by a Liberal government. I think for example, The Unemployment Insurance Act, brought in by the federal Liberals. As far as 

Saskatchewan is concerned, I think of Saskatchewan’s first Trade Union Act, The minimum Wage Act, The Industrial 

Standards Act, The Holiday Act, The Mechanics Act, The Apprentice Act, Trade School Regulations Act, and a host of 

others, all brought in by provincial Liberals. Now of course, the NDP government, like governments in every other province 

since the war, has improved those regulations. We don’t hesitate to give them credit for this fact. I say that similar changes 

would have been made by any government that had been in power in this province. 

 

One thing a Liberal government wouldn’t have done, it wouldn’t have tried to exploit the labour movement for their selfish 

political advantages, the way my hon. friends have tried to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — The socialist we say, have failed to do one thing. What good are a lot of fancy labour statutes, if there 

aren’t jobs in Saskatchewan. My hon. friends are talking about increasing the minimum wage. The finest minimum wage in 

the world isn’t as useful to the worker as his actual wage. The minimum wage in Saskatchewan may be high, but, Sir, the 

average wage in Saskatchewan is not high, when compare to other provinces, this side of Quebec. I say that a dominant and 

persistent purpose of a Liberal government in the province will be to change some of these things. We won’t just talk about 

industrial development, we’ll take the steps necessary to bring factories and industries to Saskatchewan. The results will be 

more jobs, better wages, working people of Saskatchewan have nothing to lose and everything to gain by a Liberal 

government taking office. 

 

I repeat most emphatically, that a Liberal administration will not take from our workers, any of the gains which they, like the 

workers of other provinces, have made in recent years. Assertion to the contrary is only partisan propaganda, on the part of 

hon. friends opposite. 

 

Now, I want to say a word about civil service. Our socialist friends say that when we take office, we are going to fire most of 

the civil servants. Many civil servants are a little apprehensive about this. In the short time that I have been in politics, as I 

said a year ago, I have been a bit impressed by the calibre, by the ability of our civil servants. I think that most of them are 

doing a conscientious job for the people of Saskatchewan. Those people have also nothing to lose, and everything to gain by 

a Liberal government. I say flatly, Mr. Speaker, that no employee who is performing a useful and needed job in a competent 

manner need fear dismissal. The Liberals propose no witch hunt. Their political independence will be respected and their jobs 

will be secure. Back in 1944, the CCF-NDP promised to take the civil service out of politics. Instead, they put politics into 

the civil service. Advancement today depends frequently not how much you know, but who you know. Today, when the top 

jobs are being handed out in civil service, usually the only ones that need to apply are the so-called pinks or the left-wingers 

or the defeated politicians. Repeatedly, so-called experts are brought in from outside the province to replace people who are 

already here. Years of service, seniority, or ability very frequently since 1944, meant very little when a top appointment is 

made. The Liberal party believes that a civil servant’s politics is his or her business. We also believe whether it is a socialist 

government, A Liberal government or a Conservative government, members of the civil service should maintain political 

neutrality on their jobs. We give fair warning that if we do form a government, those individuals who participate in politics 

on government time, should do so, realizing that they are jeopardizing their position in the future. I say that under the Liberal 

administration, advancement in the service will be made on the basis of ability, no on a basis of political service. 

 



 

February 11, 1964 
 

 

49 

I come now to medicare, Mr. Speaker. Never have the NDP members opposite gone to greater trouble to misrepresent the 

position of the Liberal party than on the issue of medical health insurance. The NDP is running around this province saying 

that if a Liberal government gets in, they’ll deprive our people of medical care insurance. Several months ago the Minister of 

Health, went on to say that a Liberal government will substitute an Alberta-type medical care plan, for the one presently 

operating in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the Liberals never said this. This is what the NDP members are saying. They’re 

saying it frequently and often. The Liberal party believes in universal comprehensive medical insurance. I say categorically 

and without qualifications, that none of our citizens need fear that a Liberal government will try to deprive our people, of 

such insurance. The Liberal party insists that every citizen of Saskatchewan has a right to hospital and medical care, 

regardless of his or her ability to pay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, as we debate the subject this afternoon, there are several facts I think we should keep in 

mind. The medical care plan we have in Saskatchewan today, is not the plan the NDP wanted. The medical care plan which 

we have today, is not the plan which the NDP brought in originally, and the Liberals tried to amend. The original plan, which 

my hon. friends opposite brought in, was state medicine and they introduced it. They rammed it through this house. Our 

people viewed with revulsion the manner in which the socialist machine rode rough shod over the rights of the very people 

upon whom the success of their plan depended. Dozens of our people took to the streets, they marched on the capitol, to 

protect that original legislation. The NDP would like to forget those troubled days, when health services were disrupted and 

virtually collapsed. If amendments to the Medical Care Act, as suggested by a Liberal opposition in 1961, had been adopted, 

we wouldn’t’ have had the kind of crisis we did have. I remind the hon. friends opposite and the members of this 

government, that the medical care issue in this legislature has never medicare versus no medicare. The issue has been a 

coercive type of government plan versus a scheme which was acceptable to all concerned, including those providing the 

services, and which my hon. friends promised before an election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Hon. members will recall that the socialists rammed through the first original bill. The medical profession 

simply said, we will not work under that bill, and a storm of public protests, endorsed their position. Having failed to enforce 

the original bill, the government did what it should have done in the first place. It sat down at a meeting with the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons. They negotiated and reconciled many of the difficulties which existed. My hon. friend across the 

way refers to Ontario. Well, the Ontario leader of the NDP said, if he brought in a medical care scheme, he certainly wouldn’t 

do it the way hon. friends opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, a special session of the legislature was called for August 2nd, 1962. A second session that 

year, and I would remind you and hon. friends opposite, and the people of Saskatchewan, that it was only the co-operation of 

the Liberal members that made it possible to amend the act and end the crisis in one day. Every Liberal member voted for the 

amended act. Why? Because the most objectional features of it had been eliminated. Today, I remind the legislature and the 

people of Saskatchewan, of the amendments which the NDP were reluctantly forced by public opinion to adopt. As originally 

written and forced through this legislature, the medical care insurance plan would have pressed the entire medical profession 

under the control and direction of a politically appointed and a politically motivated commission. That commission was 

designated to decide the terms and conditions under which medical men might practise. The degree of control was such that 

in effect, there was recognized no right on the part of doctors or bargain with the commission, concerning the condition under 

which they would work. The rights of collective bargaining, which the NDP government claimed they favour for workers, 

rights which the Minister of Labour says, everybody must have, were to be refused to the medical profession. Liberals 

insisted that doctors should be privileged to practise either inside the act or outside the act. Such amendments were 

reluctantly adopted by my hon. friends opposite. 

 



 

February 11, 1964 
 

 

50 

I remind you, Mr. Speaker, that in the first act, the NDP would have eliminated the voluntary plans, such as MSI and Group 

Medical. All citizens in securing payment of their bills would have been obliged to go through the government commission. 

 

The NDP tried to wipe out this freedom of choice, but strong opposition thwarted that compulsion. Now since the amended 

act was passed, the NDP have continued to harass the profession in countless ways. As a result, the exodus of our most 

skilled and cherished medical practitioners has continued. Personally, I doubt if the unhappiness and the mistrust which today 

exists over medicare, can ever be dispelled by the present government. The scars and wounds are too deep. However, the 

Liberal party knows that the plan basically is working today. We think it could work better, with a little change of heart and a 

few modifications. 

 

If Liberals forma a government in June, first, we will take politics out of medicare. We do not think that medical care should 

be run by politicians whether they are socialists, Liberals or Conservatives. I say that if this is done, nine-tenths of the present 

difficulties would disappear. Secondly, we will sit down with the profession in an effort to regain their confidence, and we 

will make sincere efforts to secure the return of some of the doctors who have left Saskatchewan. Thirdly, under a Liberal 

government, people will not be thrown in jail, because they are unable to pay their medical and hospital premiums. 

 

In short, Mr. Speaker, by good faith, by honest efforts, something which has been lacking in hon. friends opposite, we’ll 

make medical care work. 

 

Liberals will aim not at the destruction of medical health insurance but at an improvement. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have this afternoon, tired to briefly outline some of the main planks of the Liberal platform. My 

colleagues will discuss the remaining aspects of our platform during this debate. You will, I hope, understand, Mr. Speaker, 

from my remarks, that Liberals are far from satisfied with the economic progress which has taken place in Saskatchewan 

these past two decades, as compared to the rest of Canada. 

 

Liberals are sick and tired of having Saskatchewan known as the province that is out of step with the rest of Canada. The 

province which is always looked upon as Canada’s poor country cousin. We’ve had enough of policies which send thousands 

and thousands of our people out of Saskatchewan each year to look for jobs. We’re unhappy over the fact that not one 

immigrant in 50 coming to Canada, chooses Saskatchewan as his or her home. The Liberal party does not want Saskatchewan 

to remain isolated any longer from the economic growth, the progress and the development that is taking place elsewhere in 

Canada. The election of Liberal government will end this political and economic isolation. In a government climate receptive 

not hostile to private businesses, we will embark on the biggest industrial selling program that this nation has ever seen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Personally, I am proud of the program of challenge that has been formulated by Liberals to meet 

Saskatchewan’s current problems. Our platform is constructive and businesslike, it is imaginative, yet practical. It’s a 

program, which if I may paraphrase certain famous words, will get Saskatchewan moving again. The Liberal program offers 

not the authoritarian state, for while it may be efficient, it is not free. It offers not the welfare state, for while it may be well-

intended, it distributes poverty not wealth. The Liberal program offers what I would like to call, the opportunity state. It’s the 

kind of state which offers opportunities to every individual to cultivate his talents in order that they may develop; to invest 

his treasure in order that it may grow; to apply his skills in order that they may be augmented. Out of the benefits that each 

individual as a human being derives, public interest will be advanced. 

 

Before resuming my seat, Mr. Speaker, there is one other matter to which I should like to refer. Recently, there have been 

reports, particularly in Eastern Canada, that ideas of a Liberal – NDP alliance or amalgamation are current in some points. I 

think I speak for every Saskatchewan Liberal, when I say those kind of ideas cause dismay. We’ve lived under socialism for 

20 years. We know the regimentation the industrial stagnation, the lack of development which socialism brings about. Surely, 

after all these years, we have learned that the philosophy of these two parties is at complete variance. The NDP stands for 

socialism, they stand for government ownership of the means of production. They stand for bureaucratic control, they stand 

for compulsion. 

 



 

February 11, 1964 
 

 

51 

The Liberal party on the other hand, is fundamentally opposed to socialism. We believe in private enterprise, in personal 

initiative, and in individual liberty. There are persons who have been supporters of the old CCF, who were never socialists. 

There are others who were socialists, but who now see its futility. People from both these groups are now joining the Liberals 

and they are welcomed in the Liberal party as individuals. I am convinced that Liberals in Saskatchewan want no truck or 

trade with any kind of an alliance with the NDP for the take of political expediency. Personally, I think that all these rumors 

are coming out of Eastern Canada, represent only wishful thinking on the part of the NDP, as they see their ship sinking. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — However, I serve fair warning to anyone who may be interested at any attempt to promote an alliance 

between the Liberals and the socialists, whether it comes from Eastern Canada or anywhere else, will meet with the 

unswerving resistance of the government Liberal party. Our Liberals without exception, I think feel that as they are on the 

verge of getting rid of one socialist party, they don’t want any part of another socialist party. 

 

Liberals are a middle of the road reform party, Mr. Speaker. We are not travelling to the left or to the right, but just straight 

ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has been my privilege now to be in public service for more than 22 years and with the indulgence of the 

house, I conclude my remarks by expressing a few personal views which I have formed during that period of that time. 

 

I believe that the system of responsible enterprise, coupled as it is with social legislation which puts a floor under the living 

standards of all, without jeopardizing individual initiative, offers the best promise of maximizing the benefits of freedom and 

security. 

 

I am opposed to socialism and all that it stands for, because I think, given time, socialism erodes and destroys man’s initiative 

and independence. I believe that a greater investment of capital in Saskatchewan is the one vital step towards the achievement 

of virtually every economic and social goal which we hold dear. I believe that you cannot make a nation or a province strong, 

united or productive, by fermenting class hatred. I believe in the dignity of labour and I support its reasonable and legitimate 

aspirations, but I do not believe that government is helping the wage earner, by trying to undermine the people who pay the 

wages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not agree that the world owes every man a living, but it does owe every man the right and the opportunity 

to make a decent living. As a businessman, I believe that the economy of a country or province, is subject to the same 

economic laws as the economy of a family household. If you live beyond your means, sooner or later, you are in economic 

trouble. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could be wrong, but I rather feel that this is the last throne speech where Liberal members will be sitting on 

this side of the house. As I said earlier, I would rather think the end of an era has come. Like in all other parts of Canada, the 

NDP is a spent force. It is hardly necessary for me to say I shall not support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Hon. W. S. Lloyd (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, there are one or two matters which the Leader of the Opposition raised in his 

closing remarks, which I hasten to add my very hearty and ready concurrence. I refer to his reference to certain episodes 

which allegedly have taken place in the province of Ontario. He is prepared to reject any offers which may come his way and 

I think we can assure him that he will not have to really go to the trouble of rejecting, because offers will not be coming his 

way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I thought he made rather touching little swan song, saying good-bye to the house sort of thing, not only did he 

dismiss himself, but he dismissed all his members over there, saying this is the last time they 



 

February 11, 1964 
 

 

52 

would be sitting there. I should have though that he would have expected that some of them, at least would be re-elected Mr. 

Speaker, but apparently not. 

 

I want to concur in one other remark that has been made and that is in the words of welcome directed to the representatives of 

the students form the two university campuses in Saskatchewan, and those who are attending our university, whose homes 

are in other parts of the world. Saskatchewan is proud of its university, we are pleased with the growth which we can witness 

it is good to have the opportunity of being able to associate with some of the representatives of the student body on these 

occasions and we look forward to seeing them before too long, at least I think insofar as I am concerned I can make it before 

too long, this evening. 

 

Now I want to say something about some of the remarks of the Leader of the Opposition, both this afternoon and yesterday 

afternoon. It seems to me that the most noticeable thing about what he has said is that he forgot to talk about the debate which 

is presumable underway, and that is the debate on the speech from the throne. Because, except for a few minutes yesterday, 

he devoted no attention whatsoever to the items that had been placed before us in the throne speech document. I should have 

thought, Mr. Speaker, that an occasion of this kind would have been an opportunity for the leader of the Saskatchewan 

Liberal party, to have put on record, something of his and his party’s position, with regard to federal-provincial relationship 

particularly in the fields of tax-sharing agreements. I should have thought this would have been an opportunity when he 

would have wanted to have said something about proposals for northern development, as referred to in the speech from the 

throne. I should have thought that we might have heard something about where they stand on the extremely important matters 

of hospital privileges. I should have thought this might have been an occasion on which some reference would have been 

made to one of Saskatchewan’s most pressing problems, namely that of rail line abandonment. I should have thought there 

might have been something said about the proposals for extending and conserving and making better use of our water 

resources in the province of Saskatchewan. All of these have been placed before the legislature, none of them warranted a 

single word of reference insofar as the Leader of the Opposition is concerned. 

 

I think too that probably the most telling thing to look at, is his entire speech is his reference to medical care insurance near 

the end of his speech. Mr. Speaker, I submit, it is still absolutely impossible to tell from those words where the Liberal party 

stands on the subject of medical care insurance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — They talk boldly . . . 

 

Mr. D.G. Steuart: — Even denser than I thought . . . 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — They talk boldly and bravely and I submit bluffingly, about sitting down with the Saskatchewan College of 

Physicians and Surgeons, and restoring confidences – a plan which will be acceptable to them. If they do that, then they will 

do that which he denied they would do, introduce a plan modelled on the basis of that which is in effect in Alberta or which is 

proposed for Ontario, and which is simply not good enough for Saskatchewan people, or the other parts of Canada either. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Now, Mr. Speaker, there were some differences in the speech of the Leader of the Opposition this year, 

compared to other years, and this is refreshing, I admit. It is the first time in many years. A lot of the speech was still the 

same, but there is a difference in the attitude, I submit, of the Leader of the Opposition and presumable of the party which he 

represents. You will note that he said that the Liberal party approaches the election this year with cautious optimism. Why the 

change from the last year, Mr. Speaker? Las year, they were most belligerently over-optimistic about this matter. The Liberal 

party has changed very considerably. Never, might I say, Mr. Speaker, has so much happened to so little in such a short time, 

as has happened to the Liberal party in the last 12 months. The party tried at times to present something of the new-look 

which they evidently think the people want the Liberal party to take on. He said at some point, 



 

February 11, 1964 
 

 

53 

things really aren’t so terrible in Saskatchewan, but then it wasn’t long before he was drifting back to his old phrases of 

stagnation in every aspect of endeavor, in the province. Saskatchewan – still a poor country cousin, those were his exact 

words not very long afterwards, but he spent a great deal of his time, you will notice, sort of wooing or continuing to woo, the 

Conservative party, once again we witnessed some public love making on his part, here in the house. I am not quite sure what 

it is that he is proposing to the Conservative party, but it seems to be kind of limited term common-law marriage arrangement 

— one, mostly of his own convenience, without any sanction on the part of the parents, lacking any contractual arrangement 

whatsoever. 

 

The Conservatives, it seems to me, are doubting very sincerely the honourableness of the gentleman’s intentions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Many of them, I am sure are remembering a little ditty which goes like this, Mr. Speaker, and applying it to 

what they are being invited to do. 

 

 There was a young lady from Niger 

 Who went out for a ride on a tiger 

 They came back form the ride with the 

 lady inside and a smile on the face of the tiger. 

 

and they know exactly where they are expected to end up if they enter into any such kind of companionship. 

 

Now, that the Liberal party is a party of responsibility, and then he went on to say, we are not going to out-promise anybody, 

we are a party of responsibility, we are not going to out-promise anybody, and then spent 40 or 45 minutes in promises to the 

extent of many million of dollars. 

 

He proposes tax-reductions which would cost in the neighbourhood of $20 million, and then he went on after that to talk 

about further reductions in royalties and possibly tax-holidays to industry. He proposed millions of dollars of expenditures on 

roads, loans to industries, loans to agriculture and goodness knows how many other things. The point I want to make, Mr. 

Speaker, is this, he said, we are a party of responsibility, we are not going to out-promise anybody, and went on to promise 

reductions in sales tax, fewer articles to be taxed under the sales tax arrangement, lowering the property tax, doing away with 

some parts of the gasoline tax, doing away with some portion of revenues from royalties, providing a tax-free holiday for 

other industries . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You’ll find out . . . 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — . . . reducing income taxes, both personal and corporation income taxes, a responsible party which is not going 

to out-promise anybody, after which he adds many million of dollars of expenditures. But I think, Mr. Speaker, one of the 

most interesting comments on this matter of responsibility or otherwise, is contained in his use of one particular document. 

You will recall he referred to a Canadian Press Despatch appearing in the Leader Post. He suggested that this shows that 

taxation bears more heavily on Saskatchewan than in other provinces, but unfortunately, he didn’t read the whole despatch. If 

he had, he would have found this very interesting and meaningful statement – 

 

but comparing taxes in one province and another can be misleading, particularly if they prompt conclusions as to which 

provinces are easy and which are tough on your pocketbook. Tax rates would have to be balanced against other factors 

such as how much money-savings you get in return. 

 

and I invite him, or I invite anybody else, to take a look at the whole picture, at the taxation and also what that taxation 

provides in the province of Saskatchewan and what has to be bought outside of or in addition to taxation in other provinces. 

Consider one item alone, consider the added cost of medical care insurance in every other province except Saskatchewan, 

something that is included in your tax bill in this province. 



 

February 11, 1964 
 

 

54 

I submit to him that it is not responsible to make use of these figures without indicating the important qualifications with 

regard to them, I shall come back with some more statistics with regard to that. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Mr. Speaker, will the Premier permit a question? 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Yes. 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Today, information that you offered a moment ago, was asked by the members of the opposition in this 

house a year ago, and you refused the answer to the question. 

 

This question was asked a year ago. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, this is no question al all, and may I say this . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald: — Put it up. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I am quite prepared to put up and I have not as yet been shut up in this legislature by you, and I doubt very 

much if I ever shall be, although you have tried it on many occasions. 

 

Mr. Gardiner (Melville): — Temper, Temper. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, on the matter of what this province provides in taxation and services, I have a lot to say about 

that in the next hour or so, not all of it falling immediately after this little bit. Also, about how matters compare with the 

situations in other parts of Canada. The Leader of the Opposition had some general remarks to make about the state of the 

economy in Saskatchewan. At times he said it was good, and at other times he said it was stagnant, of course, but he did start 

out yesterday by saying it was pretty good. In all of this he saw nothing for which any credit should be given to the 

Saskatchewan government. The credit he claimed should all go to either Divine Providence or the federal Liberal party, and 

he really didn’t differentiate much between the two of them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I submit, Mr. Speaker, that had there been a poor crop in Saskatchewan, had there been no sale of wheat, then 

he would have found reason to have blamed the provincial government in that particular way. Now, all of us will admit that 

we have reasons to be thankful in Saskatchewan for 1961. Climatic conditions were good; we have reasons again to be proud 

of our agricultural industry and the men and women who operate it. I would have thought that the Leader of the Opposition 

might have found some opportunity to give credit to programs and staff of the Department of Agriculture of the university, to 

the contribution of agriculture research and a number of other matters, which in addition to Divine Providence and the 

Liberal party in Ottawa, have added productivity or helped to underwrite production of our agricultural industry. 

 

I would like you to recall what he said about the sale and the price of wheat. Admittedly, these have contributed greatly to 

our economy. Let me refer the Leader of the Opposition to a press comment in the Leader Post, February 25th, 1963. It tells 

of a meeting at Assiniboia, and one of the speakers was the Hon. Paul Martin, who is now the federal Minister of External 

Affairs, and he was talking about the situation at that time, when you remember a Conservative government was selling 

wheat and in rather large quantities, and Mr. Martin had this to say, this whole matter of the wheat payments, and sales were 

the greatest hoax ever perpetrated on the Canadian farmers. When a conservative government was involved in selling wheat 

rather successfully, it was a hoax, but when a Liberal government does it, this was a great accomplishment under those 

circumstances. 

 



 

February 11, 1964 
 

 

55 

At the same meeting, Saskatchewan Mr. Argue spoke and he talked about payments for wheat and he said this is not the 

result of Conservative generosity but a return of the farmers’ own hard earned money. That is a perfectly accurate statement, 

of course. Mr. Argue went on to say, on March 7th at Weyburn, to say in talking about returns from the sale of wheat, you 

can’t bribe the farmer with his own money. Well, in the mouths of the Liberals an alleged Conservative bribe becomes an act 

of magnanimity and great skill when it is performed by a Liberal government in Ottawa. This is specifically what the Leader 

of the Opposition maintained here on Monday. 

 

The Hon. Mr. Sharp, federal minister in charge of this, is much more subtle, and much more generous, and much more 

accurate, may I say. He, you will recall, on many occasions, has given credit to the wheat board and credit ought to be given 

to the wheat board. If we are going to give credit to the wheat board, then we ought to give credit also to some of the 

organizations, which have made it possible for us to have a wheat board in Canada. I submit when we are doing this, we need 

to give credit to farm groups and to co-ops, who were fighting for a wheat board at a time when Liberal federal members of 

parliament were opposing it in parliament and outside of parliament. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — If the wheat board is, in the opinion of the Liberals, such an excellent piece of machinery as we agree it is, 

then I suggest this should encourage them to show enough faith in it, to pass the necessary legislation to make it a permanent 

one. They should show enough faith in it to extend its operations to grains which are now excluded from the operation of the 

wheat board. Mr. Speaker, a main reason, of course, for good sales of wheat and good prices in 1963, and anticipated in 

1964, has in fact, nothing to do with the federal government at Ottawa, or the provincial government in Saskatchewan. A 

main reason is that millions of people in Russia and in China needed the wheat we had to sell. The Liberal party, I should 

think is not going to seek to take any particular credit for the fact that there was a crop failure in either Russia or China. 

Insofar as we in Saskatchewan are concerned, we can be gratified that when millions of bushels of wheat were needed by 

people in other parts of the world, we were in a position to supply it. The fact that we had the wheat to supply this year has 

presented some dramatic evidence again of the value of our Saskatchewan industry, its value, not only to Saskatchewan, but 

its value to all of Canada. Few things, Mr. Speaker, have given the upward thrust and outward surge to the Canadian 

economy as did Saskatchewan’s production this year and its sale. It has affected employment from one end of Canada to the 

other, it has affected beneficially our balance of trade, it has improved materially our influence in the world in general. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am going to this afternoon, just say a few words about the matter of manufacturing and industrial development 

and what the Leader of the Opposition has had to say of it. You know, almost at the time that he was speaking in the house 

yesterday, these papers which I have in my hand or one of them at least, must have been in the process of printing. I picked 

up the Leader Post his morning, and I found on page two, one headline saying Plants first stage complete, it refers to the 

Falcon Engineering Company, which has completed the first stage of its program to establish a branch plant at Weyburn, 

manufacturing a variety of steel, reinforced fibre glass products. It is located on five acres of land at the Weyburn Municipal 

Airport. It will employ labour force of 12 men initially, and within six months will employ 40 men with an annual payroll of 

more than $250,000.00 

 

On the same page, Company formed to make Plastics, date line Swift Current. The establishment of a plastic manufacturing 

plant, announced Monday by Prairie Plastics Company. The gentleman who was making the announcement was good enough 

to say, ―there is not any particular association between Prairie Plastics and the Industrial Development Corporation, although 

credit can go to the corporation for prompting the establishment of this business.‖ 

 

The same page carries news about a new map relating to resources in northern Saskatchewan published jointly by the 

dominion government and the provincial government. 

 

The Saskatchewan paper, which came to my desk just this morning, ―La Ronge area interesting Prospectors.‖ It tells of 

interest, probably because of the fact of claims which cover an interesting copper-gold prospecting area that has become what 

is know as hot. North of Lac La Ronge in recent months . . . 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — You wouldn’t know that . . . 

 



 

February 11, 1964 
 

 

56 

Mr. Lloyd: — Rio Tinto staked about 50 claims. Augustus Exploration had previously acquired a claim block covering some 

5,000 acres. Within the last two weeks, another group of 30 claims was recorded by the same company in the same area. 

More than 600 claims now in good standing. Mr. Speaker, one can read the newspapers every day, reporting activities in this 

province and find there ample contradiction of the ridiculous, repeated attempts of the Liberal party to paint this province as 

one in which one finds nothing but stagnation and lack of development . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Now about D.B.S. . . 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Yes, I shall come to D.B.S. as well, Mr. Speaker. One of the other comments which the Leader of the 

Opposition made yesterday, Mr. Speaker, you know was, he was getting sort of sorry for us on this side of the house. He got 

into a bit of a mellow mood, carried away by his sentimental associations of days long past perhaps, referred to a group of so-

called ―tired old men‖ over here. Well, Mr. Speaker, I admit we haven’t attempted to demonstrate our energy and imagination 

and grasp public problems by having our pictures taken kicking on any legislative doors. We haven’t wasted any additional 

energies when the photographer didn’t catch us the first time, doing an encore for him . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — . . . and we haven’t tried to illustrate our initiative by hiring a public opinion firm to go about seeking 

information as to what we look like in the eyes of the public, but instead of doing these things, we have been mighty busy, 

doing things which contribute to the present and the future of this province of Saskatchewan. Let me indicate just a few of 

those things in the few additional moments I want to take this afternoon. Of course, we have been busy in making work the 

most important recent social legislation in the dominion of Canada. Namely, Medical Care Insurance. We have been busy 

making it work. Second, we have been busy with plans and discussions with other provincial governments, with the federal 

government, with local communities, as to ways and means of keeping branch rail lines form being abandoned in the manner 

with out consideration of consequences to people in communities. Thirdly, we have been busy and active on plans and 

discussions with other provincial governments and the federal government, on how to conserve and supplement and redirect 

the water supplies so essential to Saskatchewan and Canada’s future. Fourth, we have been busy standing up for the rights of 

the province of Saskatchewan at a series of important federal-provincial conferences. We have been busy building a great 

dam and power plant at Squaw Rapids, the first harnessing of that important resource for the use by the people of 

Saskatchewan. We have been busy working with industries to the end that the gross value of non-agricultural production in 

Saskatchewan in 1963, exceeded one billion dollars for the first time in our history. We have been busy helping to bring 

water and sewage to thousands of people in farm homes and tens of thousands of people in smaller urban communities. We 

have been busy getting on with the job of massive extension of Vocational Education facilities and university facilities. We 

have been busy building dust-free highways so that some three-quarters of the traffic which moves on provincial highways 

moves on highways with that kind of quality service. Mr. Speaker, those are just some of the things which this group of ―tired 

old men‖ have been doing. I think the conclusion is that tired or not, there is still a lot more energy and competency and 

capability here than one finds in the group that we look at across the other side of the house. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Now, Mr. Speaker, may I ask leave to adjourn the debate at this time. 

 

The debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:50 o’clock p.m. 


