



















































Hansard: February 28, 1964


471 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
SIXTH SESSION – FOURTEENTH LEGISLATURE 

17th Day 
 

Friday, February 28, 1964 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the Budget Motion moved by the Hon. Mr. Brockelbank. 
 

Hon. E.I. Wood (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — One item in the budget before us concerns the Municipal Winter 
Works Incentive Program. This program has been in operation for six seasons and has, up until the end of last season, 
provided 1,365,167 man days of work on 4,470 projects. 
 
The Municipal Winter works Incentive Program was initiated by the last federal administration and the federal government 
pays one-half the labour costs on these projects. People are a little inclined to forget that the municipalities and the provincial 
government also have a share. The municipalities pay one-quarter of the labour costs plus all the other costs for materials, etc. 
The provincial government pays one-quarter of the labour costs and has always supported this program enthusiastically, and 
has endeavoured to have it widened to include such organizations as telephone companies and schools. Since the inception of 
the program we have paid $3,004,811 as our share of the costs. We feel that this has been a worthwhile effort that has really 
helped to reduce winter unemployment to the low we have in the province at present. 
 
The federal government has ruled, and ruled justly I believe that unemployed farmers may qualify for work under this 
program. This may give the impression at times that the money is not being used to mitigate unemployment as much as could 
be desired. Undoubtedly some people work under the program who could live quite well without this employment. However, 
the municipalities embarking on these projects undertake to hire only those who would otherwise be in need of social aid, if 
such are available. Failing this, they may hire other unemployed persons. By and large I believe the municipalities are being 
conscientious in their handling of these projects. 
 
Another item in the budget that is before us, and a program that has been of real assistance to municipalities, is our grid road 
system. Started some eight years ago as a ten-year program involving something over 12,000 miles of all-weather 
inter-municipal roads, the municipalities of the province have built to date some 9,400 miles of grid road, 143 miles of oil 
access and 21.6 miles of resort roads. 2,500 miles have been regravelled. These roads have cost some $60,000,000 of which 
the province has paid approximately $36,000,000 or 60 per cent. Involved in this construction have been some 290 rural 
municipalities, 11 local improvement districts and 104 towns and villages. 
 
As I have indicated, this program was originally conceived as a ten-year program. This would have called for the building of 
10 per cent of the complete program each year. Owing to the scarcity of provincial funds, to the disappointment of the 
municipal people this has been cut to 9 per cent for the past three construction seasons. However, due to the buoyant 
provincial finances the past two years, we have been able to pay in advance in the fall and winter for the work that we would 
ordinarily not have paid until the following year. This has saved money for the municipalities involved and has also made it 
possible for us this season to announce that, for this coming construction year, we will be able to allow rural municipalities to 
build, and we will pay our share of costs, for 12 per cent of their complete rid mileage. This will allow us to all intents and 
purposes to put our grid road program back on to schedule, with a hope of having the bulk of it completed in 1965. 
 
This grid road program has proved to be a very popular one with the rural municipalities, and last year at the annual 
convention of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities a resolution was approved requesting the government to 
extend the program beyond that originally contemplated. We have given this close attention and consideration. I do not 
believe that it would be desirable to indefinitely extend our municipal grid system. There must be some restriction as to size 
and emphasis on standards, as we have with our highway system. 
 



 

February 28, 1964 
 

 
472 

There are, however, quite a number of additional roads in the province that could logically and justifiably be included in such 
a system. Instead of adding these on an ad hoc basis, I feel it would be much better to first look at the road situation 
throughout the province and formulate a planned extension that would round out our municipal grid system. 
 
We have therefore asked the Municipal Advisory Commission, which assisted in the drawing up of the original plans, to 
contact the municipalities first by mail in order to obtain their suggestions, and then in person to work out this system of 
extensions. 
 
The people of the province are proud of our grid road system. The rural municipalities are to be complimented on the way in 
which they have undertaken this tremendous task. We are proud of the part the provincial government, through the Municipal 
Road Assistance Authority, has played in it in giving leadership and substantial financial aid. It has meant a great deal to rural 
Saskatchewan by providing all-weather access to communities that would otherwise be isolated at many times of the year. 
 
Several items in the budget have to do with programs dealing with Indians. While several departments deal directly with our 
Indian people, such as the Departments of Education, Public Health, Social Welfare and Rehabilitation, Natural Resources, 
and Co-operation and Co-operative Development, as well as the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and Saskatchewan 
Government Telephones, the Community Development Branch of our department has been designated as the organization 
responsible for correlating the work that is done by these other departments and dealing in the main with Indian Affairs as 
they affect the province. 
 
This department is especially qualified for this task because community development work as such has a natural affinity for 
ordinary orientation of this department, and vice versa, and also because a large part of the people of Indian ancestry live in 
the local improvement districts which are our direct responsibility. 
 
I heartily agree with those who say that the economic and social welfare of the people of Indian origin in our province is a 
matter of the greatest urgency. In 1961 I had the honour, as the then Speaker of the House, of representing Saskatchewan at 
the London Conference of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. While taking part in the debate on economic and 
social development of underdeveloped countries in the commonwealth, I was struck by and spoke of the fact that here in 
Saskatchewan we have people well nigh as underprivileged as any in the world. This certainly does not apply to Saskatchewan 
alone. The conditions under which many of our Indian people live across Canada is a national disgrace. 
 
Saskatchewan has a particular interest in the problem because, compared with other provinces, we have a large number of 
people of Indian ancestry. We had an estimated 26,483 Indian people in 1962. This is a large percentage of the Indian people 
in Canada (13.4 per cent) and also of the total population of the province (2.8 per cent). And both these percentages are 
growing. 
 
One of the aspects that gives urgency to the problem is the fact of the rapid growth of the Indian population. The rate of 
growth in 1962 over 1961 was 4.5 per cent annum while from 1949 to 1954 the average yearly increase was 2.8 per cent. In 
other words our Indian people are increasing rapidly and the rate of increase is increasing. I would like to point out for the 
benefit of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, that this rate of population growth is no indication of a satisfactory economic 
environment. 
 
The situation that we have concerning our Indian people, I would like to point out further, is not the entire fault of either 
section of our society. I will be quick to point out that little can be done to improve the condition of these people unless the 
Indian people themselves are prepared to help themselves, and to take an active part in the programs and work of betterment. 
However, by far the major portion of blame for the present state of affairs lies with we non-Indians. It is we who have 
imposed the reserve system upon them; it is we who have allowed a state of segregation to develop that is little different from 
that which exists in South Africa or in the deep south of the United States. It is these actions of non-Indians in the past, and I 
am afraid also to some extent in the present, that have given the Indian people a great distrust of us and what we say. It is we 
who have kept the Indian people for over a hundred years as second-class citizens. Can we blame them then, Mr. Speaker, if 
they are 



 

February 28, 1964 
 

 
473 

not aggressive, if they are easily discouraged and not quick to accept all that we tell them? 
 
It would be entirely wrong if the members in this house were to get the impression that the provincial government has been 
unaware of the necessity of doing something about these things. We have been aware and a good deal has been done. 
 
It is apparent to all that if our Indians are to take a proper part in the life of our province they must have a suitable education. 
The Indian Affairs Branch of the federal Department of Citizenship and Immigration has made a real effort to provide a good 
education for the children under their jurisdiction. Such segregated schools, however, are not a good thing as we are well 
aware. The Indian Affairs Branch has co-operated well with our Department of Education, and twenty-one agreements have 
been reached between these organizations whereby last year 1,585 treaty Indian pupils were attending our provincial schools. 
This is a very important step in the eventual proper working together of the two groups in our society. 
 
The Department of Education has not neglected the Metis children, which are our direct responsibility. In 1946 there were 27 
teachers of Metis children in the northern part of our province with approximately 800 pupils. Today there are 84 teachers in 
our government aided Metis schools and 129 teachers in Uranium City and Creighton instructing approximately 3,480 pupils. 
 
Our hospitalization program has been a real boon to both our Indian and Metis people. The percentage of those making use of 
hospital facilities is much higher among the Indian than among the non-Indian groups. The medical care program is designed 
to be of major benefit to low income people, and thus will be proving especially useful for Metis and Indians. The treaty 
Indian people are very desirous to be included under this program and although some difficulty is being experienced we are 
hopeful that an agreement can be worked out with Ottawa in this regard. 
 
In the Northern Affairs Administration Area over the past few years, the Department of Natural Resources has spent over 
$1,000,000 in developing the fishing industry, and $300,000 has been spent in price supports on fish. These things have 
definite benefit to both treaty and non-treaty Indians. 
 
In the budget that we are today considering some $100,000 is earmarked for furthering housing programs for Metis people in 
the north. Our Social Welfare Department is spending millions of dollars in endeavouring to provide a decent standard of 
living for these people, and so no one can say that what they are doing is not both necessary and substantially adequate. 
Undoubtedly, more necessary than provision of social aid is the providing of work for our Indian and Metis people. Much has 
been done in this regard through winter works projects, by both the Local Improvement District Branch and the Department 
of Natural Resources as well as municipalities in the area affected. 
 
In this regard, Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out what has been done in the Meadow Lake Area. There a Social Service 
Board has been set up, which involved the town of Meadow Lake and the surrounding local improvement districts. This area 
contains a large proportion of people of Indian ancestry and many of whom have chronic social aid troubles and have been 
recipients of social aid over a period of many years. This board has tackled the problem, has a development and also a 
rehabilitation program. By searching for employment and using a number of programs, the report is that social aid costs have 
declined significantly in that area. The latest reports show that while in September of 1962, the social aid bill was some 
$17,000, in September of 1963 it had dropped to $14,000, in October of 1962, the social aid bill was $21,000 and in October 
of 1963 it had dropped to $13,700, in December of 1962, social aid costs were $17,000 in September 1963 they dropped to 
$14,000. I think that this indicates that what these men are doing up there in endeavouring to utilize whatever is at their 
disposal, and in an endeavour to provide employment for these Indian people, is having results and I think it is a very 
worthwhile endeavour on the part of these people. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Wood: — By joint effort these people in Meadow Lake are demonstrating that welfare problems amongst people of 
Indian ancestry and others can be reduced by a proper approach. 
 



 

February 28, 1964 
 

 
474 

I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that also lumbering operations have been initiated in this area for Metis groups as well as in 
other parts of the north. The member from Meadow Lake spoke yesterday about some of the aspects of the work which we are 
doing in this regard in the Canoe and Green Lake area, and I believe that these projects which we have initiated are working 
out well, and are providing necessary employment. 
 
The Minister of Co-operation told you yesterday about what is being done to assist the fishing industry in the north through 
the co-operative approach. No one can say that we have been inactive here, and that the results have not been really and truly 
worthwhile. 
 
In the Leader Post of February 21st, just the other day, I noticed that a new industrial corporation has been set up at La 
Ronge, involving local people, both Indian and non-Indian. 
 
I am well aware, owing to correspondence we have had with the people of the area, that a good deal of activity has been going 
on there for years in regard to production of native crafts and the setting up of this industrial corporation portends even better 
results along thee lines in the future. 
 
In the last two construction seasons, through co-operation with the reserve bands and the Indian Affairs Branch, the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation brought electric power to six reserves, serving some 250 customers. Saskatchewan 
Government Telephones has brought telephone service to two reserves and three others are planned for 1964, pending 
approval by the federal authorities. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Wood: — We have been active as well, Mr. Speaker, and successful in getting together with the Saskatchewan 
representatives of the federal Indian Affairs Branch in an effort to correlate our activities. We first formed a committee 
working in the Kamsack area, in regard to local problems there, and out of this grew an agreement signed by the former 
Minister of Citizenship (Mr. Favreau) and myself, setting up a formal federal provincial committee dealing with Indian affairs 
of mutual concern. This committee, chaired by my deputy Dr. Brownstone, is composed of three representatives of provincial 
government departments and three representing the federal agencies. Meetings are held at frequent intervals in a spirit of 
getting together for the purpose of getting things done. I would like to sincerely thank Mr. John McGill, the regional 
supervisor of Indian Agencies, Indian Affairs Branch at Saskatoon, for his co-operation and this sort of approach helps both 
our organizations in coming to grips with our problem. 
 
I believe that we are the only province in Canada, where such an arrangement has been achieved. Careful appraisal will show 
however, that a basically different approach must be made to our problems concerning people of Indian ancestry before 
anything resembling a satisfactory long-term solution can be found. Approximately 100 years ago the system of reserves was 
started. This did guarantee to the Indian people a tract of land that they could call their own. Treaties were drawn up also that 
gave the Indians certain rights and guarantees, but hereby was established a policy of apartheid that parallels closely that 
which we so decry in South Africa today. 
 
I believe we must face the fact that at the turn of the century it was firmly believed that our Indian population was dying off, 
and that no real effort was required, and because of this no real effort was made to find a long-term solution to their problems. 
However, modern medicine and the development of somewhat better living conditions have so changed all that today our 
Indian population, as I have said earlier, is now rapidly increasing. 
 
One of the main factors tending to perpetuate the segregation we have is the fact that we have a definite division drawn 
between treaty Indians and the rest of our population by the Indian Act, which makes these others the wards of the federal 
government. We can never have anything approaching complete integration between us so long as this situation remains. The 
reserve system itself is a real block. It is good that the Indian people retain this property that goes with their treaties, but when 
they are afraid to lose these rights if they leave the reserve, we have a real impediment to their proper absorption into the main 
stream of life of our province. 
 
The hard facts are that there are just not sufficient resources in the reserves and the present environment of the Indian people 
to provide them with a satisfactory livelihood. The resources that are available must 



 

February 28, 1964 
 

 
475 

be developed, and there is a crying need in this direction, but we still must look at the long-term acceptable solution as the 
only one, and this is that we integrate our Indians and non-Indian people together and make available to both the provincial 
economy. This is accentuated by the increase of population on the reserves which makes the lack of resources there more 
apparent year by year. For some time it has been felt that the only long-term solution for this was the devolution of the 
jurisdiction in Indian Affairs from the federal government to the provinces. One of the most important developments in recent 
years in this regard was the November federal-provincial conference. I can report to the house, Mr. Speaker, that although 
long overdue, the federal-provincial conference on Indian-Eskimo affairs was a success and held forth a great deal of promise. 
I was particularly impressed with the attitude of the Hon. Guy Favreau, then Minister of Citizenship and Immigration. He 
stated and I quote: 
 

It has become clear that significant progress in the future depends upon extension of provincial services to Indians and to 
Indian communities in the province. 

 
He stated further: 
 

That the government of Canada for its part is prepared to assume its new responsibility in working toward economic 
emancipation of the Indians and accelerating the restoration of self-determination, authority and self-reliance to Indian 
reserves and communities. These are essential if any comprehensive approach to Indian problems. To be fully effective, 
however, such developments must be integrated into provincial plans and programs and make effective use of all existing 
resources. 

 
I may say that the government of Saskatchewan welcomes and supports these views. I would like, Mr. Speaker, to quote to 
you the basic objectives that were set forth at this conference, but I’m afraid that time will not allow me to do so. Our 
objectives might be summarized: that native peoples be consulted throughout; that their support be obtained if any lasting 
progress is to be achieved; that services essential to the welfare of Indians are to be maintained during the development of any 
new arrangements; and that special supports and protections, now provided to the Indians, are to be progressively adjusted as 
the above aims and objectives are fulfilled. 
 
I’m glad to say, Mr. Speaker, that this very largely reflects our Saskatchewan submission to the conference last fall. It was 
agreed at this conference that a further conference be scheduled in May of this year, and we have been looking forward very 
earnestly to this. In fact, it looms as being so important that our whole approach to Indian affairs is more or less bound up in 
this approaching conference with the federal government in regard to these things. 
 
We are very disappointed, Mr. Speaker, in that the federal government has so far shown very little action in preparing for this 
meeting. Since coming from the conference at the end of last November, we have heard nothing from them as to what steps 
are being taken to prepare for this meeting, in spite of some urging by both the Premier and myself in this regard. So far as we 
are concerned, Sir, we have already started action in endeavoring to approach the Indian people in this province by way of 
conferring with them and trying to obtain their opinions in regard to these matters. The Premier, myself, and my deputy have 
written to the Indian Chiefs of the province, arranging meetings with them, and we are hopeful, so far as we are concerned, 
that these matters dealing with Indian people of our province, which have so long been neglected, will be brought together 
and that we will be able to do something that is worthwhile with the co-operation and the full knowledge and the consent of 
the Indian people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are very many other things that I would like to talk about at this time concerning both these Indian matters 
and other matters of my department, but I will at this time close my words by saying that I will support the motion. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Ian H. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — I want to join with other members in this assembly in wishing a long and 
happy retirement from the political arena to members of this legislature who are here for their last session. 
 



 

February 28, 1964 
 

 
476 

Mr. Williams, Mr. Stone, Mr. McCarthy, Mr. Horsman, have served their constituencies well in the past and we also wish Mr. 
Klein and Mr. Peterson well in the future. Of course, we will always miss Mrs. Batten in this house and it is hoped that she 
will find her way clear to return to the political arena in the future. It is a credit to have such a brilliant representative of the 
fairer sex in this legislature. I have often felt sorry for the Attorney General when Mrs. Batten engages him in a battle of 
words. He was never much of a match for her, and the way the Attorney General used to squirm around in his seat, one would 
think he was in the electric chair. Now, come the next general election I should also like to wish him a happy and enforced 
retirement also. 
 
With the short time at my disposal this afternoon, I’m going to bring to the attention of this government some of the problems 
which should be dealt with in my constituency in the coming year. First, I should like to point out to the Minister of 
Highways, some of the things that need his attention. In Souris-Estevan we have five ports of entry into this province. Of these 
five ports, only one is paved, one is oiled, one is on a gravelled highway, and two are on grid roads. Highway No. 50 was, 
only last year, removed from the highway system, and returned to the municipality at Torquay. Now this seems to me to be a 
shortsighted attitude on the part of the department, in view of the fact that this road was only rebuilt a few years ago, and is of 
highway standards. The R.M. is not in a position to adequately maintain this road. Their equipment, first of all, is not large 
enough, nor do they have sufficient personnel; and it causes them extra expenses. This port of entry into Saskatchewan is a 
very busy one, I might add. Instead of abandoning this short ten miles of highway to grid road status, I believe more and more 
American tourists are coming to use Dr. Mainprize regional park and Highway No. 50 is the direct route. 
 
Highway No. 9 is also an important route to the United States border because it leads to the Moose Mountain Park area, and 
traffic during the summer months is extremely heavy indeed, especially on week-ends. The point is this, Mr. Speaker: if we 
hope to attract tourists to our province, we must provide paved or dust-free roads for the tourists to travel, otherwise they will 
not come into our province. It is just as simple as that. We need the tourist trade but if this government has but one paved road 
from the United States into Saskatchewan, plus one or two oiled roads, what hope have we got except to attract the most 
rugged of travellers? 
 
I understand from newspaper articles that Highway No. 47 north of Estevan was to have received some attention this year in 
the form of oiling. This would have been a step in the right direction, however, from yesterday’s report by the Minister of 
Highways, this is not to be. I suppose that this being an election year, Mr. Speaker, that he has decided to spend more money 
in his own constituency to help himself get back into this house. 
 
There has also been some indication of further work on Highway No. 18, west of Estevan. Now this road is becoming a more 
and more heavily used road because there is an oil field down in that corner, and this road was only recently rebuilt. But it 
will soon be pounded to pieces unless some sort of hard surfacing is done. Much of the surface material had to be hauled in a 
long distance due to the rocky nature of the lands through which the rerouted road went, and I urge the Department of 
Highways to save this road before too much heavy traffic pounds it to pieces. The budget for this road as announced yesterday 
would be confined to re-grading a short stretch from Torquay to Outram. I want to compliment the Minister of Highways on 
the completion of Highway No. 18, east of Oxbow. My people down there are well pleased with this road because it connects 
with a paved highway, from Manitoba right through to Regina. 
 
Highway 39 is also now completed from North Portal to Estevan, but we still have a very serious problem with the railway 
crossing east of Roche Percee. Last spring there was a tragic accident at this crossing. There was one young lady killed, and a 
young man crippled for life. Repeatedly our local citizens, safety council, and others warned the government of this crossing. 
Well, to be sure, blinker lights were installed, but half the time these lights don’t function, according to the reports which 
come to me. I pleaded with the government to look farther down the road and consider installing an over-pass which to my 
mind is the only real solution to the problem. I only hope we have no further accidents at this crossing because this is a main 
tourist route from the United States border, from our main port of entry into the province, and traffic will be heavy, and it will 
be increasingly so as time goes on. 
 
I note, Mr. Speaker, that the Attorney General intends to hire about 10 per cent more RCMP to patrol our highways. Well for 
my money we 



 

February 28, 1964 
 

 
477 

don’t need any more police patrols in this province. If other roads are as well patrolled as the one from here south to Weyburn 
and Estevan, we have too many patrols on the highway now. For four years I have made this same request, raise the speed 
limits on our widened highways to 70 miles an hour. I make the same request once more. Last summer I forwarded an article 
which I picked up, on safety and raised speed limits, to the Minister of Highways for his perusal. The article was written by a 
group of highway traffic experts in the United States who actually found the number of accidents per number of miles 
travelled were reduced when speed limits were raised. A speed limit raise would serve two purposes, it would decrease the 
number of accidents and reduce the number of Mounties necessary for patrol purposes. I believe one of the reasons for the 
government keeping our speed limits so low is because fines collected are a lucrative source of revenue to the province. 
 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Premier): — Oh, come now . . . 
 

Mr. MacDougall: — However, I feel that they pick our pockets clean enough with the high gasoline taxes without pinching 
us for exceeding the low rate of 60 miles an hour. After all with the new cars the way they are built, the low centre of gravity 
and the safety features which are built into them, together with the improved highways, there is no reason for the low speed 
limits. The last Mountie with whom I had conversation on the highway agreed with me. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. MacDougall: — He indicated his work would be much easier if the speed limits were raised on our major highways. He 
also told me that in his experience he could see no reason why the speed limit couldn’t be raised considerably, and I told him I 
felt exactly the same way, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — What colour is your license? 
 

Mr. MacDougall: — Well, we have one other great need in the Estevan area, Mr. Speaker, and that is the need for a nursing 
home or geriatric centre for the elderly. There is one such wing attached to the senior citizen’s home at Carnduff, but I believe 
this one is filled to capacity most of the time. Therefore, I recommend to this government the urgency of such a home in 
Estevan. This project needs immediate attention this year because some of these people are occupying hospital beds which we 
can ill afford. I would suggest that the government extracts possibly $2,000 a day hospital tax out of our area on oil field 
equipment alone. So I would suggest that they part with some of this wealth in the area from whence it came. 
 
The Estevan Chamber of Commerce, an energetic and active group of citizens, has pointed out the need for a new liquor store 
in an area where there is adequate parking in the city of Estevan. For years now the liquor board store has been situated on a 
busy thoroughfare, sandwiched between two hotels where there are no parking facilities, I suggest they build a provincial 
building to house the various government offices scattered throughout the city. Certainly in any case a change in the liquor 
store facilities is indeed in order. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I should like to turn briefly to a subject which I brought up at the last session and that concerns petroleum 
and natural gas development in Saskatchewan. At that time I recommended many changes which were requested by the 
Canadian Petroleum Association. I note that the great majority of these requests were conceded by the Department of Mineral 
Resources, and I noted also that drilling and exploration activity was stepped up during the past year. In the south-east corner 
of this province we have experienced one of the best years of activity since 1956. Now according to the figures in the budget 
the new oil wells totalled some 571 in 1963. I say, had it not been for this socialist government and the policies which they 
hold, development would not have slowed between 1957 and 1962. Finally they began to see the light and they changed many 
of their antiquated regulations as out-lined last year and we had another boom. However, when the department altered 
regulations as far as oil was concerned, nothing was done by the government to offer any incentive to promote the exploration 
for natural gas. It is apparent that these back room socialists still believe that the government through the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation is the only body capable of handling natural gas. 
 



 

February 28, 1964 
 

 
478 

Men like the manager of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation are a detriment to the free enterprisers and the progressives 
like the Hon. Minister of Industry and Information, who is the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 
Now if this minister wholeheartedly agrees, or goes along with antiqued thinking of the manager of the S.P.C., then I say he is 
equally guilty for the lack of exploration for natural gas in this province. If on the other hand he believes that certain changes 
in S.P.C. gas policy are in order, then I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that he take fewer safaris to the Orient and attend to business 
here at home. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. MacDougall: — I know that to try and convince his advisers must be quite a problem and will take courage, but I still 
urge him to try. 
 
Now once again I want to read into the Hansard of this house a few of the requests by the Canadian Petroleum Association, 
which in the opinion of that body, would create a fresh climate, a new incentive, for the exploration of natural gas. Let me add 
that a Liberal government will go along certainly with most of the requests in order to get Saskatchewan moving again. All I 
need to do is point out the revenue being enjoyed by Alberta because they allowed the export of natural gas and because they 
let private enterprise have a free hand in marketing this product. Mr. Speaker, this is the difference between free enterprise 
and the NDP socialists. After the Canadian Petroleum Association presented its brief on incentives for petroleum and natural 
gas in Saskatchewan, the Hon. Russ Brown made a statement outlining government natural gas policy. Now while the C.P.A. 
welcomed the declaration of policy they felt, judging by their comments as outlined in a further brief, that many of the hon. 
gentleman’s statements were unclear, and this being the case they have for the time being drawn their own conclusions. At 
Mr. Brown’s request back in January, 1963, the Canadian Petroleum Association presented proposals to promote the 
exploration for natural gas in this province. Now the proposals were, in short, that the government create a market for gas by 
permitting gas export or barring this the S.P.C. should offer a competitive price for gas. Secondly, one of the major deterrents 
to natural gas exploration is that the S.P.C. does not give sufficient consideration to the economic requirements of the 
producers, nor would the S.P.C. bargain as an earnest purchaser on a competitive market. The Canadian Petroleum 
Association strongly objected to the Department of Mineral Resources ordering and insisting on the conservation of oil field 
gas where such projects were uneconomical. It appeared that the S.P.C. is pessimistic regarding the future of gas in 
Saskatchewan and this is borne out by its present policies. As my friend from Saltcoats would say, ―typical socialist 
planning‖. 
 
A few additional requests considered by the Association for the necessary incentives follow. First, meeting the purchase price 
offered by other purchasers in western Canada. Canadian Petroleum Association feels, as do all free enterprisers, that the 
attitude of the S.P.C. in its dealings with industry has had detrimental effect on industry’s desire to explore Saskatchewan. If 
the concept of government monopoly were moved and producers could expect the same price from the S.P.C. as they could 
get by exporting natural gas, then the search for gas would most certainly commence. A very important request by the C.P.A. 
is as follows and I quote from their brief: 
 

To ensure that both industry and the Saskatchewan Power Corporation bargain in good faith, provision should be made in 
the general pricing policy for either party to have recourse to arbitration should they so desire. The purpose of such 
arbitration would be to interpret the corporation’s general pricing policies and how it is should be applied to any source of 
gas. It is suggested that the procedure on such arbitration be that each party appoint an arbitrator and the arbitrator so 
appointed select a third person to serve as chairman on the board of arbitration, and if the two arbitrators cannot agree on an 
appointment of a chairman, provision should be made for the appointment of a chairman by the Chief Justice of 
Saskatchewan. The decision of the majority of the board of arbitration would be binding on both parties. 

 
As I pointed out last year the Canadian Petroleum Association is composed of responsible men who have consideration for 
this province at heart, as well as that of the natural gas and petroleum industry. They have made suggestions in various briefs 
and correspondence with this government.



 

February 28, 1964 
 

 
479 

All that remains now is for the minister to get down to business and get his colleagues to ratify a firm gas policy with the men 
with the exploration dollar and stagnation would turn into handsome remuneration for our treasury. For example, Alberta 
where bids have been thrown open to gas exports or free enterprise purchasing, we find that in 1962, natural gas royalties 
netted that province $7,100,000. Compare this during the same period to $127,000 in Saskatchewan. Another interesting 
statistic is that in 1962-63 oil royalties in Alberta were some $14,000,000, gas royalties were some 17 per cent of oil royalties. 
While here in Saskatchewan oil royalties totalled some $10,000,000 and gas royalties amounted to .9 per cent of oil royalties. 
 
The total amount of revenues in 1962 in Alberta, including Crown Lease Sales and royalties etc. was $119,000,000 compared 
to Saskatchewan’s total for the same period of some $20,800,000. As I said before and I’ll say it again, what Saskatchewan 
needs is a change. Not only in oil and gas policies, Mr. Speaker, but a change in government to get the necessary financial 
interests to come in and explore for natural gas. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. MacDougall: — The good reason for the optimism in the petroleum industry mentioned in the budget speech, I would 
suggest, no doubt will be in a Liberal administration of a good sound businessman at its head in the person of Ross Thatcher. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. MacDougall: — I will not support the motion. 
 

Mr. D.T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate at this time, I want to 
associate myself with the remarks of other speakers in this house in paying compliments to those members of this legislature 
who are voluntarily retiring. I want especially to pay tribute to my colleague from Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) who has over 
the years endeared himself to the hearts of all the people in this area and especially to members in this legislature, and I am 
sure that because of his effective work in the past, that his successor will take his place in this legislature after the next 
election, Mr. Speaker, not on this side of the house, but on the right hand side. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. McFarlane: — Mr. Speaker, in this debate we are being asked to deal with a program of deriving revenues and spending 
those revenues supposedly to provide or maintain services that would be in the best interests of developing this province to 
the greatest benefit of the people now and in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am going to be as critical of this budget as I have been on other budgets in the past. This program of collecting 
and spending will not develop this province any more than programs in the past. Once again this budget points out the fact 
that services rendered for the benefit of our people will not come from the development of our resources, but instead from the 
hard earned dollars of our tax payers. This is the largest tax notice ever sent to the people of Saskatchewan. Never in the 
history of our nation has so much been extracted from so few for so little. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. McFarlane: — Mr. Speaker, having listened to the Provincial Treasurer and members opposite who have spoken when 
they gloss over this negative program in glowing superlatives, it leaves the impression that they are trying to outdo Cassius 
Clay in self glorification. Mr. Speaker, members of this government have been trying to convince the tax payers that the 
people have never had it so good, that there are no depressed areas in our society, that there is no unemployment, that because 
of fabulous industrialization, everyone is living in a modern utopia. Well knowing the antics of the members of this NDP 
government over 20 long years, especially in the art of propaganda, I thought we had better search out the facts. 
 
Reviewing the budget, Mr. Speaker, and checking how and where the money is to be spent, the first item that struck me was 
the tremendous proposed expenditure for social aid of approximately $13,000,000. Mr. Speaker, surely if conditions are as 
buoyant as this government would have



 

February 28, 1964 
 

 
480 

us believe, and if everyone is enjoying the abundant living we were promised four years ago, and if Saskatchewan people 
never had it so good, why then must we have an area in our society that this government has not been able to provide work 
for? Why must we still have the lack of opportunities for every person to enjoy a measure of health and peace of mind, to take 
his place in society and share in the production and development of the resources of our province for the common good? Mr. 
Speaker, it is a tragedy that in these times, $13,000,000 is to be voted for social aid. It is true the treasury will be reimbursed 
by the tax payers of $7,500,000. Mr. Speaker, I am in favour of social services for the people of our province, but I am in 
favour of paying for these services by the development of the resources of our province. Apparently this is not the policy of 
the socialists. They believe in establishing these services at a price far and beyond the ability of the people to pay for them. 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest many of our citizens must seek financial help because this government’s price to set up to develop our 
main resources and monies allocated accordingly. In this budget as in former NDP budgets this is not the case. For example, 
agriculture is the basic industry in this province. Today, we are being asked to approve a budget where we only find some 
$10,000,000 devoted to our main basic industry. Compare that with $13,000,000 devoted for social aid. Then for municipal 
roads in this province we find only $7,000,000 as compared to $13,000,000 for social aid. And for mineral resources, for the 
development of our second basic industry in this province, the production of the mineral wealth, we find that only the 
insignificant sum of $1,750,000 is devoted to develop the mineral resource of the whole province. Natural resources – we are 
lead to believe that we are deriving a great wealth from the natural resources – and then we find in order to stimulate and 
promote this resource, only $7,000,000 had been devoted towards this item, in comparison with the $13,000,000 devoted 
towards this item, in comparison with the $13,000,000 devoted towards social aid. And so let’s look at the record a little 
further. The government’s direct share of social aid this year is $7,500,000, the government’s direct share for maintaining all 
agricultural services is $5,000,000 or $2,250,000 less than for social aid. 
 
The government’s direct share for capital expenditure in agriculture $4,800,000, $2,750,000 less than for social aid. And this, 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you, points out this program of socialism, it points to the reason why we have not had in this 
province the type of development of our resources we should have had. The day has come when we must get out and develop 
the natural wealth of our province and see to it that this wealth is used to provide the services that our people so richly 
deserve. Compare a program of that type to the one we have today, where the largest revenue part of the budget is derived out 
of the taxpayer’s pocket. Mr. Speaker, this policy must stop and will stop when the Premier has the courage to invite the 
people to the polls as soon as possible, in order that they may give their decision. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. McFarlane: — I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, what is going on in this province in the way of spending the 
revenues they’re deriving from the people. First I want to deal with the highway policies of the government at the present 
time. I want to indicate to you and to members of this house, where and how they are spending and how they’re not spending 
the money that should be going into the highway and grid road programs in this province. 
 
Now let’s look at the gas tax. Certainly every cent in the tax should go towards the construction of highways and grid roads. 
This year, by way of the gasoline tax, this government is going to take in $30,750,000 and for the motor vehicle license tax, 
they’re taking in another $9,250,000. Adding these up, Mr. Speaker, we arrive at a figure of some $40,000,000 from these 
two taxes alone. But what is their capital expenditure on highways? Sixteen point six million of dollars and their ordinary 
expenditures for highways $10,000,000 making a total expenditure of $25,500,000 roughly out of $40,000,000 in revenue. 
The total for administering and construction of highways – pardon me, Mr. Speaker, before I give that figure I want to include 
the grid road system because certainly some of this tax revenue should go towards the constructing and the maintenance of the 
grid road system in this province. Mr. Speaker, all we can find in the estimates for the year under review to be allocated 
towards the grid road program is a mere $7,000,000 and so adding the highway program and the grid road program, we find 
that after taking in $40,000,000 in revenue, all they are providing in the way of services to the people is some $33,500,000. 
Yes, in addition to DNR, you look up the Department of Natural Resources and you’ll see an insignificant figure for highways 
and road construction. And I wouldn’t mention the figure in this house if I were you, because I think it only amounts to 
$695,000.



 

February 28, 1964 
 

 
481 

This is the only year this article is for: 
 

In Saskatchewan there were $21,300,000 chartered bank loans; it is estimated that the banks loaned farmers $3.00 for every 
$2.00 the Farm Improvement Loans Act does. Using this base, it was estimated Saskatchewan farmers in 1961 would 
receive through the banks $28,000,000. 
The Veterans Land Act: in the fiscal year 1962-63 the Veterans Land Act loaned some $3,800,000. And now provincial 
government loans . . . 

 
This is most interesting, Mr. Speaker, in that it draws a comparison between the types of legislation and the results in 
Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and Alberta over a comparative period of time. In Alberta, since the legislation was introduced in 
1957, 2,150 loans totalling $17,500,000 have been made. In Manitoba in the years 1960 to 1962, farmers received 1,349 
loans, which totalled for $14,600,000. In Saskatchewan since 1959, only 591 loans totalling $6,000,000. If these figures point 
out one startling fact, it is the fact that legislation set up by this NDP government is just not practical or acceptable to the 
farmers of this province. It has not solved the credit problems of the farmer, in fact I suggest this government should be 
ashamed of its record. 
 
The Department of Co-operation which administers the act must be ashamed as witnessed by their annual report for the 
current year, because the only place I have been able to find this information was in their 140 page report. It was so 
embarrassing that the only reference to be found among all the government records is on page 83 of the said report under the 
Co-operative Trust Company Limited. Here we find two little sentences which read: 
 
 The company administered the Family Farm Act, having approved 591 loans for a total value of $6,133,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they were so ashamed, they were too ashamed to add the words ―Since 1959‖. Mr. Speaker, this evidence proves 
that here’s another so-called agricultural policy of this NDP government that has failed to sustain our farmers in our basic 
industry of agriculture. 
 
The Provincial Treasurer having conveniently hid the Family Farm Credit Act beyond the sunset, wet his finder, pointed to 
the horizon and said, ―We see a need for different type of Credit‖. He called it ―Rehabilitation Credit‖. Mr. Speaker, in view 
of this government’s record in the credit field, especially in respect to the farming industry, it is indeed doubtful if any new 
version they many have will be any more acceptable or successful than those they have had in the past. 
 
The budget speech says the government has been particularly concerned about the province’s smaller farmers. Well, it’s about 
time they become concerned. After 20 years of CCF-NDP government, by the Minister of Agriculture’s own admission, 
50,000 farmers have been driven off the land. The minister says it is because of the cost price squeeze, I suggest this 
government must take a full share of the blame for the added costs of production. They have allowed land taxes to go up by 4 
times, increased the sales tax by 2½ times, increased the gasoline tax, in fact they have allowed increase in 600 items, plus 
finding 600 more new ways of increasing cost of services. All of which have reflected on the lack of ability of the smaller unit 
to continue under this pressure . . . 
 

Hon. Mr. Kuziak (Minister of Mineral Resources): — How about the Liberal provinces? 
 

Mr. McFarlane: — Certainly this government is responsible more than any other for creating this condition. In the budget 
before us what definite steps are taken to stop this trend? That is what is most important now. Well, it says the hardship 
caused by the people moving off the farms can be made easier by appropriate education and welfare programs. What 
educational and welfare programs? How ridiculous can they get? Mr. Speaker, these are not young people who are leaving the 
farms, because under this government’s policy or lack of policy, the young people couldn’t get establishing on the farms. Mr. 
Speaker, most of these 50,000 people who have left the farms are people who have worked, sacrificed, and sweated out the 
best years of their lives trying to raise a family, make a living and own their own land, and after years of these conditions are 
not too much interested in 



 

February 28, 1964 
 

 
482 

educational programs the NDP government might have. They have been accustomed to work, and it is work they want. 
Unfortunately, as borne out by the records, too many have not been successful in finding that work in this province, and have 
gone to other areas of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the educational part of the program certainly hasn’t been successful so that only leaves the suggested welfare 
part of the program. Mr. Speaker, the government certainly can’t boast about its welfare program in this regard. If these 
displaced farm men and women find themselves in the financial position many other senior citizens in this province are in, 
they may apply for a supplementary allowance to universal old age pension. This charitable government may give them an 
allowance of some $2.50 a month subject to a means test, provided they do not have any more than a $1,000 or thereabouts in 
cash assets for a single person. This is the ―new horizons‖ for the farmers forced off the land at the rate the Minister of 
Agriculture has stated is now 2000 per year. 
 
Then the Provincial Treasurer mentioned the feasibility study of the Saskatchewan River Delta area, which was to be part of 
the great new horizon for agriculture. The budget speech states that the budget contains provision for the commencement 
(mind you, the commencement) of a feasibility study of the Saskatchewan River Delta area. The implication here is to leave 
the impression that vast new lands will be opened up immediately for farming, but let’s look at the statements and see what 
will actually happen. All they are doing is taking 14 personnel out of the Saskatchewan River Irrigation Branch reducing that 
expenditure from $153,000 to $38,620 and setting up these personnel under the Saskatchewan River Delta survey at a cost of 
$150,000. All this group is to do is to see if it is feasible to develop this area for agricultural development. Certainly this is not 
putting a 5 cent piece in the farmers’ pockets for this year. We have no quarrel with the principle of establishing committees 
to do this type of research, what we do condemn this government for is that they are twenty years too late, they should have 
done this long before they tried to settle veterans in the Carrot River Delta years ago. It would have prevented years of 
hardship, frustration and defeat suffered by these veterans as a result of the mishandling of the whole affair by this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest there is a vital need for land acquisition, utilization and development in this province and especially at 
the present time because land values are too high. They are too high for young people starting in farming to raise the 
necessary cash and assets in order to purchase what land is available. All available arable land in the province has long since 
been acquired. The only alternative now for farmers to acquire a larger cultivated acreage is to utilize what at present is 
non-productive land within their own holdings. 
 
This is not a factor in the wide open plains, but certainly is in the vast areas of park land of this province. Many acres of land 
could have been cleared of bush and scrub and broken ready to produce crops, much low land could be drained, broken and 
sown to sorage crops to sustain livestock. This would allow thousands of farmers to utilize land they now have and by 
diversification and intensification add immeasurably to increasing their economic position. Many farmers in the province who 
have the financial resources are doing this at the present time; many other farmers who have the necessary assets can obtain 
loans from established sources to make this investment and they are doing so. However, the group of farmers who need this 
type of program most are unable to take advantage of it due to restricted capital and assets. 
 
This points up the need for a program whereby a farmer could make arrangements to have a project of sufficient size 
approved where it was deemed feasible to do so. A program should be devised whereby the farmer could apply to have his 
project investigated, costs of the project estimated, the work contracted for, and if approved, be able to obtain the necessary 
financing arrangements through an established loaning agency, the loans guaranteed to that agency against loss by the 
government under the same policy as the federal farm improvement loans which have been so popular with the farmers across 
Canada during the past years. With careful and efficient administration, Mr. Speaker, a program of this type would do much 
to strengthen the economic base of many of the farmers of this province. Now is the most opportune time for a program of this 
nature, when there is heavy demand for cereal grains at the highest prices for years, when there is an ever increasing demand 
for livestock products. The success of the program and the benefit to the farmers would be the fact that a large acreage could 
be reclaimed and utilized by getting the land producing and so enabling the venture to pay for itself through immediate 
production. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have drawn your attention to what I think are some of the serious errors and omissions in the speech by the 
Provincial Treasurer. 
 



 

February 28, 1964 
 

 
483 

Let’s review again, Mr. Speaker, gas tax $30,700,000, total highway and grid road program $34,000,000; this leaves a deficit 
of $4,000,000 but they received $9,250,000 from automobile and truck licenses and drivers’ licenses and other fees. This 
revenue should be allotted to the highway and grid road program, if it had been, this would have given a total revenue of 
$40,000,000 they would have $6,000,000 over and above what has been allocated to highway construction, grid road 
maintenance and construction etc. Now where did the $6,000,000 go? I can tell you some places it should have gone and 
people in my constituency have been trying to tell the minister for years, where some of this $6,000,000 should have gone. 
The minister may smile, I know he’s a very pleasant fellow, but after the announcement of his highway program yesterday, I 
suggest that when these delegations come back to see him, he had better have a little bit more than a smile. 
 
It would appear by these figures that I have mentioned, that the government has collected $40,000,000 in revenue, to finance 
a $34,000,000 program and in effect have charged $6,000,000 commission for their services. In other words, the taxpayers of 
this province paid $40,000,000 for $34,000,000 in service. But when the taxpayers realize that out of the $40,000,000 total, 
only approximately $23,000,000 is for the maintenance and new constructions of highways and grid roads, then the figure is 
much more alarming. Forty million dollars will be paid for the taxpayers for a $23,000,000 worth of maintenance and 
construction. Here again is evidence of overtaxation. Here again is evidence that his government could have reduced the 
license or gas tax fees to the roads and highways to match the amount in revenue collected. But no, they want to continue on 
as they have in the past, in their policy of tax and gouge the people of this province thinking that they the government is more 
capable of spending the individual hard-earned dollars than the people are themselves. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. McFarlane: — Before passing this item, Mr. Speaker, I am going to tell the Minister of Highways that when people 
from my area of the province and the Estevan area of the province come into see him with their delegation in the future, he 
had better let them know that there was $6,000,000 unaccounted for in this budget, and when the delegations come in the 
future as they have in past, asking that that portion of No. 47 highway which was taken out of the highway system of this 
province by this government be put back in, then maybe he should give them consideration and see that this is done 
immediately, because here is an area of the province that takes in four municipalities; Tecumseh, Golden West, Chester and 
Wolseley. In the case of the Tecumseh municipality, they are now deriving revenues from oil and the people in that area have 
to provide the road services. The construction and the maintenance of this grid road gives you the revenues derived from the 
oil that they’re not even returning back to that municipality. And then in the case of the Chester municipality on numerous 
occasions these people have come to see if that portion of road could be put back in the highway system, and they have every 
reason to come back to the minister, because on two occasions in 1956, the Premier of the day, Mr. Douglas and the Minister 
of Highways at that day, promised that it would be taken and put back into the highway system. I understand that the secretary 
of that municipality has two letters to that effect, and so, Mr. Speaker, when they come to the minister for this consideration, 
he should tell them that he has the $6,000,000 and that they rightly deserve having that portion of road put back into the 
highway system. On behalf of the municipality of Golden West, certainly they have a case if any municipality ever had a case 
because Mr. Speaker, here is one municipality that hasn’t got one inch of highway within its boundaries. And much talk has 
been made by members opposite in regards to rail line abandonment. If they were to lose the railway they have there at the 
present time, then they would not even have an inch of railway in their municipality and so, their need for a road is of the 
utmost importance. Then in regards to Wolseley municipality, they have to come in on these delegations, because when the 
CPR pulled up the Wolseley-Reston Line some years ago, many of those people had to go to different town for shopping, 
hauling out their livestock and hauling their grain. And so the municipality there again is charged with the maintenance of a 
road which they can’t afford to keep up, and so, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to the minister that over the weekend he go 
down and drive over this road and come back and call in these delegations and say that he will take this portion of road and 
put it back in the highway system, as it should be. 
 
And then when the people from No. 33 highway or the people from Stoughton to Francis come up on the delegation, he 
should assure them that that portion of the road will be oiled as of this coming summer, because there is one of the most 
dangerous sections of the highway in the province of Saskatchewan, a highway that leads directly into the setting sun in the 
summer months and people have great difficulty in driving due to dust and 



 

February 28, 1964 
 

 
484 

narrow conditions of the highway. And then of course we have that portion of what should be No. 35 highway from Francis to 
the Trans-Canada, and I’m sure that the minister is well acquainted with the needs of the people there, and I am surprised that 
the member for Lumsden (Mr. Thurston) hasn’t been able to have the influence in the government circles to see that that 
portion of grid road has been put into the highway system. And then of course, Mr. Speaker, I am going to warn you what’s 
going to happen in the regard to No. 16 highway. You know that the Wolseley-Reston Line was pulled up some years ago and 
you know that all the services to the people in that area must be now by truck. You also know that much of that portion of No. 
16 highways that serves that area, was constructed in most unfavourable years. These people certainly need some attention to 
that portion of highway. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, having pointed out that there are $6,000,000 not accounted for, surely, they will be more sympathetic 
when these delegations come in to see them about highways and grid roads. 
 
And while I am dealing with grid roads, I want to say this; mention has been made of the 12,000 mile network of grid roads 
and this provision is made in the budget in order that municipalities may complete their individual portions of that program. 
The budget states provision is made to make loans to speed up the completion of the project. Let us turn again to the estimates 
to obtain the facts, because the people are being left with misconception. Under the Municipal Road Assistance Authority we 
find that in comparison with last year, not one dollar more will be spent on the market road grid. Not one dollar more will be 
spent for grants for gravelling grid roads, in spite of the fact that they’ve taken the highest revenues out of the people in this 
province in all history. Not one dollar more for assistance for bridges on market road grid. Not one dollar more for assistance 
for municipal bridges. Not one dollar more for market roads in local improvement districts. Only a meagre $15,000 increase 
for equalization grants. We find that after having overtaxed the people of this province to the tune of some $40,000,000 of 
which the farmers of this province have contributed far more than their share, they receive this type of discrimination from 
these so-called friends of the farmer. Mr. Speaker, this NDP government never was and never will be a party for the farmers 
or the rural people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. McFarlane: — The Provincial Treasurer in his speech had the audacity to state that this is the agricultural horizon which 
we in Saskatchewan are moving towards. When he mentioned the grid road program, he qualified by saying this is the 
agricultural horizon which we in Saskatchewan are moving toward. A most significant statement made by the Provincial 
Treasurer was that this budget makes provision for loans to accelerate the completion of the grid road network. I suggest that 
this is because of the fact that the federal Liberal government set aside some $20,000,000 so that the municipalities could 
utilize this money to carry out improved projects within their municipality. This has been a most popular piece of legislation, 
enacted by a federal Liberal government. The tremendous demand for portions of this fund by the municipalities testified to 
its popularity. 
 
What is being done in this present year to try and sustain our agricultural industry? The Provincial Treasurer has not provided 
any assurance that any universal provincial plan for the extending of credit to farmers, on low interest terms and on extended 
periods of time, will be provided. He states that the Federal Farm Credit Corporation and the Farm Improvement Loans Act 
provided the major sources of credit. Strange, Mr. Speaker, that no mention was made of the Family Farm Credit Act. This 
omission was significant, as farmers were lead to believe that when this act was passed in 1959, that it was to be the solution 
to the problem of getting young people established in farming. What are the facts? It is interesting to check into the use being 
made by the farmers of Saskatchewan of various credit facilities available to them. An interesting resume and comparison was 
carried in an article in the Western Producer of December 19, 1963, and it states: 
 

The federal government’s Farm Loan Credit Corporation leads in the long term loan field. The figure for the 12 month 
period ending March 1963, for loans for Saskatchewan under this legislation was $22,400,000. It also predicted that in the 
1963-64 fiscal year this figure would be increased by 25 to 30 per cent. This would give an estimated projected figure of 
$28,000,000. 

 Farm Improvement Loans, under federal legislation for 1961 . . . 
 



 

February 28, 1964 
 

 
485 

insofar as it pertains to our agricultural industry. It is most disappointing that there is no evidence of any new tangible 
programs to be put into effect this year. Except for rearranging of cost of items it is the same old program we have had for 
years. Were it not for an increase in one item, namely their commitment to the federal government under the South 
Saskatchewan River project, there would not be any increase in services rendered to the people. 
 
Here we have the highest revenue budget, the highest expenditure budget in the history of the province, and the services and 
needs of our basic industry are again relegated to the bottom of the list. Our basic and most important industry is to be 
allocated to a mere 4.8 per cent of a $214,000,000 budget. Is it any wonder then that this NDP government is not obtaining 
any support among the farm people of this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 

Hon. I.C. Nollet (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Hays is complaining . . . 
 

Mr. McFarlane: — The Minister of Agriculture says the federal cabinet minister, the Minister of Agriculture is complaining 
about the same thing, but I want to assure this Minister of Agriculture that Mr. Hays is intending to do something about it, and 
he is going across the length and breadth of this nation telling the people what must be done if agriculture is to survive in the 
years ahead, and I hope, Mr. Speaker, that maybe the provincial minister will take a leaf from his book and maybe he will be 
as interested in seeing that this is done within the confines of the provincial government in the not too distant future, but I’m 
afraid that his days are numbered, and this will be the last chance he will ever have of accepting this obligation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Party has always maintained and still maintains that if we are to have a high degree of economic 
buoyancy in this province, as in this nation, we must have the freest possible trade with all the nations of the world, who are 
willing trade with us. I would point out that a great deal of the buoyant economy we have at the present time is due to these 
policies. The tremendous achievements by the present government in Ottawa in this respect during recent months has been 
very instrumental in giving the people of Canada and Saskatchewan the buoyant economy we are now enjoying. I am going to 
give credit to our federal Minister of Trade and Commerce. The tremendous job being done by the Hon. Mitchell Sharp, 
Minister of Trade and Commerce, indicates even more prosperous days are ahead for everyone. 
 
Because agriculture has been and is still the basic industry in Saskatchewan, this can only mean future prosperity for everyone 
in this province. Bold, imaginative programs must be adopted to make our Saskatchewan economy even greater in the days 
ahead. The platform presented by the Liberal Party indicates that we can bring in industry, that we can create new jobs, and 
that we will expand the agricultural industry, trade freely with all the nations that will trade with us and make Saskatchewan 
the supermarket of the world. Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude by reminding the members of the legislature and the people of 
Saskatchewan of this: I have stated on many occasions that this government has not given agriculture its fair share of 
budgetary allocations. Now I am going to suggest that people of the province are going to remember this along with the other 
many various items that have been brought to your attention by my colleagues on this side of the house. 
 
Now I am going to suggest that because of these reasons, Mr. Speaker, after the Premier has the courage to call the people to 
the polls, whenever he does, we will be sitting on your right. I’m sorry that you won’t be there, but we will be sitting on the 
right of the speaker, and we will be giving the people of this province the type of government they so richly deserve. I base 
my reasons on this: We, the people, remember the avowed policy of the socialists to not rest content until capitalism is 
eradicated, and we remember the statements of the former Premier and Provincial Treasurer in regard to the municipal men of 
this province at the provincial-municipal conference in 1956; we remember their attitude to the people of this province in their 
attempt to bring in the original medicare act; we remember the way they attempted to bring in the county system immediately 
after the last election; and I suggest, Mr. Speaker, it is still a sleeping giant ready to pounce upon the municipal system of this 
province should they win the forthcoming election. 
 
We remember the attitude of the Premier towards members of this house last session when he closed down the house rather 
than accept our criticism. We know a great ―new horizon‖ leading to the freedom of a new Saskatchewan will only be 
accomplished by the resounding defeat when they have the courage to call the people to the polls. The people of this 



 

February 28, 1964 
 

 
486 

province remember the agricultural policy proclaimed by the CCF-NDP party at its birth. They remember the use-lease 
program, where the state would own the land an the farmer was to be a tenant of the state; and they remember, listen to this, 
Mr. Speaker, and I am going to tell you this for your benefit, and they remember the words of Mr. Winch, when he said in 
effect, ―We (meaning the state) don’t necessarily have to own the land as long as we can control the means of production and 
marketing of goods to farmer producers‖. And so, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure it is abundantly clear to you that I will, at this time, 
as I have done in so many times in the past, oppose this motion trying to set up a program of socialism in this province. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Ross A. McCarthy (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, when I rise to take part in this debate and probably make my last 
speech, if you are generous enough to call it that, I know this will probably be the last opportunity that I will have in 
addressing this assembly. I first want to thank the people of the Cannington constituency for their friendship, their 
co-operation, their advice, and their returning me in four different elections. 
 
Now looking back over it I wonder how I won the first by-election. It always has been a mystery to me, because I was 
certainly quite green in off the pasture; I had had some municipal experience but I had never tried to make a political speech. 
In the little town of Carlyle down there which is about the centre of our constituency, two months before the election, the CCF 
moved in and took over the whole bottom of a new store. It must have been about this size I would think, and they took over 
one flat of the hotel, which is a pretty fair-sized building. They kept about five people in this office and they kept – there are 
about 70 polls – they kept seven people there, either elected ministers or elected members for two months. They got there a 
little ahead of time. I think if I remember right there was some little confusion about the date of the election and they got their 
apparatus set up a little too soon, but at any rat they continued it on and I – there are some people here in this house who were 
down there and some who are gone – think the only reason I won it, one reason I won it was because of this organization and 
the fact that they were offering $200,000 road grants in Cannington providing you voted CCF. 
 
Well the people didn’t vote CCF and $200,000 in road construction in 1949 was a lot of money, but the people of Cannington 
demonstrated that they couldn’t be bought by that kind of tactics and I think they also demonstrated that it went a little against 
the grain to have a bunch of people running around that constituency in such great numbers, telling them how they should 
vote. They are a funny bunch down there you know. They have an idea they know how they want to vote and they don’t want, 
especially some younger fellows running around there telling them how to vote. They had it well organized. They had seven 
men for 70 polls, which meant each man had 10 polls, and the prize plum of it all was that a gentleman who is a cabinet 
minister, he is not here now, was drawing votes to a particular country poll the day of the election. Well the boys told me 
afterwards that he drew a lot of Liberal votes and by adding up the score before and since, it is quite evident that was what he 
was doing. But he was there the day of the election. Since then I always gave that gentleman and two or three others who are 
gone, when I had the opportunity, a very cordial invitation to come down and help me win in Cannington again. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. McCarthy: — But we manage to win Cannington the last time without any assistance. In fact, since that election they 
haven’t given me very much assistance; they don’t too often send to many people down there to assist me to get elected. The 
odd one runs in for a meeting and out again. I’m not too sure, but I think my good friend and neighbor, the lady member for 
Saskatoon (Mrs. Strum) was attempting to help me a little. She did help elect me, she didn’t’ do it intentionally but . . . 
 

Mrs. Gladys Strum (Saskatoon): — On a point of privilege, I was teaching . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! ORDER! 
 

Mr. McCarthy: — I’ll take the lady’s word for it, but from memory, I think she was doing a little electioneering. 
 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Teachers have spare hours. 
 



 

February 28, 1964 
 

 
487 

Mr. McCarthy: — So much for the by-election. Now I would like to say at this time that there has been quite a bit of 
confusion and quite a bit of false propaganda going on as to why I am quitting at this time. There has been a lot of talk, in fact 
someone had the nerve to put it in the paper; they didn’t say they thought, they said as a matter of fact I was quitting because I 
couldn’t get along with our leader Mr. Thatcher. Of course, they don’t peddle that down in Cannington; they know better. I 
stated my position down there and we have them pretty well trained so they stay out of Cannington, but they did peddle it all 
over the province and it appeared in the paper and I forget who it was that mailed it over, that that was the reason. They 
didn’t’ say they suspected it was the reason or anything else, they said it was the reason. 
 
I denied it when I got time but to keep the record straight, I want to assure you and this house, Mr. Speaker, that that wasn’t a 
consideration in my deciding to quit. I had other considerations that are quite valid, I had every confidence in our leader, he 
has put this Liberal party on the road . . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. McCarthy: — Don’t get excited boys – on the road to victory, and you will find it out, and the only thing you don’t like 
about it is that he has reorganized this party and he just lives for it. Nobody else, in my memory and I have been connected 
with this party for a great number of years, over 40, has put as much into the party as our leader has, and I think that probably 
– I’m quite convinced he will be our next premier, and if he puts as much work into the government as he has put in to 
rebuilding the Liberal party in opposition, why we have nothing to worry about. I am quite convinced that that is going to 
happen. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. McCarthy: — And I want to say again that that is one of the seamy side of politics when they go around and say you are 
quitting for some reason. They don’t know what they are talking about, or else they are knowingly telling an untruth. I think 
that we should have less of it. 
 
Well now, I remember in my first speech, if you want to call it a speech, I should say talk, because I don’t think I can still 
make a speech, but in my first speech in the legislature, I thanked the people on both sides of this house for the very friendly 
and cordial welcome they gave me when I entered the house in 1949, and that was in a by-election, I was quite sincere about it 
and I said at that time that I hoped that whether my stay in the house was long or short our personal relation would still be the 
same, and I am very happy today to say that I think with very few exceptions that our personal relations are good. I believe 
that I have the respect of the majority of the fellows on the other side, more than the majority . . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. McCarthy: — . . .and they have always treated me with respect. And now a tribute to the civil service of this province. 
They have always treated me well; they knew I was in opposition but they didn’t make any difference, I don’t think, in their 
service to me. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. McCarthy: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to repeat what the hon. member for Wilkie (Mr. Horsman) said the other day. 
It is surprising the change in government in a short space of fifteen years. Fifteen years is a relatively short space, but if my 
adding it up is right, there are only five members on the other side of the house who are apt to be here after the next election 
that were here in 1949. You are laughing out of turn; you are trying to create something. There are only three members on this 
side of the house who are apt to be here, remember I say apt, because politics is a slippery game, I say apt over there, but 
there are only three members on this side of the house who are apt to be here after the next election and in a house of this size 
I think it is a pretty rapid turn-over of membership. I don’t know how it compares with the dominion, but certainly that is a 
rapid turn-over in my opinion. 
 



 

February 28, 1964 
 

 
488 

Now I have made many personal friends during my duties as a member, and I value those friendships very, very much. They 
are not necessarily all Liberals. There are a great many people in my constituency who haven’t voted for me who I call 
personal friends, and I appreciate those friendships. But there are two sides to politics; there is one where you make a lot of 
personal friends; it is an education; you meet a lot of people and it is really a pleasure to work with the. But there is the other 
side of politics, unfortunately, and I regret it. I think any thinking person regrets it, and it is far too prevalent. It is too 
prevalent in both parties and that is what I choose to call the seamy side of politics, where people go out and for a short 
advantage misrepresent what his opposition member has said. They construe a difference, and they go so far as to impute 
improper motives. 
 
Now I don’t mind if you fellows over they say I’m crazy, you may be right; I don’t mind if you say I’m stupid, you still may 
be right, but when you impugn my honesty, or my integrity, why then I object. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. McCarthy: — There is far too much of this in all parties, and there is nothing in my opinion that so satisfies the 
Communities as to have responsible members degrading their counterpart on either side of the house. I don’t think there is 
anything that hurts democracy any more than to have people consider that because you are a member of a particular party, you 
are a shyster or something worse. Those things are done and I think that everybody in political life, irrespective of the party, 
should be much more careful. I don’t mind going into the battle of political life and taking my changes; I’m Irish; I enjoy a 
spat; but I think it does the things I said it will do, but I think it also prevents a great many people who are good citizens from 
running in political life, because they see the abuse, the personal abuse, the unreasonable abuse, and sometimes the untrue 
abuse of the sitting member, and I just want to leave that thought with you. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. McCarthy: — Now I hadn’t intended to say anything political at all in this deal, but there was a couple of thoughts come 
to me and I want to just say a few words before I sit down. The first one is a few years ago we had this province on our license 
plates ―The Wheat Province‖ or something like that, I just forget how it went, but for some reason or other, somebody had the 
bright idea that we were growing out of that stage, and we were going to become a province that wasn’t entirely dependent on 
wheat. Well, I don’t care who it is or where they come from, I said before, and I will repeat it again, that as long as there is a 
Saskatchewan, at least in our lifetime, our principal product will be wheat. Well now it is true, we have built up our other 
resources, but there is no single product in Saskatchewan has any chance of catching wheat, and I think that I would like to 
see ―The Wheat Province‖ on the license plates again. All the states in the union have something like this, Minnesota has the 
―The State of 1000 Lakes‖ and others have this and that, and I object to it being taken off. It was taken off and certainly this 
last two years have proven that it shouldn’t have been taken off, and I think the years ahead will justify designating our 
province as a wheat province. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. McCarthy: — Now the other thing that I wanted to mention was with regard to grid roads, and my friend the Minister of 
Municipal Affairs isn’t over there, I’m rather sorry about that, but I was going to suggest to him that when he is looking 
around to see where he should spend a little more money on grid roads that he should take in that portion of the road that was 
mentioned by the member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. McFarlane). He did a pretty good job of it; I’m not going to enlarge on it very 
much except to say this: that is one of the few municipalities that hasn’t a mile of highway in it. One of the few, I think there 
are a few. There is a very great possibility that we have a road going down there – it runs 18 miles – a very great possibility 
that piece will be taken up and we could be probably the only municipality in Saskatchewan that has neither highway or 
railway accommodation. 
 
We have correspondence signed by officials of the government in 1956. When the political climate got pretty hot, the Premier 
went down there and made a deal. I’m not going to go into all the sorry aspects of the deal, I know them all, I’m not proud of 
them and I’m not going to say, except that when it was washed out, we did not get our highway 47. We have correspondence 
saying that he would pay 80 per cent of the cost and the 



 

February 28, 1964 
 

 
489 

municipality would pay 20 per cent and that it would be taken in the highway system, at the very earliest opportunity. Now we 
have those things, I’m not going to go into the messy side of it, the things he did down there, but it was purely political, and I 
think probably the present minister knows about it. 
 
I would say this, that that 18 miles they took out, probably never was in, in 1947. They took it away from that municipality, 
gave them 18 miles less of grid road that should always have been provincial highway, and they are in real difficulty now 
because they have school centres there, and need that 18 miles to bring the children, not only from that municipality, but from 
the adjoining municipality who likewise have no highway and no railroad, and I’m sorry the Minister of Municipal Affairs 
isn’t in his seat, but I hope that the Minister of Highways, who isn’t paying any attention, maybe he will read it in the paper or 
something. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to close by quoting a quote that is in the old fourth reader and it goes, from memory, 
something like this 
 
 There is so much bad in the best of us, 
 And so little good in the rest of us, 
 That it ill behooves any of us 
 To speak evil of the rest of us. 
 
I think that if all politicians would read that once in a while we would have a better political climate. Thank you. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. James E. Snedker (Saltcoats): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this budget debate, I do wish briefly to touch 
upon three unrelated, but I think pertinent subjects. I noticed in the estimates that our liquor revenues are going to be up again 
by a considerable sum this year. This is a department of the government which fails under the supervision and jurisdiction of 
the Premier of the province and once again I would like to draw to his attention, as I brought it to his attention before, that 
people who worked on the liquor warehouse down town four years ago are still short their wages. I told him this before and 
apparently nothing has been done about it. 
 
It is all very well to blame the prime contractor, and the sub-contractor, and a run-around of that nature, but I don’t think that 
this is good enough, because the government should have had and I am informed they did have a hold-back of money from the 
prime contractor in order to make absolutely sure that all the wages of all the workers were paid and the wages should all have 
been paid before they released the final amounts of money held from the contractors. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, these people are workers, they work for wages, and small amounts of money mean a lot to them, it is all 
very well for ministers of the crown and high-flying socialists rolling in wealth to think the matter of $100 isn’t very much, 
but to a worker it means all, particularly if he has a wife and children to support. Once again I bring this to the attention of the 
Premier. I sincerely hope he will do something about it. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR! HEAR! 
 

Mr. Snedker: — I also wish to say a few words in regard to the Department of the Attorney General. I think he made some 
mention the other day about one-track minds, and I hope he will get this on to one particular track in his mind and give it 
some consideration. I notice that the Securities Commission has estimated it will cost $53,300.00 in the coming year to 
operate and I would suggest that he take a good long look at the activities of that department which is costing the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan so much money. 
 
Only recently, Mr. Speaker, just a couple or three years ago, we had some promoters selling shares in a cheese factory in the 
town of Melville in my constituency. They were stock salesmen all licensed by the Securities Commission to go out and sell 
stock in this thing and they sold the stock. I don’t know how much, but I think in excess of $30,000.00 worth to the farmers 
and the business people of my area and all those people ever had to show for their money was a plywood sign 2½ x 3 stuck up 
on a post outside an old power building that had been leased or optioned and it said ―The Future Home of the Melville Cheese 
Factory‖ and that is all the people ever got for $30,000.00 I would suggest that the Attorney General, when he is spending this 
$53,300 had better take a look at the activity of that department. It is significant, Mr. Speaker, that one 



 

February 28, 1964 
 

 
490 

of the salesman who was around my country selling stock in that particular cheese factory happened to be the defeated 
candidate from Qu’Appelle-Wolseley, a former CCF candidate, I think Mr. McFarlane defeated him on two different 
occasions. 
 
I would suggest to the Attorney General that he take a big, long hard look at that part of his department, and do something 
about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I regret that the Minister of Municipal Affairs isn’t in his seat, I do have a few words that I wish to say in regard 
to the proposed county system, which the government tried to force on the people a few years back. I listened to what the 
minister had to say with interest when he said that no county system be implemented until such time as the people ask for it. 
Now I presume that he would consider a resolution be passed by the Saskatchewan Association of the Rural Municipalities in 
their convention, if that resolution asked for the implementation of The County Act, he would consider that would be 
sufficient grounds to implement the county system. I went to the convention last year, Mr. Speaker, and I saw what I 
considered to be and what was, a definite attempt by the socialists to take over the whole Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities in order that by devious means they could manage to arrive at the aim which they wished to, that is the 
abolition of local self-government in our province. 
 
I think that what they endeavoured to do last year and in which they were thwarted by the people, I think that endeavour will 
be repeated again this year, possibly they will be a little better organized. 
 

An Hon. Member: — Hope not . . . 
 

Mr. Snedker: — I’m not laying too much blame at the feet of the present Minister of Municipal Affairs for that. If anybody 
wants to know where the culprit of the deal really is, he is sitting right across there – the Provincial Treasurer and I am going 
to lay the blame for the whole thing right smack dab on his doorstep where it belongs. 
 
I have too much respect for the present Minister of Municipal Affairs to doubt his word in the matter, and I have had too 
many years experience with the Provincial Treasurer. I knew him a good many years ago, in fact before some members sitting 
on the opposite side of the house remember him . . . 
 

Hon. J.H. Brockelbank (Provincial Treasurer): — I don’t’ remember you . . . 
 

Mr. Snedker: — I’m quite happy about that; the feeling is mutual. It is my personal opinion that he is about to follow his 
usual devious methods to bring about by any means possible the end that he desires. I want to draw to the attention of the 
members of this house, Mr. Speaker, that in the United States, in the states where there are counties, in those states where the 
counties are divided into wards, and where the people elect their local ward government and then later their county 
government, they have much better local government in those states than they have in the states where the county is the only 
form of local government, and where the counties are not divided into wards with local elected officials in those wards. Now I 
know that is quite true, I don’t think anybody will argue with me in that regard. For that reason and because I have lived in 
some of those areas, because I have seen what took place, I’ve probably been more vehement and as strong as I possibly could 
be, in opposition to any diminution of the rights of our local people to have their own elected forms of government, and I 
oppose most wholeheartedly any liquidation of our rural municipalities and of our smaller elected groups. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the total all-inclusive cost to the people for this socialist effort to destroy our local government and the 
county system was almost $1,500,000. Mr. Speaker, I am proud of the fact that in my area, our own people in their own way 
at no expense to anybody, did themselves, when need arose for co-ordination of local government groups, formulate and 
construct the council of Potashville for the purpose of co-ordinating local government into an effective body, thus laying the 
foundation towards securing any and all of the desirable benefits of a larger administrative unit without the destruction of any 
local self-government and without infringing in any way on the democratic rights of the people 
 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that my people have shown the way for any change that might be necessary in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Now I 



 

February 28, 1964 
 

 
491 

realize that the socialist won’t like this because this is something that they can’t control. The people themselves built it and the 
people themselves are going to control it, but I would suggest that this is the method, this is the way by which any change in 
local government should be brought about. By the people doing it themselves, and let the government keep their sticky fingers 
out of other people’s business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate Adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Walker for second reading of Bill No. 
18 – An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Evidence Act. 
 

Mr. Batten (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, I have discussed this with the hon. Attorney General and I understand that there 
will be an amendment brought in on third reading and, therefore, I have nothing further to say on it. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill to be read the second time. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
HON. MR. WALKER: Moved second reading of Bill No. 36 – An Act providing for Certain Temporary Changes in the Law 
respecting Agricultural Leaseholds. 
 
He said: 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a bill, an emergency bill, which is passed each year to permit tenants to have the right to go back on to the 
land after the 31st of December, even if their lease has been cancelled, or even if it has expired. We have had this every year, 
for the last ten or twelve years, except for the last two years, and we have heard of some instances where tenants were unable 
to market their grain in the fall, and their lease expired and it was necessary for them to go in for the purpose of removing the 
grain, the threshed grain, and so this does give them until the 1st of July to go in and remove their grain while their lease is 
expired. 
 
It is in the same form as we have passed in other years. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
HON. MR. WOOD: Moved second reading of Bill No. 31 – An Act to amend The Village Act, 1960. 
 
He said: 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bill we have before us is An Act to amend The Village Act, 1960. The bill contains a number of amendments 
to this act, none of which is believed to be controversial; many of them have been requested by the urban municipal 
association and all of this has been discussed with the urban municipal association and I think they would best be discussed in 
committee. I do, however, have to add to this Act as it is before us a house amendment. 
 
The urban municipal association has from time to time requested us that we do change the majority in regard to the debenture 
bylaws and such in the village from two-thirds to a simple majority, as is the case in other municipalities. While we are in 
agreement with this, for some reason it was not incorporated in the bill as it was printed, so I am asking that the house accede 
to this request at this time. 
 
With these remarks, Mr. Speaker, I would now move second reading. 
 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I just have a brief comment to make on this bill. I notice that the 
minister in second reading, said that these were somewhat routine amendments, and there was nothing in the bill that was very 
controversial. I beg to differ with him on that point. There are many amendments in this bill that I think are good and 
necessary; there 



 

February 28, 1964 
 

 
492 

are some, however, that I disagree with rather strenuously, and I think that will lead to a slight change of principle in this bill. 
We understand, of course, that it would not be right to use funds allotted for capital expenditure, or funds left over after 
capital projects of that nature for current expenses. That is pointed out in the bill. The funds allotted for and approved for 
capital expenditure and borrowed by way of debentures and so forth should not be used for current expenditures. That 
restriction is good. I cannot for the life of me conceive why they should tie in that restriction with such sever penalties, if a 
council should per chance use some of those funds for other than current capital expenditures. Because the act as I read it 
says: 
 

If a council should, by chance, through error, or any way else, use any of these funds left over from capital expenditures, 
those members of the council who voted for the project, shall be held personally liable in any court or jurisdiction and that 
the councillors themselves shall be held responsible for that expenditure upon the protest of any ratepayer, any taxpayer, of 
the village, they will be brought before the court, and personally held liable for those funds to the treasury of the village. 
Likewise if any councillor who votes for such a motion shall be debarred from being councillors for two years. Further to 
that, that if this should occur, it doesn’t matter whether it is by error by intent, the overseer and the secretary shall be subject 
to a penalty and a fine of $100. 

 
Now surely, Mr. Speaker, if we are to put local government into the hands of responsible and dedicated citizens, we can 
hardly expect them to accept these onerous duties under stringent regulations like that. 
 
I think you have placed every village council in a straight jacket. You have dictated exactly what can be done and if they 
should dare falter they are subject to a heavy financial responsibility, debarred from being a councillor for two years and the 
overseer and the secretary subject to a fine of $100. 
 
I can’t agree with the minister when he says there are no controversial amendments in this bill. The second reading – I’ll go 
along with it, but certainly in committee of the whole, I intend to register again my protest and move the necessary 
amendments to eradicate this. 
 

Mr. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — I have just one observation to make on that and one that I am very concerned with. I 
have from time to time been concerned of efforts of centralization and this situation is all right, you can stay at home, to me it 
appears as if it is just another attempt to destroy local government. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! I wonder if the member would stay to the bill. 
 

Mr. Coderre: — I feel the intent behind it is not explained sufficiently in the bill. This point is going to discourage many 
stalwart citizens to act upon any village councils in this respect, because they could be liable to some oversight on their part, 
and if you destroy the desire of people to serve on local government, you destroy the very thing that we so cherish. This 
section actually does mean that. I’m even going to go as far as to say that I can’t even take a chance that it could possibly go 
through committee of the whole. I would object to it right there on this basis alone. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — It is my duty to inform the members that the minister is about to close the debate, if anyone wishes to speak, 
you must speak now. 
 

Mr. Wood: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am very sorry to have the hon. members opposite feel that I was endeavoring to slip 
anything over on them by saying that I felt that nothing was controversial in this bill, but I still think that if it is actually 
understood that there is not too much to be perturbed about here. The fact is that when the hon. member from Maple Creek 
(Mr. Cameron) first raised his objection, I was at a great loss and wondering just what section he could be referring to as 
being objectionable until he did actually refer to it directly. 
 



 

February 28, 1964 
 

 
493 

I may say in this respect, Mr. Speaker, that up until this time there has been nothing in The Village Act, dealing with the 
disposal of surplus capital funds that had been obtained by the selling of debentures. This had not been very disturbing and it 
hasn’t worried anyone because the villages have not been involved to any great extent in this sort of transaction. However, 
with the bringing of water and sewage to a good many of the villages, we do have quite a few villages selling debentures. At 
the present time there is not provision in The Village Act dealing with the eventuality when they have a certain amount left 
over. The people of our department pointed this out to me, and thought that we should put in The Village Act the same 
wording, and the same sections that are not in The Town Act and I believe, even The City Act, in regard to making provision 
for what is to be done in case there is money left over. 
 
I couldn’t say what is done in regard to this, but it has been handled in a rather slipshod manner hitherto and we thought that 
there should be provision made to take care of it. I will have to admit, Mr. Speaker, that I haven’t checked this as closely as I 
might have, but my understanding is that these sections here are exactly the same as what are now in The Town Act and have 
been there for a good many years. I have discussed this, as I said, with the municipal people, and they saw nothing wrong with 
the inclusions of the same sections in The Village Act. 
 
Now if the hon. member from Gravelbourg (Mr. Coderre) feels that we are endeavoring to dislocate the whole system of local 
government by putting the same sections in The Village Act as have been for years in The Town Act, I’m sorry about this, but 
I still maintain that I have discussed this with the people themselves, and they are not perturbed about it. I think these sections 
have borne up well, and I think there is nothing wrong in including them in this act. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: Moved second reading of Bill No. 39 – An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act, 1962. 
 
He said: 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill provides for some amendments to The Wascana Centre Act. The amendments have been worked out in 
co-operation with the city of Regina, and the University of Saskatchewan and I have received from each of those bodies, their 
consent to amendments in the form proposed. 
 
The amendments are for the most part of a highly technical nature, attempting to spell out with some more clarity the financial 
provisions of the act. The manner of spelling out is too change or modify the definitions contained in the act, and changes will 
be found in the definitions of ―landscape construction‖ and ―service construction‖, ―service maintenance‖ and like definitions. 
These I think will be found to be of not major consequence and can most easily be discussed in committee. I will for the 
benefit of the house review very quickly the effects of the changes. One of them is a little more consequential in its nature and 
I will explain that at more length. 
 
The changes will permit a participating party (the members will recall the participating parties are the city, the university and 
the government) to transfer land to the Authority without reducing the liability of the transferrer to pay for the maintenance of 
the lands. It will enable the Authority as part of a landscape construction program to pay for park seating and to pay for, let us 
say, a tennis court which was conceived to be landscape construction but was found not to be fully covered by the definition. 
It will enable the Authority, but not obligate it, to build a limited range of buildings and structures. And here what is intended 
are washrooms and tool sheds and other buildings which are really integral parts of an operating park. It will make it clear that 
construction and maintenance costs include the costs of machines and equipment to carry out such construction and 
maintenance. It will also make some changes in the total possible costs of the Wascana Centre Authority. This is of slightly 
greater consequence and therefore I think I will take a moment to explain this to the house. 
 
The present effective ceiling on the money which may be spent by the Wascana Centre Authority is that the levies on the 
participating parties cannot add up to a levy of more than one mill on the city of Regina. Accordingly, having regard to the 
fact that the city of Regina pays 30 per cent, the total costs can’t exceed 3-1/3 mills of the city of Regina mill yield. 
 



 

February 28, 1964 
 

 
494 

There have been exclusions from that, being the costs which the city of Regina spent in maintaining Douglas Park and 
Wascana Park, the parks which they previously operated, these were spelled out in the original act. It is now proposed to 
exclude from the 3-1/3 mill limit, the cost of land acquisition where the authority is compelled to acquire land or where the 
Authority has declared that the land acquisition costs should be excluded from the 3-1/3 mill limit. Members will recall that 
the Authority can be compelled to buy land within the Authority area, by any landowner who wishes to develop the land. The 
Authority can prohibit him from developing, but then the Authority is obligated within one year’s time to acquire the land 
from him, either by purchase or by expropriation. And we also wish to provide that, even where there is not an obligation 
imposed by the provisions of the act, the Authority, by a particular form of majority (which would require that the majority of 
persons from all three of the participating parties, that is at least three government people, three university people and at least 
two city people agree) could regard a particular land purchase as a compulsory transaction. And under these circumstances, 
such a purchase would be excluded from the 3-1/3 mill limit. This as I say, could have some financial consequences. I don’t 
think they will be particularly great nor will they be of particularly long duration since the land acquisition phase will 
necessarily be short. I think, Mr. Speaker, with that explanation, and with my expression of opinion that the other matters are 
of a quite technical nature and can be much better discussed in committee, I would move second reading. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: Moved second reading of Bill No. 40 – An Act to amend The Change of Name Act. 
 
He said: 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you can see this is a tiny amendment to change the act known as The Change of Name Act. It is an 
amendment which will change in only a small regard, the nature of advertising required in order for people to change their 
name. The effect of it really is to change one of the existing time limits from four weeks to two months because the four 
weeks time limit has been found to be administrably awkward and difficult for citizens, and also to require that the 
advertisement be published in an issue of a newspaper circulating in the area where the applicant resides. The present act 
provides that it be published in a newspaper published or circulated in the district and a few isolated instances have been 
found of people attempting, in effect, to circumvent the act by being resident in the city of Regina and publishing it in let us 
say a newspaper such as Farm Light and Power which, while published in Regina, does not circulate here at all. It is a very 
trivial amendment, as it appears to me but is a useful tidying up. It can be further pursued in committee and with that, Mr. 
Speaker I would move second reading. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: Moved second reading of Bill No. 41 – An Act to amend The Centralized Teaching Program for 
Nursing Students Act, 1956. 
 
He said: 
 
Members may know that the hospitals or schools of nursing in the province originated early in the 1950’s a plan for arranging 
that a part of their nursing training program would be offered centrally. They provided a four month course of basic sciences 
and they offered it centrally to save problems for each of the participating hospitals. This centralized teaching program has 
had its ups and downs but has continued with a reasonable degree of success since that time. A few changes in the act 
covering it, the act which was introduced in 1956, are sought. The changes arise as a result of some changes in the factual 
situation. One of the changes provides for a changed in the definition of ―participating hospital‖. A participating hospital is 
one which has the right to appoint a board member. Some of the hospitals are participating fully and this was the intent. A 
couple of the hospitals participating only partially and the purpose is to exclude them from the definition of participating 
hospitals for the purpose of having a board member. 
 
The program started out being directed by agreement with the University of Saskatchewan and the person who ran it was an 
employee of the University of Saskatchewan. By arrangement between the university and the 



 

February 28, 1964 
 

 
495 

Saskatchewan Registered Nurses Association, this person became an employee of the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses 
Association. This necessitates some small amendments. 
 
By the provisions of the old act, monies were to be paid over to the University of Saskatchewan and because of the changes in 
the organizational structure, it is now proposed that the monies be paid over to the board. 
 
I believe that the changes do not affect in any material way the method of administration or direction of the centralized 
teaching program as it has been carried on and, accordingly, I believe that we can consider the details in committee quite 
effectively. 
 
I would move second reading, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 p.m. 
 


