



















































Hansard: March 19, 1965


1253 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

31st Day 
 

Friday, March 19, 1965 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. R.A. Walker: (Hanley) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to welcome on your behalf 

and on behalf of the members of this house, a distinguished group of grade 7 and grade 8 students from the Aberdeen 

School, sitting up in the gallery to the west. I want to express a welcome to these students from the Aberdeen School, 

and to the folks who brought them here and to express the hope that they will find the proceedings interesting and 

instructive. I hope that they will have a pleasant journey back to Aberdeen and that they will remember the 

Saskatchewan Legislature favorably enough to come back here again, either as visitors or as members of this house. 
 

Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 
 

Hon. David Boldt: (Minister of Social Welfare) — Mr. Speaker, I, too, would like to express a welcome to the 

members of the Aberdeen School. I am sure that the hon. member knows that the town of Aberdeen is in the 

Rosthern constituency, a very good stronghold for the Liberal party . . . 
 

Mr. Walker: — We should say only good things about them today . . . 
 

Mr. Boldt: — I want to welcome these students and their teachers, Mr. Rathgaber and Mr. Barnes, and the parents 

who accompanied them today. I am sure that all members will join with me, and hope that their stay here will be a 

pleasant one. 
 

Mr. Ian MacDougall: (Souris-Estevan) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to draw to the 

attention of the house a group of students in the Speaker’s Gallery, from Gainsborough, which is in the southeast 

corner of the province, two miles from the Manitoba boundary. They are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Ball, 

their driver Mr. Bevans, and his wife, and Miss Cole, who has brought the children from Gainsborough here many 

times before. This is the third trip for these people, bringing children to the legislature, and I hope their stay here this 

afternoon will be an enjoyable one. 
 

Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 
 

Mr. Ed. Whelan: (Regina North) — Mr. Speaker, on your behalf and on behalf of the members of this assembly, I 

would like to welcome a group of 31 students in the East gallery; they are the grade 5 students from Regina Park 

school, in Regina North. They are with. their teacher, Mrs. Nancy Hilt, and two student teachers, Mr. Warwick and 

Mr. Weikus. They have two parents escorting the group, Bill Todd and James Burns. I hope that their stay with us 

this afternoon will be pleasant and educational. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE MR. WOODROW S. LLOYD, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION 
 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank: (Acting Leader of the Opposition, Kelsey) — Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the 

house that at about 10 o’clock this morning, Mr. Woodrow S. Lloyd, Leader of the Opposition, underwent surgery at 

the University Hospital for a back condition. The operation was completed at 11:15 and his doctor reports that his 

immediate condition is quite satisfactory, and I am sure that all will join with me in wishing him a speedy recovery. 



 

March 19, 1965 

 

 
1254 

Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

QUESTION RE NEWSPAPER REPORT 

 

Mr. Martin Pederson: (Arm River) — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day, I would like to direct a question to the 

hon. member from Milestone (Mr. Cy MacDonald). 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher: (Premier) — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows he cannot direct a 

question to a private member. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The point of order is well taken. It is contrary to Parliamentary practice to direct questions to private 
members. 

 

Mr. Pederson: — May I then, Mr. Speaker, direct it to the Premier? That in view of the motion I introduced yesterday 

and the tremendous speed with which the member from Milestone rose in his place, may I ask if this had anything to do 

with the headline in the Star-Phoenix of last night, where it says “Milestone in Space Race”? I was wondering if this had 

any direct connection with his speed in moving yesterday. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION RE PROPOSED HOSPITAL 

 

Mrs. Marjorie Cooper: (Regina West) — Mr. Speaker, may I direct a question to the Minister of Public Health (Mr. 

Steuart)? Has the minister yet taken any action towards appointing a board for the proposed South Saskatchewan base 

hospital? 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart: (Minister of Public Health) — Yes. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — May I ask a question, Mr. Speaker? Could I ask what action the minister has taken? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I have taken several actions, they would be much too long to go into at this time in the house, but just as 
soon as I have something concrete to report, this house will be the first to know. 

 

QUESTION RE HORSE SHOW AND MONDAY EVENING SITTING 

 

Mr. I.C. Nollet: (Cut Knife) — The Horse Show opens on Monday evening, will we be sitting? 

 

It has been traditional for the house to adjourn for the evening sitting. Am I to understand this will not take place on 

Monday? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I will let the house know on Monday when we sit. 
 

Hon. A.H. McDonald: (Minister of Agriculture) — I will be attending the Horse Show on Monday, therefore the 

Department of Agriculture estimates will not be up on Monday. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:58 o’clock. 


