



















































Hansard: March 24, 1965


1291 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

34th Day 

 

Wednesday, March 24th, 1965 

 

The Assembly met at 10: o’clock 

On The Orders of the Day: 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE SASKATCHEWAN SAVINGS BONDS 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day are proceeded with I should like to 

comment on the Saskatchewan Savings Bonds. The sale of these bonds have now exceeded $10,000,000. However, this 

figure is still about $3,000,000 less than in the same period one year ago. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Lost confidence . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Sales will be continued until next Wednesday, March 31st, when the sale will be discontinued. 

Again, I commend the bonds as a good sound investment for Saskatchewan citizens, and again I say that we will sell 

more than we did a year ago. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT OF APPOINTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SECRETARIES 

 
Mr. Thatcher: — While I am on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I wish to announce today the appointment of two new 

Legislative Secretaries. The first appointment will be to the Department of Agriculture, it will be Dr. J. C. McIsaac, 

MLA for Wilkie. Dr. McIsaac is a young man, thirty-three years of age. He received his doctor of veterinary medicine 

at the Ontario Veterinary College of Guelph, Ontario, and has a private veterinary practice in Unity. He also is a 

farmer. 

 

Mr. J. H. Brockelbank (Acting Leader of the Opposition, Kelsey): — On a point of order. Under what authority is 

the hon. Premier making these appointments. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — If you will just let me continue. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — I want to know what authority, I don’t think he has the authority to make these 

appointments. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think that is a point of order that can be raised when the minister has concluded whatever 

statement he is making. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — The second appointment will be made to the Department of Health. The government is naming Mr. 

Cy MacDonald, MLA for Milestone. Mr. MacDonald has a Bachelor of Arts and a Bachelor of Education Degree, he is 

presently a teacher at Notre Dame College at Wilcox, he is married with seven children. He will be concerned primarily 

in the months ahead with the new Department of Youth. 

 

These appointments, Mr. Speaker, are made, of course, subject to the approval of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor 

of Bill no. 30, and will not come into effect officially until that approval has been given. 

 

However, in these two departments there is a good deal of work to be done and I make the announcement today only so 

that these MLAs may be acquainted with the two departments concerned. I may tell the hon. Member for Kelsey (Mr. 

Brockelbank) and the house, that additional Legislative Secretaries will be appointed before the end of the session. 

 

I say again, for the edification of the member for Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank) these appointments will not take effect 

until His Honour has approved the bill. 



 

March 24, 1969 

 

 

1292 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, on the point of order, the Premier is quite improper in announcing the 
appointment of Legislative Secretaries when he has no authority to make these appointments, when the act has not been 

passed authorizing it. Now, if he had said, “I would like to inform the legislature that it is my intention to appoint these 

people” but he starts out by talking, by saying the appointments are made, and on different occasions the Premier has 

shown absolute disregard of the legislature and the authority under which he acts. Now, I object to this kind of 

procedure. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, if I may say one word, I said very definitely, Mr. Speaker, that these appointments 
were made subject to the approval of the Lieutenant Governor. You didn’t wait until I finished my statement. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — That is the point, they are not appointments at all, Mr. Speaker, and they shouldn’t 

have been called appointments. 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Ruling, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT OF REPORT OF THE WORKMEN’S COMPENSATION BOARD 

 

Hon. Lionel Coderre (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I 
have assured the members of this house that I would give them a copy of The Workmen’s Compensation Board. In the 

number of years that the various government have been here, this has not been done, while I am doing it this year, I 

want to assure the assembly, although it is a precedent, the first in Saskatchewan, I want to assure the assembly this is 

not a common practice. I would like to table these for the members of the house. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5.09 o’clock p. m. 


