



















































Hansard: March 31, 1965


1399 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

39th Day 

 

Wednesday, March 31st, 1965 

 

The assembly met at 2:30 p.m. o'clock 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

QUESTION RE RETURN 102 — AND PUBLIC SERVICE SUPERANNUATION ACT 
 

Mr. J. H. Brockelbank (Acting Leader of the Opposition, Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker before the orders of the day are 

proceeded with I would like to remind the Minister of Labour, (Mr. Coderre) that yesterday I was informed that return 

102 was on the way. it hasn't arrived yet would he keep chasing it, and, second I would like to ask about the legislation 

in regard to the Public Service Superannuation Act. It has been stated there is going to be changes in regard to the 

people with low pensions and also the speech from the throne mentioned the legislation might be necessary with regard 

to the Canada Pension Plan. Is this necessary and when might we expect to get this legislation? 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Well, the first subject you mentioned, Public Service Commissions, that bill 

definitely will be brought down and we are also hopeful that we will be able to proceed this year with that bill. As you 

know at Ottawa, it has passed the House of Commons, it hasn’t passed the Senate. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Before the orders of the day I would like the members to join with me and welcome a 

group of students from Yellow Creek High School. They are led by their teacher Mr. Gingerra and Mr. Helkovich and 

the bus driver, Mr. Andy Lipchuk. They drove in this morning, about 200 miles, I also want to remind the house that on 

several occasions I announced provincial champions of this province in soccer and volleyball, some of the winners are 

up there right now and I am sure the house will join with me in wishing them an educational trip and also a safe journey 

home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. H. H. P. Baker (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from Kinistino, (Mr.Thibault) has asked me to 

welcome the group he has today. We want to extend all the courtesies we can from our city, and I hope they will have a 

pleasant stay here and visit many of our sights in our community. We are pleased to have you here. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. W. A. Robbins (Saskatoon): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, may I have leave of the house for one 

minute to bring greetings to a group of students from Pleasant Hill School, Saskatoon, who are accompanied by their 

teacher, Mr. Ulrich. They are in the Speaker's Gallery, and I am sure all present in the assembly will be pleased to 

extend to them our greetings and our hope that they will have a very enjoyable and educational time during their stay in 

Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 

At 5:15 o'clock p.m. His Honour The Lieutenant-Governor entered the Chamber took his seat upon the throne, and 

gave Royal Assent to a certain bill. 

 

The assembly adjourned at 5:21 o'clock p.m. 


