



















































Hansard: February 23, 1965


539 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

14th Day 
 

Tuesday, February 23, 1965. 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE HEAVY WATER PLANT 
 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are called, I have an 

announcement to make. 
 

About one hour ago in the House of Commons, the Hon. C.M. Drewry, Minister of Industry, made an 

announcement of historic significance to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

The government of Canada has accepted the recommendation of the Atomic Energy of Canada Limited, to accept 

the bid of Western Deuterium Company Limited, for the sale of heavy water. This will mean construction of the 

world's largest heavy water plant at Estevan, Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — The plant will have a capacity of 300 tons and the government of Canada will guarantee the 

sale of the first five year's production of heavy water at this rate. The cost of the new plant will be $46,000,000. It 

will employ in the construction stage about 500 men, and about 200 men when completed. In addition, the plant 

will utilize more than 1,000 tons of lignite coal from the Estevan area daily. 
 

Saskatchewan should be very proud of this latest industrial accomplishment, for the contract was obtained in 

competition with at least three other provinces of Canada. The bid of $14.65 per pound of heavy water, was the 

lowest bid submitted. It will be recalled that Western Deuterium was an unsuccessful bidder in 1963, when the 

government first asked for bids on heavy water. At that time the bid went to Nova Scotia. Naturally, we are happy 

at the outcome of this mission, doubly so since Western Deuterium is a wholly owned private Canadian company. 

Under this government agreement with Western Deuterium, the plant will be owned by SEDCO and leased back 

to Western Deuterium who will be responsible for its construction, maintenance and operation. 

The lease-back agreement will be for twenty-five years. Western Deuterium will have an option to purchase at 

any earlier date if it wishes. 
 

The government will hold forty per cent of the capital stock of Western Deuterium. The large quantities of steam 

required to process the heavy water will be supplied by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation Boundary Dam 

plant. The acquisition of this new industry will be a great boon to the economy of Saskatchewan. In addition to 

the direct employment it creates, it will utilize vast amounts of our lignite reserves, and establish a base for 

subsidiary industries and suppliers. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Acting Leader of the Opposition): — Before Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I 

would like, first of all, to say that I am sure that everybody on this side of the house is very happy about the 

coming of this new industry to Saskatchewan . . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTION RE. MR. FURLONG'S SALARY 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . and from the announcement of the Premier, it appears that it is a good and probably a 

logical mixture of public ownership and private enterprise. A government agency is going to own the plant, and 

rent it to the company. There is another matter I would like to mention, that is 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

540 

in regard to an article in the Leader Post last night, the headline "Furlong appointed S.P.C. General Manager". I 

want to say, first of all, that I have known Mr. Furlong for a good while, and I think a good deal of him, and I 

want to say that I wish him the very best of success in his new position. I was, however, very shocked to see in the 

Leader Post, this statement: 

 

Mr. Furlong's salary will not be disclosed, Premier Thatcher said. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is certainly disrespectful of this legislature, is a reflection on this legislature, that the 

Premier should make a statement like that, outside of this house. I hope that he will change his mind and that this 

will not be the policy which he will follow. Too often, on a number of occasions, he has shown the inclination to 

do things covered up. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member should wait until this 

question is properly asked before he puts thoughts or makes charges against the Premier. This was a news 

conference. When they get around to this, if we don't answer the question, then he can make his charges, but they 

haven't asked it yet. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — I was thinking that maybe the Premier might want to say something about this. 

This is what he meant, that it was not going to be disclosed but I want to assure the Minister of Public Health (Mr. 

Steuart), the question will be asked. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, on this matter, I recall having been on the Crown Corporation Committee on 

numerous occasions. When I wanted to know Mr. Cass-Beggs' salary, the government repeatedly refused to give 

it. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Nonsense. Never. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Yes, repeatedly, so we are just following their example if we do not give it. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. J.B. Hooker (Notukeu-Willowbunch): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I 

beg to draw to your attention, and to the attention of this assembly the presence of a very fine group of grade 

twelve high school students from the town of Willow Bunch. These students are accompanied here this afternoon 

by their bus driver, Mr. Davis, and their principal, Mr. Verhelst. We sincerely hope that their visit with us this 

afternoon will not only be enjoyable but educational. 
 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Wesley A. Robbins (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day are called I would like to 

draw to the attention of the assembly, a group of twenty-nine students from Albert School in Saskatoon, in the 

east gallery, along with their teacher, Mrs. McMillan and their principal, Mr. D.L. Hicks. I take particular pleasure 

in introducing the group to the house because this happens to be my home school. I can not recognize too many of 

these youngsters from this distance, my eyesight may be failing. The only fellow I can recognize is the fellow 

with the black eye. He got it by being in connection with the business end of a hockey stick last week. 
 

I am sure that every one in this house will join with me in wishing these youngsters and their teachers an 

informative and educational stay in the house. 
 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Walter Smishek (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day I would like to draw attention to 

a group of students from St. Chad's School. It has just been drawn to my attention, and I would like to welcome 

them to this assembly and hope that their stay will be enjoyable. They are here with their teacher. 
 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

541 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the motion of the Hon. Mr. Thatcher, that Mr. Speaker do now 

leave the chair, and the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Blakeney, (Regina East). 

 

Mr. B.D. Gallagher (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, before I adjourned the debate last night, I made some comments 

on remarks that had been made and noticeably had not been made by the financial critic of the opposition (Mr. 

Blakeney). 

 

While he was talking about the budget, and I should say here, Mr. Speaker, that he did a pretty fair job with a very 

weak case. I suppose his legal training accounts for this. 

 

It was quite noticeable, as I remarked last night, Mr. Speaker, that he did not talk about some of the things in the 

budget that the people of this province had long awaited. For example, the million dollars that was spent by the 

Department of Agriculture on the South Saskatchewan River project; or the $40,000 that was to be spent this year 

on the Cumberland House Farm, as compared to $5,000 to $10,000 last year; or the $500,000 incentive program 

for mineral exploration that was announced in the budget. He did not talk about the votes in the estimates of the 

Department of Natural Resources that were increased. 

 

Figures like $14,000 of an increase for parks and recreational facilities, an increase of $50,000; regional park 

grants, an increase of $70,000; nor did he mention the fact that there was a $31,000 increase in tourist 

development. No, Mr. Speaker, he picked out a few very choice pieces that he thought would make him some 

votes in the country, and I suppose they have the desired effect on his NDP friends out in radio-land. He also 

mentioned, Mr. Speaker, that he took exception to the government not giving the auditorium in Regina 

$2,000,000. I want to repeat again this afternoon what I said last night, Mr. Speaker, that this government believes 

that there are more places in the province of Saskatchewan than just the cities of Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

We believe, Mr. Speaker, that the boundaries of Saskatchewan spread from the Northwest Territories to the 

United States and from Manitoba to Alberta, and we are going to deal fairly with all the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — He rather sneeringly scoffed at our decision to abolish the mineral tax and also that farmers 

should be allowed to use purple gas. I could go on and on, but I see now that I am on radio time which is very 

limited. For this reason, I will not go too far on this particular phase of what he had to say, but I would like to 

make one statement. I think that he actually thought that he had hit a soft spot when he talked about the decrease 

in the grants for education. I wonder if he listened to the news at dinner time today, Mr. Speaker, when the 

Trustees' Association of the province was commending the government for the generous grants that they are 

giving towards education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

As I said last night, Mr. Speaker, only once before was there a larger increase in the grants to education in this 

province. He mentioned the fact that last year there was $5,200,000 of an increase in grants to education, and as I 

said last night, the year before it was only $2,400,000 of an increase and the year before that, $2,700,000 of an 

increase, less than the increase in grants that is going to be provided by this government for education, Mr. 

Speaker. So his argument does not hold too much water. 

 

When I was finishing my remarks last night, Mr. Speaker, I was talking about something that the party on the 

other side should be very shy about mentioning the matter of political patronage. I recall while he was speaking 

yesterday, Mr. Speaker, that he held up a list of eight names and he said, "These are the people that the Liberal 

party is employing, political heelers". Well, let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people that the Liberal party 

employs likely vote one way or another, and I think that the Liberal party has the right as the government of this 

province, to hire the people that they think can run the government of this province best, and it 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

542 

just so happens, Mr. Speaker, it just so happens that in most cases Socialists can not run the government of this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — But I want to repeat what I said before, Mr. Speaker, I think there were one or two of these 

people who happened to be defeated Liberal candidates. There were others who had very good qualifications for 

their jobs. I would just like to mention one of the people who was a defeated Liberal candidate. I do not think 

people on the other side of the house should question his ability at all — Mr. Walter Erb. Tommy Douglas 

appointed him as a minister of a CCF government in this province. He must have had a lot of confidence in his 

ability, and that is why he is holding the job that he holds today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I notice that the member for Regina West, the financial critic of the opposition (Mr. Blakeney) did not mention 

the fact that this government had in their employ, since coming into office, a former CCF cabinet minister, Mr. O. 

Turnbull, teaching at the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am not going to spend all afternoon, but I could, relating to this house and to the people of 

this province the names of some of the people who, because of their political work in the past, got jobs from the 

CCF government. I think this has been gone over time and time again, and I am not going to bore the house with 

this, but I want to say once again that of the people that the financial critic (Mr. Blakeney) spoke of yesterday, 

only one or two of them happen to be defeated Liberal candidates. 

 

Do you know that the record of the previous government, the CCF government, was the worst record for political 

patronage of any government in this country, past or present? Naturally, when a government goes to hire people, 

most people that they do hire, vote Liberal or they vote Conservative or they vote CCF. Well, the people who sat 

across the way, regardless of whether they had qualifications or not, gave their friends jobs. People like Mr. 

Bentley, for example. I mentioned his name last night, and I would just like to repeat it today, because I found a 

little memo afterwards to the effect that he was a CCF member from 1945 until 1949, and that, when he was 

defeated in 1949, he was appointed as director of staff training, and I got hold of a memo this morning that he sent 

to all his field officers while he was a director of staff training, and here is what the memo said: 
 

Would you please supply me with the names of all the field officers in your department, together with their 

addresses and the areas in which they work, by constituencies, if possible. 
 

Now, surely, Mr. Speaker, this man must have been hired, not only because of his past performance and what he 

had done for the CCF, but what he was going to do after he was hired. 
 

I will go on, Mr. Speaker. What about names like Mr. L.L. Lloyd, brother of the Premier? What about Mr. Alan 

McCallum, defeated CCF candidate in 1934, subsequently appointed as Deputy Minister of Education and Mr. 

J.O. Probe, M.P. for Regina, 1945 to 1949? After he was defeated in 1949, he was appointed Director of Civil 

Defence. 
 

I want to repeat once again a name that I mentioned last night because I noticed the whole family was hired in this 

particular case — Mr. O.W. Valleau, M.L.A, for Melfort, 1938 to 1948 and Minister of Social Welfare in the first 

CCF government. When he vas defeated in 1948, he was appointed Chairman of the Workmen's Compensation 

Board. His son ran in the Last Mountain constituency. When he was defeated he got a job, and I notice on the files 

that even his wife got a job as a temporary secretary in this government. This is a sort of a family affair, Mr. 

Speaker! 
 

Then there is John Burton, and there is Kim Thorson. There are a lot more of them, Mr. Speaker. I can't spend all 

afternoon relating these names to the house and to the people of this province, but I think that if there is any group 

in this province, or in this country, that shouldn't talk about political patronage, it is the people on the other side of 

this house. Especially, Mr. Speaker, the financial critic (Mr. Blakeney) who happened to be an employee of the 

former CCF government. Mr. A.E. Blakeney was working with the Securities Commission up until the time he 

was a CCF candidate. Mr. Ed. Whelan, the member for Regina North, worked with the Mediation Board, and as I 

mentioned last night, the member for Regina West, the lady member (Mrs. 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

543 

Cooper), and Mr. W.J. Berezowsky, people who are sitting here in this house today, worked for the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these people had it working both ways. If they could not get elected, they worked for the 

government. They quit working for the government when they could get elected. If they got defeated they went 

back and worked for the government. Surely, Mr. Speaker, these are the last people that should talk about political 

patronage! In closing my remarks on this particular subject, Mr. Speaker, I only want to say that all that is the 

matter with the people that sit opposite is that they are very bitter today because there is no haven of refuge for 

defeated CCFers from one end of Canada to the other. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — I want to turn my remarks now Mr. Speaker, to the budget. I want to commend the Provincial 

Treasurer for the job that he did in bringing down this budget. I have confidence that the Provincial Treasurer of 

this province is the most able administrator that this province has seen in many, many years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — When he brought down the budget, the other day, he outlined the principles the government is 

going to pursue in the following months and I want to review these principles at this time. 

 

First of all, our concern regarding high taxes, and our moves to bring taxes down. Secondly, the change in the 

economic and political climate of this province to induce development and investment. Thirdly, our concern for 

raising the standard of living of our people; and fourthly, providing the best services that can be provided for by 

the peoples' own tax money in all fields of government service. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, why was this budget possible? Because sound business principles are being applied to the 

running of government in this province since May of last year. If I, or the member for Kerrobert-Kindersley, (Mr. 

Howes) who sits in front of me; or the member for Elrose (Mr. Leith) who sits behind me, or any other farmer in 

this assembly, didn't apply those same principles to the running of our farms, we wouldn't be on our farms, Mr. 

Speaker. If the member for Meadow Lake, (Mr. Coupland) or the member for Shaunavon, (Mr. Larochelle) or the 

member for Rosetown, (Mr. Loken) or any other member of this house happens to be a businessman, didn't apply 

those same business principles to the running of their business they would not have stayed in business, Mr. 

Speaker. I say at this time, Mr. Speaker, that because the people that sit to your left, did not apply sound business 

principles to the running of the government, they find themselves in the opposition today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — For the first time in twenty years, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are getting some 

relief from high taxes. Too long has the Socialist government extracted every last possible penny from the 

taxpayers of this province, In fact, I think that their defeat last June could largely be attributed to their attitude to 

the taxpayers of this province. 

 

Surely, Mr. Speaker, a twenty per cent reduction of the sales tax, saving the people of this province $9,000,000 or 

$10,000,000 is not to be scoffed at by our Socialist friends. Surely, the $3,500,000 to $4,000,000 the farmers will 

save on tax free gas for farm trucks is a step towards helping the farmers of this province. 

 

But my friends across the way say that the farmers should not burn tax free gas in their trucks. Well, I can 

understand the member for Regina West or any of the city members saying this, but I cannot quite see the member 

for Weyburn (Mr. Pepper), or the member for Pelly (Mr. Larson), or thee member for Watrous (Mr. Broten), or 

even the dean of the house, the member for Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank), telling the farmers in that part of the 

province that they should not use tax free gas, Mr. Speaker, but that is exactly what they will be saying if they 

stand up in this house and vote against this budget. 

 

The same thing, Mr. Speaker, applies to the reduction in sales 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

544 

tax. Do you mean to say that the Mayor of Regina (Mr. Baker), who incidentally happens to be in his seat this 

afternoon for a change, is going to tell the people of this city and the people of Saskatchewan, that they do not 

deserve to save $9,500,000 to $10,000,000 because of the reduction of sales tax? Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what 

he is saying if he stands up and votes against this budget, and I would think from the program that he has outlined 

in this house that he is the last man in this province that should be voting against anything that is for the people of 

this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — Mr. Speaker, the difference between the Socialists and the Liberals was expressed pretty 

clearly in the budget the other afternoon. The Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Thatcher) and members who sit to your 

right, believe that the people of this province have a right to spend some of their own money. We have enough 

faith in the good judgment of Saskatchewan people to believe they can invest the money they save in tax dollars 

just as well as the government can invest that money, and it is my hope that the money that the people of 

Saskatchewan save in tax reductions this year will be invested in Saskatchewan industries. I am sure that the 

people of Saskatchewan will be proud to have a part in helping the development of this province in the next ten 

years, and I might say that it is only by investing their savings that they will have a real share in the development 

of this province. That development for which this budget is designed is the very thing that will provide the funds 

for government services we need, and raise the standard of living of the Saskatchewan people. 

 

The Socialists think that they, and they alone, Mr. Speaker, should spend the people's money. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

the record of the opposition speaks for itself. By extracting the people's money to invest for them, they have just 

kept Saskatchewan from ten to fifteen years behind the rest of this country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — I suppose, Mr. Speaker, that it is not good taste for any of us to drag down, to malign, or 

condemn, or to accuse people on the other side of the house of always being the guilty ones, but I can tell you, Sir, 

that I am getting a little bit tired of listening to people who sit to your left suggesting that they and they alone, 

have a monopoly on all virtues, and that the Liberal party and its members have all the vices. This 

holier-than-thou attitude of the NDP has been carried just a little bit too far, Mr. Speaker. They are supposed to be 

the only party that operates a clean election campaign and the only party that can be trusted with public funds. In 

their own right they are the only true custodians of our natural resources, and no one but the Socialists ever thinks 

about our people. The little man, the man on the street, the small farmer, the wage earner, or the poor 

underprivileged family that must have to accept social aid. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, there was a time when I might have been taken in by this sympathetic smooth talk of the 

Socialists. Well, I can tell you that after I went through the 1964 election, if I have ever been fooled in the past, I 

will not be fooled in the future by Socialist smooth talk. 

 

After the methods that they used in my constituency to try and win that seat for the Socialists, if they thought it 

was honorable, they found out that it wasn't very fruitful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Liberal party, according to the people on your left, Sir, are not to be trusted with public funds. Well, I only 

want to say that from the record of the last eight or nine months of this government, from what has been said in 

this house, I would think that the people to your right are more to be trusted with public funds than the people to 

your left, and I might add, Mr. Speaker, we are more to be trusted with public documents too. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — Our Socialist friends would have you believe that some money-hungry millionaire was going 

to steal all our forests under the Liberals, or some shady American was going to extract all our oil and take off 

without us seeing it. Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that I would rather see some pulp company or some sawmill 

operator come into this province to develop our forests, to produce something for this province . . . 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

545 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — What about after they are gone? 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — . . . and to provide homes and jobs for our people, than to see our forests burn down or rot 

with a crown monopoly handling all the harvest of Saskatchewan's forest products. As far as our oil fields, or 

where other American investment is concerned, it is far better for the people of this province if we risk our capital 

to develop our oil resources, our mineral resources, or any other investment we might make to provide wealth in 

this province and jobs for Saskatchewan people, than the dog-in-the-manger attitude of the Socialists. 

 

This last point, Mr. Speaker, that I mentioned a moment ago that only Socialists represent the people, the small 

farmer, the wage earner, the worker, the under-privileged, this point, Mr. Speaker, has been worn out by my 

friends who sit across the way. 

 

I think the people who sit to your left, Mr. Speaker, have given up the idea that they are friends of the small 

farmer any more, and if they vote against this budget, Mr. Speaker, we will know where they stand in that regard. 

They still seem to be persistent though, in trying to paint the Liberal party as being anti-labor, anti-co-op, and 

anti-reform. I don't want to bore this house, Mr. Speaker, with reading into the record all the legislation that has 

been passed by Liberal governments, both federal and provincial, regarding labor. I think I did this a year or two 

ago and I want to say at this time, Mr. Speaker, that all the basic labor legislation that is on the statute books of 

Canada today and in this province was passed by Liberal governments. Practically all the social reform legislation 

that we have in this country, legislation to help farmers, workers, unemployed, old people, and the 

under-privileged, was passed by Liberal governments. 

 

Then to make good fellows of themselves, Mr. Speaker, they get up and they suggest that we should increase the 

minimum wage by twenty-five cents an hour. One of them even suggested forty cents an hour. I want to say, Mr. 

Speaker, I can imagine that they would expect us to do as much in one year as they did in twenty years. I don't 

think we will be able to get the minimum wage up, Mr. Speaker, quite as much in one year as the Socialists did in 

twenty years. But I do believe that before four years are up, we will be able to do a lot more for the working 

people than our Socialist friends did in twenty years. In fact, the most they did was to export them to other 

provinces. If this Liberal government cannot do more for labor in its first term of office than the Socialists did in 

twenty years, we won't deserve the support of labor in the next election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it must worry the Socialists. They feel they are losing their grip on labor. They are like a 

drowning man clinging to a straw. I think they are beginning to realize that it is only the top dogs in the union that 

will be left for the NDP and, as for unions, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that it was Liberal governments that gave 

the people the right to organize unions in this country, a right that every man and woman who has to work for a 

living should have, and it will be a Liberal government, Mr. Speaker, that will restore to the workers the right to 

run their own unions and not have them run by some power-hungry Socialist at the top, who wants to use the rank 

and file members as pawns or puppets. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — This is the difference, Mr. Speaker, between the Liberals and the Socialists. Do you know, 

Mr. Speaker, it is down right disgusting to listen to the garble that emanates from the mouth of the member for 

Regina East, and he has been quite bold in this house. Now he should talk, he is not looking after . . . 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, the member for Regina East has not spoken 

in this debate. 

 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane (Qu'Appelle-Wolseley): — . . . in this house. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — Yes, but you can not refer to a previous debate. 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — I am not talking about a pre- 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

546 

vious debate. I mentioned nothing about it. I am not talking about the Mayor either, Mr. Mayor. I am referring to 

the member to your right. Mr. Speaker, he is not looking after labor. He is one of these power-hungry individuals 

who is taking advantage of union members for his own political gain. 

 

Now, what about co-op's, Mr. Speaker? We all know what the former government tried to do. They tried to make 

the co-op's a political movement. There are areas in this province where if you were not a prominent NDP, you 

could not be elected to the board of a co-operative organization. In fact, some NDP members make no bones 

about what their intentions were in this regard. I recall in this house, only about two or three years ago, when the 

former member for Bengough stood up in this house and said, the CCF is the political arm of the co-operative 

movement. What a statement, Mr. Speaker! I think more of the co-operative movement than to suggest that any 

party should be their political arm. They should not have a political arm if they are going to grow and flourish. 

The co-op's, Mr. Speaker, were set up many years ago, not by socialists, but by progressive, free enterprise 

people. They were set up by both producers and consumers to give service to their members and to protect them 

against exploitation by any group or any individual who might try to exploit them. 

 

I see, Mr. Speaker, that I am going to be over my radio time, and I am going to leave some of this out. I only want 

to say at this point that the founders of the United Grain Growers, the Grain Growers Grain Company, the 

founders of the Pool, and the founders of the first Co-operative Consumer Organizations in this province did not 

set these organizations up to make political organizations out of them. They set them up to protect the people that 

belong to them, from being exploited and to give service at cost to the people that belong to them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — Mr. Speaker, the co-operative movement is a good movement. It has served a useful purpose, 

and rather than politicians of any party trying to use it for political gain, the co-operative movement should be the 

guiding conscience of a free enterprise system. That is the difference, Mr. Speaker, between our attitude toward 

the co-operative movement and the socialist attitude toward the co-operative movement. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, this talk that emanates from the people who sit to your left as being the people who 

represent the little man, the farmer, the worker, and the under-privileged, has gone a little bit too far. I have the 

privilege of representing a seat that was settled many years ago by people from central and eastern Europe. The 

majority of my constituents are of Ukrainian and German background. Many of them are small farmers, many of 

whose sons and daughters are the working people in the city of Yorkton, and in the villages of my constituency. 

Many of the business people of my constituency are the sons and daughters of these pioneers. They are 

industrious people. They are proud people and they are thrifty people. They are among the best farmers in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. They have been successful in business and in the professions. All they asked for or all they 

expected when they settled in this country was a chance to carve out their own future without some socialist 

planning it for them. I want to say at this time, Mr. Speaker, I consider it an insult to my constituents for some 

socialist to stand up in this house or outside of it and tell my people that they and they alone are concerned with 

their welfare. Mr. Speaker, these people fled from a socialist country to come here and have the opportunity to 

build this country to what it is today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — They want a chance to plan their own future, Mr. Speaker, and that chance was restored to 

them last April 22nd. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — The Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Thatcher) has called the budget a development budget. I think 

he named it well. It outlines the path the government will follow. It reflects the attitude of this government 

towards developing Saskatchewan for our people. I think it is also a budget of change, a budget of promise, and a 

budget of hope. It is also a change in government attitude toward investors, a promise for long past due relief, 

hope for the farmers, hope for our business people, hope for the men 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

547 

and women of our labor force, hope that all the people of this province might share in the riches our province was 

blessed with, and hope for every man and woman, for every boy and girl for a better life and a richer future. It is 

going to be a real pleasure, Mr. Speaker, for me to support this budget and I am going to vote against the 

amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate I want to congratulate you, Mr. 

Speaker, on your new position, and I am sure it is an honor to your constituency and I know that you will do your 

best in keeping good order in the house. 

 

I also want to thank the voters in my constituency for having returned me to this house for the third time. I took 

part in four-way fights, three-way fights, and last summer we heard of a saw-off but finally, at the last hour, the 

Conservative candidate decided that maybe it was just as well to give the Liberals their wish, and so we had a 

two-way fight. We had a good battle, and, by the way, we have only five votes that are not counted. There were 

only five challenged votes. We got along very well. Both the Conservative and Liberal candidates were good 

fellows, and just to show that they were quite agreeable, we have not got 400 votes that were not counted. I got in 

with a majority of 207 votes which I think was a substantial majority. I want to thank the people of my 

constituency for having turned out and placed their confidence in me and I consider it an honor to represent these 

people. I can assure the people of my constituency, whether they are Liberals, Conservatives, Social Credit, or 

CCF, that I will represent them with fairness, regardless of their race, color or creed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — After listening to the debate, I want to congratulate the Leader of the Opposition, the member 

for Kelsey, (Mr. Brockelbank) who is taking the place of Mr. Lloyd who is in hospital in Saskatoon. We hope Mr. 

Lloyd comes back soon. But I want to say that the dean of the house has sure demonstrated his ability in this 

session. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — I want to congratulate the financial critic, (Mr. Blakeney) for the magnificent way in which he 

spoke yesterday. I want to compliment him also. When the Premier delivered his Budget Speech, the financial 

critic remained absolutely silent. I think that he raised the dignity of the house by doing so. But the Premier did 

not award him the same respect. It is not surprising that he decides once in a while to kick in doors and to dig in 

the garbage cans and so on, to carry on his political ambitions. I also want to compliment the two ladies of this 

house. I want to say that it adds color to this house, with flowers on each corner, and two nice lady members, and 

it helps the dignity of the house, I would say. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Thibault: — I want to give them full marks for delivering such wonderful speeches and as far as the member 

for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) is concerned, I will say that he did not get full marks. He failed and I hope he writes 

again some day. 
 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — On a point of order, I . . . 
 

Mr. Thibault: — You failed . . . 
 

Mr. Guy: — I wish you . . . 
 

Mr. Thibault: — I never referred to any previous debate, and I wish you would sit down. I was not referring to 

any previous debate. I said that you failed, and you failed. That is the way I said it. 
 

As far as local governments in my constituency are concerned, I want to congratulate them for the wonderful 

co-operation they have given the 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

548 

previous government and I know they will give this government the same cooperation that they gave the CCF 

government. 

 

The previous government had a wonderful program and they took part in it whether it was sewer and water, 

power, or natural gas. The CCF government got wonderful co-operation and I want to tell the members on the 

other side of the house that they can expect the same degree of co-operation from the local governments in my 

constituency. 

 

I hope that this atmosphere will continue to prevail. It is the only way that we can make our country move ahead 

— to lay our political differences aside and work for the welfare of the country. Some of the programs that I am 

hopeful that the government at this time will carry out, is regarding regional parks. We have three wonderful lakes 

in my constituency that can be improved and a regional parks board has been set up and work is going in that 

direction. I am asking the present government to be kind to them and help them out all they can. 

 

I have not much time so I am going to make my remarks as brief as possible. We are going to celebrate this year, 

our sixtieth anniversary. I think that the pioneers of this country did a wonderful job and that in every year and in 

every decade, people dedicated their lives to improving our country. We are only sixty years old and we want to 

build on the foundation that was laid by our pioneers. Sixty years in the life of a person may be a long time, but in 

the life of a nation, it is a very short time. I think one of the things that we should work for this year is to build the 

Brotherhood of Man. Too often in this house, I have listened to people trying to pit labor against farmer, and 

farmer against labor, and people who will do that will try to pit father against son, and son against father, and 

mother against daughter. 

 

This is the kind of attitude that is being built up today and I do not like it. Those are the attitudes that bring world 

wars. So during this year, let us dedicate ourselves to the Brotherhood of Man. This is what we need. 

 

I also want to say a few words about the new flag. We had quarrels about it but we must accept it. I think that a lot 

of wounds that were opened up over it were unnecessary. I hope that they will heal up very soon. 

 

I want to talk about local government. When the grid roads started that was the program, I would say, that took 

the cars off the blocks. We used to put our cars on blocks for six months of the year, and the grid road program 

was the program that got the cars rolling. By driving around, they paid gasoline taxes and thus they built more 

roads. Now, as the program is coming to an end, these members across the way seem to think that the 

municipalities can cut down on their spending. I am very sorry that I can not agree with the way the budget is 

drawn up. The cutting back on funds for municipalities means that local governments are going to have to raise 

their taxes. You cannot have it both ways. I think we should have had a substantial increase in the money 

allocated to municipalities. I want to make a few comparisons here. Back in 1949 and 1950 when the public 

revenue tax was paid, and the government of Saskatchewan took $1,600,000 away from the municipalities and 

paid back $723,000, they were paying that out of the money collected from municipalities. But in 1958, 

practically $5,000,000 was paid to municipalities and what they got back from municipalities was a matter of a 

few thousand dollars. This enabled the municipalities to build the roads they have today. But their problems do 

not end there, because the grid road program is coming to an end, and we can see by the budget that there is a 

cutback in the amount of money that they are going to receive this year. 

 

Now, let us face it. If you look at the S.A.R.M. resolutions that are going to be presented this year, you will find 

that they are asking for help in maintaining these grid roads and help to build more roads. 

 

Also, they fondly imagine that farmers want purple gas. But here is a resolution from meetings of Districts no. 1 

and no. 2: 

 

Whereas the provincial government has proposed to permit the use of purple gas in farm trucks, and whereas it 

is felt that farmers in general do not object to paying gasoline tax on fuel used in farm trucks providing for their 

expenditure . . . 

 

Therefore, be it resolved that the government of Saskatchewan be requested to return the gaso- 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

549 

line revenue from farm trucks to the rural municipality for road construction and maintenance purposes rather 

than to permit the use of purple gas in farm trucks. 

 

Believe you me, we drove too long on purple gas roads, and it looks as if that is what we are going back to or the 

municipalities are going to have to raise their taxes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — I am not buying that kind of deal. I think that one of the main issues is that the farmers want a 

fair return for their products so that they will be able to pay these taxes. The loss of revenue due to the cut in grain 

prices that the farmer has to face now is more than twice the tax for school purposes, on their land. This is the loss 

they are faced with today. It will take a lot of purple gas to pay for that. 

 

My time is running out, but I must deal with a few other things. I want to point out that some are wondering how 

you will improve the farm problem. I would say that you can't, but that the federal government can by taking a 

slice of the military budget and feeding it into the farm economy. It will create jobs and give the farmer a better 

standard of living and it will feed the hungry people of the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — That is what will bring peace to the world. As long as you have 200,000,000 people dying of 

starvation, you cannot expect to have peace. These people will not buy any government system that does not 

provide them with a full stomach and shelter and medical care. 

 

I would like to say a few words about the agricultural lease. I want to touch on it briefly as my time is running 

out. I want to tell the Minister that I am not against the allocation committee for crown leases. I expect that he 

should be just as fair in my constituency as people have been fair before, because in my constituency I can take 

him around and show him a lot of Liberals who have crown leases. As far as I am concerned, I have no 

knowledge of any leases being granted in my constituency on the basis of political patronage. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — I am not afraid to face that question any day. Now, I want to say a few words about our civil 

servants. I have to cut my speech very short. The people of this province lost some of their freedom. I think there 

is one letter that was never quoted in this house and I am going to quote it now. It is a letter from the Power 

Corporation to all employees. This is a typed copy that was mailed out November 3rd, 1964. On paragraph five 

this is what it says: 

 

Employees who wish to stand for or who are elected to the legislative assembly of the province of 

Saskatchewan, must terminate employment with the corporation. 

 

I want to remind the members opposite that we passed a bill last year for a man named Dojack who wanted to run 

for the Liberals and what was his occupation? You know very well, that he was a member of the teaching staff of 

the Boys' School. This is the kind of freedom the CCF were giving. 

 

I can use another example in my constituency, where the Ag. Rep. secretary belongs to the Liberal executive. We 

never questioned his ability to do the job as long as the job was well done. I said he has the right, and I thought we 

had outgrown this business of choosing civil servants on the basis of political background. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Now, I will continue quoting this letter: 

 

Activities by employees in provincial political 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

550 

affairs which, in the management's opinion is not in the best interest of the corporation, are not permitted. It 

must be recognized that political activities even outside the working hours may cause serious difficulties in 

dealing with the public corporation business and in relationship with the corporation among supervisory staff. 

 

There you are, telling the employee who has to climb the power-line pole and hang the transformers and put the 

insulators on, that even after hours, he cannot take part in politics. 

 

I talked to this fellow. I am not going to divulge his name, but this is a typed copy of the letter that was sent out 

and I am prepared to table it. This is the kind of Liberal freedom that we have in my constituency, and believe me, 

neither the civil servants nor the people in general, buy this stuff. I believe that they should have freedom, and this 

letter definitely denies it to the people who are working for the Power Corporation. 

 

I do not want to belabor this point too long, but I want to talk about the by-election that took place recently. I 

would like to give you a little run-down of the history of by-elections. In Turtleford, a few years back, they 

elected a Liberal. After a few years of being represented by a. Liberal, they returned to the CCF. In Weyburn, they 

elected a. Liberal, but after a year or so, the CCF was re-elected again. Then, when you get to Prince Albert, if 

there were not some 400 votes sitting in envelopes, I do not know if the member for Prince Albert (Mr. Steuart) 

would be sitting over there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — So, when it got to Hanley, after about six months of Liberal rule, the people decided that they 

wanted a CCF representative in no uncertain terms. The people of Hanley said "No" to many things. They said 

'No" to the giveaway of our natural resources. They said "No" to such things is liquor advertising that was 

protested by the Temperance Association and Mr. Premier got a brief on that. They said "No" to the sale of liquor 

in drug stores. They said "No" to the mafia. They said "No" to many things, and this is why I am going to say 

"No" to the budget and "Yes" to the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, the government has presented to this house, in its own words 

"a prediction of what is likely to happen in the year ahead" — a prediction which fails to take account of the 

economic and social changes which are taking place in Saskatchewan and in Canada. The Premier, also Provincial 

Treasurer, has stated the kind of principles that the government intends to pursue in the coming months as well as 

the rationale of those promises that his party made to the electors, a rationale which is negative, which is 

backward and which is regressive. The budget is a setting of priorities, a place where pious remarks take concrete 

action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Budget Speech sets out four priorities. (1) The Liberal promises which were hastily and for the 

most part, ill-conceived and which are not being fulfilled. (2) It charges that taxes in Saskatchewan are higher 

than in the rest of Canada. This is untrue, Mr. Speaker, and it fails to explain that taxes in British Columbia, 

Ontario, and Quebec are higher, that in fact 72 per cent of Canadians pay more taxes and receive less services 

than Saskatchewan citizens did under the CCF administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — (3) That development will only take place in a new economic and political climate. This too is 

incorrect. Significantly in the fourth and last place, and I quote: 

 

That there remains much to be done to improve living standards for our people. 

 

A priority which this side of the house is dedicated to placing first and foremost. 

 

Let me first, Mr. Speaker, analyse the budget, not on my priori- 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

551 

 

ties but on those of the government. Let me draw to the attention of the members of the house the platform of the 

Liberal candidates in the city of Regina. They made ten pledges. One only, is reflected in the budget — the 

reduction of sales tax. But where, Mr. Speaker, are the other items? I draw to the attention of the house, a leaflet 

that was distributed during the last election campaign by the Liberal party. It is called "A New Deal for Regina". 

Where, Mr. Speaker, is the tax exemption of children's clothing and shoes? Where are the free text books for 

grades one to grade twelve? Where is the fifty per cent of all education costs that the province was going to pay, 

or approximately $1,500,000 additional for the city of Regina alone? 

 

Where is Regina's share of the gas tax revenues which the Regina Liberals promised the city for road construction 

and maintenance? What happened to the pledge that Saskatchewan government and Crown Corporation buildings 

pay taxes at the established mill rate? Where is the exemption of city purchases from the provincial sales tax? 

Where is the General Hospital which we were told would be erected "immediately"? Or the 600 bed Geriatric 

Centre which we were told would be provided "immediately"? Where are the increased grants for provision of 

adequate nursing homes? It was on these promises, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member from Regina South, the 

Minister of Highways (Mr. Grant) was elected. The people of Regina are entitled to know where he now stands on 

the promises that he made. But so far, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from Regina South (Mr. Grant) has been 

glued to his chair. We have not heard from him. Are these promises which Liberal candidates expounded but 

never expected to be fulfilled? 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us look at the inconsistencies in the budget. Agriculture diversification and development is to be 

given prominence, yet the technical resources in the Department of Agriculture are reduced; the Animal Industry 

branch, four positions eliminated and $40,000; the Plant Industry Branch is cut by $200,000; seven positions are 

eliminated in the Representatives Branch and $40,000; the General Agriculture Assistance has a $40,000 cut. 

In spite of being told that the economy is booming, six per cent of the labor force in Canada remains unemployed. 

About 22,000 persons in Saskatchewan are presently unemployed. But we are told that a labor shortage looms in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We are told that this government will increase employment in the non-agricultural sector by ten per cent per year 

over the next four years — 80,000 new jobs in the next four year period. But what does this government do to the 

Department of Labour budget? It reduces it by fourteen positions and $100,000. Every branch but one has a 

smaller staff. Every branch but one has less money. Mr. Speaker, in the 1964-1965 budget, the CCF provided 

$10,370 for a Women's Bureau in the Department of Labour. The Liberals completely ignored this provision until 

a few weeks before the Hanley by-election. Then the hon. Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) issued a statement to 

the press announcing the establishment of a Women's Bureau. Here is the way the story appeared in the Star 

Phoenix of November 28th: 

 

Appointment of Miss Mary Rocan as Supervisor of the newly-established Women's Bureau of the provincial 

Department of Labour was announced today by Labour Minister Lionel Coderre. Special attention will be given 

to the Bureau to conditions of labor and legislation affecting working mothers, the effect of technical change on 

women's employment, and the opportunities for vocational and technical training. 

 

After all this fanfare, when I opened the estimates to page 27, what did I find under the Women's Bureau? I draw 

it to your attention. No appropriation under the expenses. No appropriation under the Women's Bureau for 

personnel services. No appropriation at all, Mr. Speaker. The Women's Bureau has been wiped out, after only two 

and one half months of existence. 

 

The hon. Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) is also the Minister in charge of Co-operative Development and here 

the budget reveals the same formula — the budget reduced by five positions and $56,000. These are the friends of 

labor. These are the friends of co-operatives that the hon. member from Yorkton (Mr. Gallagher) was talking 

about. 

 

Technical education appears in the budget, but it appears too little and too late. And I might note that the net 

amount being put up by the province for technical education is not $1,000,000 but is $250,000, the 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

552 

balance $750,000 will be paid by the federal government. 

 

In the face of a larger population, more people in older age groups and chronic unemployment, the budget of the 

Department of Social Welfare is held static. No increase is allowed for social aid. Supplemental allowances are 

cut by $10,000. Old age assistance is reduced by $80,000. Blind pensions are reduced by $11,000. Construction 

grants for facilities to the aged are reduced by $200,000. 

 

This government has been outraged at the cost of social welfare payments but the very people who intelligently 

administer the program, and who are essential in the early review of cases, the staff in the Regional Services 

Branch, are held constant — really a cut when one takes into account salary increases and other costs. 

 

The result is one of two things. Either people who need social aid will be denied it, or social aid will increase 

because a routine review of present recipients will now take place some months later. 
 

The treatment of the social welfare budget is added evidence that this government is planning a further regressive 

step to foist on the municipalities a larger share of the costs of the indigent, a program which is a provincial 

responsibility and over which the citizens of Regina will have no control and must accept because the indigent 

tends to move to areas of employment and congregate in urban centres. The province should be paying the city to 

administer their programs and should assume 100 per cent of the cost — not 93 per cent, and surely not a lower 

percentage as the Premier has proposed. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Smishek: — At a time when urban changes are pressing upon us, the paltry sum of $6,500 as grants for 

urban development has been reduced to $2,250. At a time when the government has been concerned about 

economy, it now proposes to hand out $100,000 of government printing to weekly newspapers. Where are the 

public tenders? Will union shops be allowed to bid on these, or is this to be parcelled out on the basis of political 

support? 
 

The budget, on the one hand proposes to make and guarantee loans to industry on a massive scale. On the other 

hand, the government indicates it will try to dispose of the Wizewood Plant, a recipient of a loan from the former 

CCF government. Is this the new economic and political climate which the Liberals want? Regina today would 

not have a steel plant and the 550 jobs if this attitude had prevailed. At this rate we will deter industry and the 

"risk takers", not assist them. Is this the type of confidence — a loan one day, and a sell-out to their friends the 

next? 
 

Last year, this house voted unanimously for a new base hospital for southern Saskatchewan. The cost of the base 

hospital would be $15,000,000 to $20,000,000. The budget provides a measly $100,000 for the hospital. Must 

southern Saskatchewan wait for decades before the Liberals are prepared to act or does the government propose to 

place upon the citizens of Regina the cost of a new hospital, a facility which will serve mostly citizens outside 

Regina, at a cost to the over-burdened property owner now living in Regina? 
 

Oh yes, the Minister of Health (Mr. Steuart) skated around the new hospital yesterday, but he did not commit his 

Department or the government to approve a provincially built and paid for hospital. I want to hear this 

commitment from the Minister before this house adjourns. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Smishek: — Let me turn, Mr. Speaker, to the single greatest weakness of the budget. I am dismayed at the 

government's lack of fiscal understanding of the costs of primary and secondary education. There is indeed a tax 

debate going on in the province, but it is not on the level of taxes, but on the equity of taxes. The oppressive tax 

situation, which members opposite are fond of talking about, does not centre on the sales tax, it centres upon the 

property tax and this government has done absolutely nothing about it. Indeed, in its attitude to hospitals, social 

welfare, and now, education is moving to place an intolerable burden on the farmer and the home owner. Property 

taxes for the financing of general services are regressive, inequitable, and out-moded. There is absolutely no 

validity or rationale to the property tax as it presently prevails. 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

553 

Mr. Speaker, my time is up, and I must close by saying I will support the amendment. I must oppose the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — In rising to take part in this debate, it affords me my 

first opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, for the very high office you hold in this legislature. I am sure that it has 

not only brought great pride to the people you represent, but I am certain it has enhanced the prestige of the 

Liberal party and the government to your right. I want to take this opportunity of congratulating all the new 

members in the house, and especially to the new members on the government side of the house. I don't think in 

the history of Saskatchewan there was ever as many new people came in with the abilities that our new members 

have on this side. They have done themselves proud in debate. They have done themselves proud in committee, 

and I am sure, Mr. Speaker, I can speak for the Premier and my colleagues in assuring you and assuring the 

people of the province that as a result of their presence here, the future is great for the Liberal party and for all 

people in Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to especially congratulate my neighboring representatives, Mr. Thomas Weatherald in the constituency of 

Cannington, who replaced my former colleague, Mr. Ross McCarthy. I want to congratulate our very able 

Attorney General, Mr. Darrel Heald, who is my neighbor to the west in Lumsden, and another very efficient 

young member, Mr. Cy MacDonald, my neighbor in Milestone. I want to express my sincere appreciation this 

afternoon, along with my colleague from Estevan, in the announcement today of this tremendous new industry, 

The Heavy Water Plant in his city. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Mr. Speaker, I must, before I proceed, thank the people of Qu'Appelle-Wolseley, for once 

again giving me the opportunity to represent them in this house and in this government and I want to thank the 

five former CCF cabinet ministers who came down to take part in the election campaign, and help me out. I want 

to also thank the three former CCF-NDP MLAs who came down to help me out, and I want to also thank the 

former federal Minister of Agriculture, who came down for a week and held two meetings a day. He also did a 

great deal to help me out. 

 

I am sorry, Mr. Speaker, that during the election campaign I did not have time myself to hold any meetings. I held 

one meeting in my own constituency, but I was busy telling my people and notifying them of the meetings to be 

held by the five former CCF cabinet ministers, the three former CCF MLAs, and the federal Minister of 

Agriculture, to make sure the crowds got out and attended their meetings, and because we heard speeches from 

them similar to what we heard from the former Minister of Health (Mr. Blakeney) yesterday, and the member for 

Regina East (Mr. Smishek) today, I didn't have to hold any meetings on my own. 

 

I want to thank the people of Qu'Appelle-Wolseley for having given me the highest Liberal vote in the history of 

that constituency. They gave us the highest Liberal majority in the history of that constituency, and they gave the 

smallest vote for a CCF candidate in the history of that constituency. In fact, the CCF candidate in the past 

election was only able to garner 28 per cent of the vote, and I have the honor and the pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to 

inform the house that the CCF are so little thought of down there that we have one poll where they never even got 

one vote. Not even the poll clerk or the deputy returning officer supported them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want at this time, to congratulate the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Thatcher) for presenting a budget 

which is the most realistic and far-reaching that I have ever heard in this house since entering it several years ago. 

 

We are at long last able to speak with sincerity about industry moving into this province on a large scale. Previous 

budget addresses could only talk about bolstering sagging crown corporations. We are talking, not about 

promises, but about real accomplishments. I am proud to be associated with a government which will go down in 

history as the one that rescued the province of Saskatchewan from the Socialist economic experiment. 

 

We have a new government patterned after the governments in the rest of the provinces of Canada which during 

these past twenty years have 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

554 

moved out in front in development and their people have been enjoying the fruits of industrial growth, while here 

in Saskatchewan the Socialist government sat on their proverbial posteriors waiting for some miracle to happen. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, something did happen. The people elected a Liberal government — one which will not sit idly 

by and watch the other provinces attract industry, and our youth, into jobs outside the province. 
 

The task of bringing industry to the province will be difficult in the beginning simply because much has to be 

done to overcome the climate that the previous government created. The programs which the government 

unfortunately adopted to discourage industry from locating here have to be removed and new ones will have to be 

substituted. This, Mr. Speaker, will be our goal, and I am sure that you realize as we do, and the people of 

Saskatchewan do, that up to the moment we have been tremendously successful. 
 

Furthermore, we will have to stop the flow of university graduates to other provinces in Canada and across the 

border. We have a large investment in the youth of our province and it is unfortunate that in the past we have not 

been able to retain them for the benefit of Saskatchewan. The solution to retaining them is to make this province 

the kind of place where our youth will be proud to stay from both an economic and a social standpoint. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. McFarlane: — Our economic base under the previous government was never encouraged to broaden. We 

have the best grain growing potential in the world and not even the previous government could have changed that. 

But we also have the greatest potential for other agricultural pursuits. It is necessary to broaden our agricultural 

base to encourage the breeding and feeding of livestock of all kinds in order to capture the lucrative markets, not 

only of eastern Canada, but across the line and in Europe. The growing of specialized crops, to cope with the 

problem, in the event of a limited market for wheat, should be fought. Encouragement should be given to the 

supplying of necessary feed and food supplements throughout the province so that cattlemen can be assured of all 

the supplies necessary to maintain livestock herds which will find a ready market, both inside and outside of 

Canada. 
 

In the grain basket of the world, it is fair to expect to find the development of products which require grain as a 

prime ingredient. This province should and could be bristling with abbatoirs, feed mills, flour mills and other 

allied industries. 
 

This province has natural resources and mineral products, forest products, and products of water. The former 

government did very little to encourage the development of these resources. In the years ahead it will become 

abundantly clear that the blame for the lack of the development of this province over the past twenty years rests 

squarely on the shoulders of our Socialist friends across the way. 
 

Pulp and timber which abound in the north has been left to be harvested by the elements, and notably by forest 

fires, while other provinces have been enjoying royalties and taxes from industrialists who are developing large 

pulp and lumber mills within their bounds, and Mr. Speaker, we will be announcing new industries in this regard 

in the very near future. 
 

Industrialists on the other hand have been discouraged from entering the province because of the Socialist's signs 

posted on the borders, "Crown Corporations Only". Yes, of course, some industry was allowed to enter the 

province because the government was desperate for money to carry out experiments. These industries came in on 

bended knee. They knew the wealth was here and it must have been difficult to keep them out, but the Socialists 

did a remarkable job of just that. 
 

I am happy, Mr. Speaker, that our Liberal government has already shown in the few short months, what the 

absence of the Socialist government can mean to the province, insofar as encouraging location of industry here is 

concerned. Announcements that have been made to date are only a forerunner of what the future will bring. We 

will be able to look back on the industrial famine of the past twenty years, in a few years hence, and thank the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan, thank the electorate for having made the kind of decision they did on 

April 22nd last. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

555 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Before I go further, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about my own Department of 

Municipal Affairs, which has an important role to play in provincial matters. In my short time in office, I have 

been pleased to note that we have a good basic staff with many of the personnel having been many years in the 

service in the Department. It is important that the staff in this particular Department have experience in dealing 

with local governments. We are short of staff in some of our branches, but every effort will be made to recruit 

suitable persons. 

 

I am particularly interested in expanding our Community Planning Branch, because there is a pressing need to 

provide more community planning assistance to our larger urban centres and for others which are expected to 

expand. We are on the verge of industrial expansion and it is expected that a number of villages and towns will 

avail themselves of the provisions of the Industrial Towns Act. It is of utmost importance that the smaller urban 

centres, which will experience rapid expansion due to the boom which is taking place in the potash industry, 

receive proper guidance in the matter of physical development. 

 

There will be an initial burden placed upon the staff of the Department to service these centres. Recruiting of 

trained and experienced community planning personnel is a problem, and I gather has been a problem for a 

number of years. We hope to remedy this situation by engaging private consultants where and when necessary, 

should we find difficulty in recruiting suitable staff for the Department. 

 

I would like to mention the town of Lanigan, which as you know, was the first town designated as an industrial 

town under the Industrial Towns Act, A physical plan of development was completed by Department personnel 

and recently a town manager was engaged to serve as Chief Administrator, acting under policies as set by the 

Council. We expect a model town will develop in the area, as a result of proper planning and the fact that the 

industrial activity in the area will require more homes and businesses and local facilities. 

 

The Department is aware that urban centres, other than Regina and Saskatoon, find it difficult to engage and pay 

for specialists in community planning. This problem has existed for some time and, therefore, we are planning the 

establishment of regional offices to be located in the areas of the province, not as yet determined, where a 

planning office can be established and staffed by experienced planners. Such planners would be able to assist all 

urban centres in the area with their planning problems, in conjunction with our office in Regina, This move will 

be welcomed by urban councils and administrative personnel, as well as by the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association. 

 

I would like to mention something about the Water Assistance Branch. It is gratifying to see so many of the 

smaller communities install water and sewer systems. This kind of improvement not only adds to the amenities of 

the people, both old and young, but assists in attracting more home owners and business ventures, and in many 

cases, industry. Certainly, hospital and school facilities benefit from such improvement. Water and sewer services 

to nursing homes and homes for the aged are of prime importance, and this will have been noted that the budget 

has made adequate provision for assistance to such communities and the scope of our water assistance program 

will be widened. 
 

Some amendments to the Family Farm Improvement Act will be before this house this session. 
 

The Municipal Water Assistance Board was allotted $600,000 in the last budget passed by the legislature and 

when we took office in May of last year, about seven weeks after the budget was in operation, I learned that 

commitments made by the Board up to that time had precluded making few new allocations during the year. 
 

This was a serious position because there were numerous applications for assistance, which could not be dealt 

with because the allotment had been committed. This matter received our immediate attention and additional 

funds were made available to assist communities who had already undertaken works, and were in need of funds. 

During the present fiscal period, a total of $1,000,000 was made available for assistance to urban communities 

toward water and sewer facilities. We have been able to thus far in the year, give assistance to about forty urban 

centres under the program. 
 

It is our intention to continue this program for the benefit of 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

556 

local communities. We are concerned that the lack of modern water and sewer facilities will discourage industries 

from locating in some areas, and therefore, every effort will be made to provide assistance, especially where there 

is a possibility that the lack of a system may turn industry from locating in this province. We are, of course, 

mindful of the comfort that such utilities provide to a community and particularly the aged. 

 

The foregoing points up the need for continued research and exploration into the problem of finding adequate 

water supplies so that the benefits of our water and sewer systems can be fully realized. 

 

Some areas are presently finding it most difficult to supply the needs of their people for water. Costly water 

pipelines have had to be constructed. The matter of finding adequate supplies of water will require our full 

attention and the ingenuity of engineering specialists in this particular field. We will undertake appropriate 

studies, however, to overcome the problem since we recognize the magnitude and importance of the problem to 

the people of the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about highways. You will have noted mention in the budget of the 

very large increase in the amount to be expended on highways. This increase is significant, not only to the public 

at large, but will benefit particularly many of our municipalities. The increase in provincial highway mileage will 

relieve municipalities of many miles of roads, which are presently their responsibility, both with regard to 

construction and to maintenance. I want to congratulate the Minister of Highways (Mr. Grant) for the close 

cooperation between his Department and the Department of Municipal Affairs, especially in taking some of the 

grid roads into the highway system. This is something that has been long overdue. 

 

We have experienced a winter of not only severe cold weather, but one in which snow and blowing snow have 

caused havoc with our highways and our local roads. The building of the kind of roads which are designed to 

resist drifting and blocking, those which are of the provincial or grid road design, should be encouraged, so that 

snow clearing will not be a major problem. It is becoming increasingly important that municipal roads be kept 

open, not only so that farmers can move freely to market but because school buses must be able to transport 

children to school. The cost of snow clearing, if performed by municipalities, could in some years, such as this 

one, seriously affect the financial position of the municipalities. Roads built to grid standard would reduce the 

cost of snow clearing, and therefore when the present grid road program ends, as it does this construction year, 

serious consideration will have to be given to the matter of an additional program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — This whole matter will be discussed thoroughly with municipal authorities and the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. Most municipalities utilize snow-blowing clubs to clear snow 

from the municipal roads. This method is not the most economical but appears to be the most efficient. Members 

of the snow plough clubs are to be commended for the admirable job they have done. This kind of local effort 

should be encouraged and expanded. 

 

I am pleased that provision has been made for an expanded program of assistance to urban municipalities for 

street improvements. The policy of assistance in improving main streets will encourage more of these centres to 

extend such improvements to other areas of the communities. Dust-free roads and streets can mean more pleasant 

living from the standpoint of beauty and health and utility. 

 

We are presently experimenting with the use of salt, a by-product of potash and mining and refining which is in 

plentiful supply, as a means of providing dust-free roads and streets. Present indications are that the experiment 

may prove successful. While I do not wish to raise any false hopes regarding the utilization of salt as a road 

conditioner, I am sure that all of you can appreciate the significance of success in this experiment. I can visualize 

a tremendous benefit to our rural municipalities, to our park areas, and to our urban centres, in the use of such a 

process. It would also provide a means of utilizing what is otherwise a waste product in the production of potash, 

and there will be an unlimited supply of such salt. It is planned to expand our experimental program so as to cover 

a number of areas of the province which contain different soil types and perhaps different weather patterns. The 

Department has prepared a review of the test pro- 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

557 

grams in a. pamphlet prepared by the grid road authorities and which I recommend for reading by all members of 

this house. 

 

I want to say a few words here about the Municipal Road Assistance Authority which is also part of my 

Department. Grid construction in 1964-1965 was considerably accelerated in comparison with previous years. 

Approvals for construction were issued on the basis of twelve per cent of the grid mileage in the individual 

municipalities, and grants were paid on this basis. In addition, a sum of $2,000,000 was provided by the 

provincial government to be used for loans to enable municipalities to construct grid roads in advance of the 

ordinary grid road grants. The main purpose of the $2,000,000 loan, which was used to cover the provincial 

government share of the cost only, was to enable municipalities to take advantage of the municipal development 

and loan fund which was provided by the federal Liberal government. 

 

The municipalities were able to borrow two-thirds of the municipalities' share of grid costs from this federal fund, 

and will receive a twenty-five per cent rebate on the amount borrowed. As a result of all the available funds, 1,546 

miles of grid road were constructed in the 1964-1965 construction season. This involved the moving of an 

estimated 30,000,000 cubic yards of earth. In addition, sixteen miles of oil field access roads, which are 

constructed to grid standards, were worked on, as well as six point two miles of resort access roads. 

 

The provision of temporary provincial funds and funds under the Municipal Development Loan Act, has resulted 

in quite a few municipalities constructing grid roads a year or more in advance of receipt of the Authorities 

Assistance grants. As a result, 204 municipalities are ahead in their program by a total of 884 miles. Five hundred 

and two miles of this was financed with the aid of the provincial loan funds and 382 miles through local 

municipal funds. One of the results of this acceleration is that 100 municipalities have completed their entire 

original grid road mileage. However, the government still owes its share of the cost to 66 municipalities. 

 

The impending completion of the initial grid program has made it necessary for the provincial government and 

rural municipalities, to examine the rural road problem to see whether grid road extensions, are desirable. The 

Municipal Advisory Commission and the Municipal Assistance Authority have made a detailed study of the 

situation and as a result of their recommendation, I am pleased to advise you that the government is prepared to 

approve in principle, a limited extension of the grid road system. The Municipal Advisory Commission and the 

Authority have already commenced negotiations with municipalities regarding relocation of the extensions. 

 

In 1960-1961, a program assisting municipalities in the re-gravelling of grid roads was begun. Under this program 

the Authority pays its normal grid share of the cost of applying up to 300 cubic yards of gravel per mile, with 

those miles which have been gravelled at least five years previously being eligible. By the end of the last 

construction year, a total of 3,576 miles had been re-gravelled. 

 

To sum up the grid road program, as of today, a total of 292 rural municipalities, eleven local improvement 

districts and 111 towns and villages have participated in the construction of 11,028.2 miles of grid road. Of this 

total 10,535 have been gravelled. In addition, 14 municipalities have constructed and gravelled 150 miles of oil 

field access roads. Nine rural municipalities, and one local improvement district have constructed 26.8 miles of 

resort access roads. 

 

I am happy to report that this budget will allow the rural municipalities to undertake a substantial construction 

program. This year is the final year of the original ten year program. 

 

Our ferry service, which is administered by the Municipal Road Assistance Authority, has been further 

modernized this year with the purchase of five steel ferries, which are being used to replace worn out wooden 

ones. These steel ferries provide greater loading capacity and are expected to last indefinitely. 

 

I turn now to the Community Development Branch. This is one part of my Department which I should like to say 

something about, and which will be incorporated, Mr. Speaker, in the new Indian Affairs Branch. It has 

experienced some difficulties during the year, due to the fact that the entire program in the Green Lake and Canoe 

Lake areas has been inadequate and has not been properly planned or executed in the past. My main objection to 

the farm program at Green Lake has been that there was inadequate planning 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

558 

by the former government, and a lack of a practical program. 

 

The central farm operation, in my opinion, was a prime example of lack of management and lack of planning. An 

attempt was made to establish settlers on numerous small farm plots, of from thirty to forty acres, in an area 

where the growing of grain would be hazardous at the best of times. Wheat appeared to be a main crop, whereas it 

is obvious that the area is best suited to the raising of livestock. Little encouragement was given to the settlers to 

operate their own farms since it should have been obvious that the small acreage involved could never allow a 

settler, let alone a family, to subsist. No encouragement was given to those interested in farming to expand their 

holdings or establish a livestock herd. The central farm was used by the settlers for the stabling of their cattle the 

year around, and the central farm equipment and labor were used to cultivate seed and harvest crops for the 

settlers. In other words, farm dwellers were not encouraged, but farming operations by such dwellers, were in the 

most cases, not undertaken, and not encouraged. 

 

Conditions on the central farm were in a state of chaos when I visited the area last fall. The condition was a direct 

result of the former government failing to engage supervisory personnel who were competent. The residents of the 

area who were engaged on the farm, would have done a better job by themselves in operating the farm than was 

accomplished by some of the government employees who were in charge. 

 

The original idea, prior to 1944, of the central farm was certainly worthwhile. The plan to assist the Metis in the 

area, by making available farm plots, was admirable. My main criticism is that there was a lack of adequate 

detailed planning and poor execution of any plan that existed during the ensuing years. 

 

I would like to speak for a few minutes on the matter of local government, which is the main concern of my 

Department. Taxes for our municipal and school purposes have been increasing year by year, and municipal 

people have shown remarkable restraint in accepting this burden. The time is fast approaching, Mr. Speaker, when 

local governments, with increasing demands being made upon them for services, will be hard pressed to obtain 

the tax money to meet their bills. What is needed to relieve this situation is the creation of more taxable property 

and businesses, so that more tax funds will pour in with no increase in tax burdens to the present property and 

business owners. Here again, industry is the answer. We also need more people to share the cost of some of the 

basic services. We need to bolster our population total, which has been lagging so badly over the past fifteen years 

or more. The trend has to be reversed. We have to attract more workers for the jobs that industry will create. This 

is a problem at the moment. 

 

We are short of laborers in this province and the situation may become worse. I have attended numerous rural and 

urban municipal association meetings this past summer and fall. The spirit of the delegates, Mr. Speaker, at these 

meetings, left little to be desired. I have faith in the municipal councillors, the reeves, the mayors, and the 

overseers who are doing their utmost to strengthen local government. It is my aim, and object, as Minister of 

Municipal Affairs, to assist them in this very important undertaking. 

 

Recent estimates indicate that total municipal expenditures, including payments to schools, are approaching the 

$145,000,000 mark in this province. This is an indication of the importance of our municipal governments and the 

tremendous task which they are undertaking. The elected members of local government, who in the main are paid 

very little for the devotion of time and energy to their jobs, are to be admired by all members of this house for 

their efforts. It is to the credit of these people that we have the kind of democracy we do in Canada today. Let us 

not forget that if we weaken local government, we are jeopardizing our own position here in this legislature, 

where local government is the basis of our democratic system. 

 

I have met with the executives of the two municipal government organizations, the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association and the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. These meetings, I am 

pleased to say, have been most cordial and beneficial. I cannot over-emphasize the importance I attach to these 

organizations. They provide an important contact between the Department and the local governments. I will be 

relying upon their representatives for guidance in dealing with some of the crucial problems in the months ahead. 

Organizations such as S.U.M.A. and S.A.R.M. are to be fostered and to be encouraged by both the people they 

represent and the government, for they are effective and necessary, in the conduct of a successful democracy. 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

559 

This government will do its best to create a better climate for negotiations with both government bodies so that 

mutual problems may be solved and desirable adjustments may be made. We believe that there are two sides to all 

questions and that an honest examination of both sides is necessary and desirable if there is to be fairness and 

good will. I will make every effort to encourage local governments to work out common problems with us and to 

solve other pressing problems where research is not being undertaken. 

 

Certainly, we mean to work together for the common purpose of strengthening local governments and to 

strengthen the ties that bind the two levels of government. In this kind of climate we can overcome any mutual 

problems. 

 

This house is well aware of the study which was carried out by the Continuing Committee set up by the previous 

government. A glance over public accounts will refresh the memory of a few who may have forgotten this 

Committee and such accounts might enlighten the new members. We have had sufficient debate upon this topic, 

both inside and outside the house, but as Minister of Municipal Affairs, I should like to make these observations. 

 

Over $1,000,000 has been spent by the former government in the study of municipal reorganization without one 

dollar of return for such investment. You may say that you have boundaries established which are now being used 

by school units, which some day may be used for county boundaries. True as that may be, the main purpose for 

establishing the study was to propose something reasonable with regard to reorganization, which was to be 

acceptable to these local governments. 

 

Acceptance was easily gained from the school units, because the boundaries were little different from the existing 

school unit boundaries. However, it must have been clear to the government of that day that the proposed 

boundaries and suggested reorganization was not acceptable to our rural municipalities. Not one county 

application has been received since the study, or at least not one has come to my knowledge, since taking office. 

What good has the $1,000,000 or more spent done towards encouraging municipalities to make adjustments? I 

would say, Mr. Speaker, very little. I believe that the basic system of local government, which we have today, has 

served this province admirably over the years, due to the devotion and dedication of those persons who have 

served in office and accepted the challenges and responsibilities. I further believe that changing conditions dictate 

necessary changes in local government and that we must be sensitive to such needs. However, if changes are to be 

useful they must be acceptable to those who represent and those who are affected by local government. 

 

We recognize today, that there possibly may be municipalities whose boundaries could be enlarged and we will 

be receptive to their problem. But as you know, our stated policy has always been that there will be no municipal 

reorganization without a vote of the persons concerned. 

 

As you know, there has recently been a great deal of research done on this subject but municipalities have not 

been convinced that the recommendations are acceptable. It will be our policy to strengthen the present basic 

system and keep an open mind on the question of reorganization and to create a climate of mutual trust so that any 

desirable changes can be freely discussed and any changes may be accomplished without due pressure from any 

source. 

 

Another area covered by my Department is that involving local improvement districts. There are, at the present 

time, twelve local improvement districts, which are areas of the province where local self-government has not yet 

been established? These areas have for many years, received subsidies from the provincial treasury by way of 

direct grants and also earned assistance. While it is recognized that there are areas covered by these districts, 

which can be considered depressed and under-populated areas, this does not apply to all the areas. The 

Department employs a supervisory staff, which is directly involved in the administration of all L.I.D.'s and all 

final decisions are made by head office, including the budget procedures. It is recognized that local governments 

must have responsibilities in order to develop. To concentrate powers at the senior level of government, which 

rightfully belong to local level, can serve only to discourage local ratepayers interest. 

 

As a first step in providing greater responsibility to local ratepayers in the local improvement districts, voting by 

secret ballot was introduced in the fall of last year, in the election of members of ratepayers committees — the 

first time in the history of the province, Mr. Speaker. The 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

560 

elections were held in a similar manner and at the same time as the elections in rural municipalities. Committees 

will meet much the same as rural municipal councils and conduct their meetings in the same manner as rural 

municipalities. 

 

We plan to encourage local committees to accept more responsibility in budget planning, operation and control 

and to establish mill rates based upon realistic budgets. It is our aim to move cautiously but firmly in the direction 

of total local self-government for all local improvement districts, which desire and are able to accept the 

responsibilities. This move will not only increase the service in these areas, but will assist in their more rapid 

development. 

 

With regard to land leases, the Department is charged with the responsibility in the matter of leasing land which 

belongs to the local improvement districts. In order that there will be a degree of uniformity in our leasing 

policies, we are adopting the same policy as that now being established by the Department of Agriculture. 

 

The Appeal Board, set up by that Department will also be used for hearing of appeals. This will insure that any 

patronage that may have developed under the previous system will be removed. The sale of lands for cultivation 

purposes will be encouraged so that farmers may develop economic units and so that they may develop a private 

interest in these lands. This will lead to better farms and to better farming methods simply because the farmer will 

reap the benefit of all the improvements to his land. There are farmers with families, who would like to encourage 

their sons to start their own operations. Land which is made available for sale will encourage this kind of 

expansion. 

 

An attempt will be made to encourage more private contracting for major road improvements in local 

improvement districts. This will be encouraged in areas where there is no shortage of contractors and bids and 

therefore competitive. This will insure that roads are built at the least possible cost to the local improvement 

districts. It will also provide work for contractors. 

 

Local improvement district equipment will be used to construct roads in areas where there are insufficient 

contractors and where construction is difficult due to perhaps the long hauls of outside equipment. It is not 

expected that wholesale changes will be made in our construction equipment inventory. However, there will be a 

gradual change where we have shipped the equipment from one area to another instead of purchasing new 

equipment. 

 

Adequate provision will be made for equipment which is of a maintenance nature because it is my feeling, that 

once roads are built, proper maintenance is mandatory for reasons of economy and convenience to the public. 

 

It is anticipated that mining and forest industries will locate especially in the northern development improvement 

districts, as well as in northern administration areas. This will have a very desirable effect upon the tax structure 

on local improvement districts. It will also have an effect upon the urban centres in local improvement districts, 

and will allow the extension of needed local services as well as tax relief — hence a reduction in provincial 

subsidies. 

 

I would like to mention a few words in regard to the Winter Works Incentive Program which is another program 

administered by my Department. The program, developed by the federal government several years ago, has been 

of considerable assistance to the municipalities. It is unfortunate that this year severe winter weather will slow 

down winter works undertakings. The effect of the weather on the program was recognized by the provincial 

government and recently representations have been made to the federal government for an extension of the 

program for one month. We trust that our request will be given favorable consideration. We have had 

representations made to have the program extended on a permanent basis for one month, due to the severity of the 

weather and on the grounds that the winter season in this region is longer than in other regions in Canada. 

 

This particular matter will be discussed with federal and municipal authorities at the earliest opportunity. The 

assistance, through the Winter Works Program, relates to direct labor costs, but it is recognized that the material 

used in winter works undertakings does have a direct effect upon the whole economy. Therefore, the importance 

of the program, Mr. Speaker, should not be overlooked. I would like to take this opportunity of 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

561 

paying recognition to organizations which fostered the whole idea of winter works through local effort. I had the 

pleasure of attending a recent meeting of the local "Do It Now" Committee in Moose Jaw. This organization and 

others like it do much for a community and the province as a whole, in fostering employment. 

 

The Municipal Development and Loan Fund which the federal Liberal government introduced in 1963, will help 

local governments in the province. The program is designed to make funds available to local government bodies 

so that they may undertake projects which accelerate capital works programs. For this purpose, the federal 

government made available to the province more than $20,000,000 at an interest rate of five and three-eighths per 

cent which is now down to five and one-quarter per cent. 

 

It is significant that the local governments in Saskatchewan are out in front of other provinces in Canada in having 

applications for loans approved, since over ninety per cent of the funds available have been committed on such 

approvals. For those who are not entirely familiar with the working of the funds, I would like to review it as 

briefly as possible. A local authority such as a municipality or a school unit makes application for a loan through 

the fund. The amount available from the fund is calculated on the basis of two-thirds of the cost of the project. 

Temporary financing by local authorities is carried out through a local bank or a credit union. When the costs are 

finalized and the project is completed, debentures are issued to the provincial government in the amount equal to 

seventy-five per cert of the funds to which it is entitled. This is a program which was introduced by the Pearson 

government. It is a worthwhile program which certainly helped the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The availability of senior government funds for local government borrowings helps considerably in keeping 

interest rates at a reasonable level for the local body, and it is especially beneficial to the smaller centres where 

credit ratings are difficult to establish by the investors. 

 

Efforts will be made to develop a permanent fund of reasonable size to assist local governments in marketing their 

debentures, especially when the Development and Loan Fund has completed its program in March, 1966. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has given me a great deal of pleasure on this occasion to outline some of the accomplishments of 

the Department of Municipal Affairs in the past fiscal year and it gives me a great deal of pleasure to review some 

of the major projects we will be undertaking in the year ahead. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to express my appreciation to the hon. Provincial Treasurer, the Premier, who 

has moved that you do now leave the chair in order that Her Majesty be granted the necessary sums to carry out 

the provisions of the magnificent development program that he has outlined. This is truly a most fitting manner 

for the inaugurating of the celebration of the Diamond Anniversary of our province, and Mr. Speaker, I want to 

assure you, the Premier, and my colleagues, that my Department will assume its responsibilities for the monies 

allocated to it, for its share in this, the initial year of a great new era of development under a Liberal government. 

I will support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I cannot let the opportunity go by to say a few words about the 

budget that we heard in this house last Friday. 

 

I should say that the first impression I had from hearing the budget was that the government has a special talent 

for distracting attention from the real issues. We heard the budget loudly lauding certain tax reductions, and I 

think before we allow ourselves to be carried away in our enthusiasm for the so-called tax reductions, we should 

analyze the budget to see just what the effect of these changes will be on the financial structure of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the tax reductions referred to was the elimination of the gasoline tax on farm truck fuel — the 

right to use purple gas in farm trucks. Mr. Speaker, I think that everyone who is a farmer will naturally welcome 

and enjoy any tax relief however slight, however insignificant it may be, and I am sure that a great deal more 

transportation will be by farm truck now than was formerly the case. The government has had a long time to 

consider this tax reduction. The Liberal party was posing this 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

562 

tax reduction as far back as 1951 so they have had some thirteen or fourteen years to consider the wisdom of this 

policy and to consider how it would be applied, how it would be worked out in practice. Since being elected last 

May, they have had approximately nine or ten months to work this out. One would have thought it would be 

possible to work out this tax easement in a way which would not create as much resentment and do as much harm 

as it does good. I think that we are all anxious that people who use motor vehicles in the making of their 

livelihood should be relieved from unnecessary imposts and taxes, and this is true of farmers as it is of small 

business men and working people who have to use their vehicles in gaining their livelihood. 

 

I think that my farm friends in the constituency of Hanley certainly are not happy about being singled out for 

discriminatory tax benefits — not as happy as they would have been if they had been able to say that all others, 

with an equal degree of need, were entitled to share in the same privilege. You have the situation now, where 

there are people living in the constituency of Hanley who farm in the summer time and who carry on some work 

in the city of Saskatoon during the balance of the year and they will drive their farm trucks in from the 

surrounding villages or the rural areas, and enjoy tax exemption on the fuel that they use to go to and from work. 

Similarly, there are people living in the urban communities near Saskatoon, Dundurn, Warman, Aberdeen, and 

other places, within twenty-five miles of the city, who go every day to work, commute back and forth, and who 

will not be able to enjoy the same benefit that is accorded to the farm people who work in the city and go back 

and forth to work with their half ton truck. There will be, I suggest, some resentment about this by people who are 

just as much in need of tax relief as the rural people and I make it clear that I am not objecting to tax relief being 

given to anyone when it can be done. All I say, Mr. Speaker, is that a government that has apparently had this in 

mind for so long could have done a more equitable and fair job of granting this tax exemption. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Walker: — I can think of people in my constituency who do sales work from door to door, who wash 

windows, who engage in janitor services in several buildings, who have to go from building to building in the 

pursuit of their livelihood. I can think of people who have to work on shifts and who have to drive their cars to 

work because the transit system does not function after midnight when they change their shifts. Many of them 

have to drive ten miles a day, 4,000 or 5,000 miles a year, going to and from work because there is no other transit 

available during the hours of their changing of shifts. These people are just as much in need, I submit, of some tax 

benefits as are the people whom I represent in the rural portion of Hanley. I think it would have been a good thing 

for this government if they had thought this thing out a little more and had seen to it that this benefit was accorded 

to all people engaged in work where they have to use their vehicles. We all agree that wherever possible taxes 

should be removed from the costs of production, and that all these people who use a motor vehicle in gaining their 

livelihood are entitled to consideration with respect to this matter. 

 

Something was said about the removal of the mineral tax from farm lands. Here again the government has had a 

good deal of time to consider the effect of this proposal and we have not yet had a chance to see just what the 

legislation will be, but I would hope that if it does not take this factor into account, it be given consideration even 

at this late date. I refer to those cases where farmers have leased their mineral rights to an oil company on the 

terms that the oil company will reimburse the farmer for any mineral tax which he may have been required to pay. 

Hon. members on the other side of the house will know that it was common for oil companies to lease the farmers' 

mineral rights giving to them one-eighth of all production and for the oil company to assume seven-eights of the 

cost of any mineral taxes paid by the farmer on those mineral rights. Now, if an exception is granted to all 

farmer-owned mineral rights then of course the farmer who has leased his mineral rights will enjoy the same 

benefits and it will mean that the company leasing those rights from the farmer will be relieved of the mineral tax 

which they presently are required to pay. When the Premier says that it is not the intention of the government to 

relieve the companies of this mineral tax, I hope he has considered this category of mineral rights, those which are 

owned by farmers but leased to companies. Otherwise, seven-eighths of this benefit, seven-eighths of this tax 

remission, will go to oil companies and only one-eighth of it will go to farmers. I hope the government has 

considered this aspect of it. 

 

Now we are told . . . I'm sorry, I did not hear what the hon. member said, if he has a question I would be more 

than happy to resume my seat . . . 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

563 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — Is that Socialist arithmetic? 

 

Mr. I.C. Nollet (Cut Knife): — That is the kind of a question we would expect . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — I hadn't really thought it was arithmetic at all, Mr. Speaker, but this modern mathematics may 

include some areas that I am not aware of. I thought we weren't talking about arithmetic at all, that we were 

talking about common sense and fair play. We were talking about the obligation of the government to the farmer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, we are told that this budget contains a reduction of $14,300,000 of tax. Well, if we 

look in the estimates, we see whether the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Thatcher) really means what he says in his 

Budget Speech. Because if we look in the estimates, we find that this government proposes, in the coming fiscal 

year, to collect $107,552,000 in taxation compared with $108,980,000 that was estimated by the government a 

year ago. This represents a reduction of something like about $1,400,000 in the revenue estimates. Now, I am well 

aware that the estimates of a year ago were exceeded, but they were not exceeded by $14,000,000. They were 

exceeded by less than half of that amount. So that this government is asking this legislature to authorize it to 

collect only $1,500,000 less than the previous legislature authorized the government to collect. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, this reduction in the estimated revenues from taxation of $1,400,000 is more 

than half accounted for by the reduction in an item which the Premier didn't even mention. That is the corporation 

income tax. I am surprised that the Premier did not mention it because the estimates a year ago were $11,800,000 

and the estimates this year are $11,000,000. At the same time, personal income tax is estimated to increase from 

$19,250,000 to $22,250,000. So while you have a ten per cent increase in personal income tax estimated by this 

government over a year ago, you have a ten per cent reduction in the corporation income tax. My hon. friend, the 

Premier, did not mention or explain this. There are only two possible explanations which occur to me, Mr. 

Speaker, whether the government of the day expects this province to fall into a state of economic stagnation and 

corporations produce less income than they have been producing, or the government over there is contemplating a 

substantial reduction in the rates of corporation income tax . . . 

 

Hon. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): — Do you want the answer now? 

 

Mr. Walker: — If there is any other explanation I would be pleased. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — The answer is that you were away over estimated expenditures last year and you 

didn't have a quarter of the activities you pretended to have. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Walker: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if that was the case, I am surprised that the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. 

Thatcher) didn't make any reference to it in the Budget Speech. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — . . . laid a trap for you . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — I thought that if that was true, the Provincial Treasurer would have said so. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — It is true. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, if that is true, then of course, the statement which I am making about the excess in 

tax revenues over the estimates a year ago has to be qualified. When I said that the yields from these taxes during 

the current fiscal year exceeded the amounts estimated, they didn't exceed them by as much as I had assumed, and 

so this government is asking this legislature to authorise it to collect almost as much money in taxes from the 

people of Saskatchewan as the previous government asked the legislature 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

564 

a year ago to collect. The rates are slightly down, but the dollars are almost exactly the same, Mr. Speaker. The 

number of dollars being taxed out of the people is almost identical. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, assuming that the Provincial Treasurer's statement of a reduction in taxation was true, 

$14,300,000, this represents a reduction of $15 per person in the coming fiscal year. Assuming that his statement 

is true, that there is a $14,000,000 reduction which I don't concede, Mr. Speaker, but even if it were true, what are 

the increases? What are the increases? Well, if a man smokes, the increase will be $10 a year from the cigarette 

tax, three cents a day for 333 days is ten dollars, and if . . . 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Prince Albert): — . . . pretty heavy smoker. 

 

Mr. Walker: — That is less than a pack a day and that is considered, I think, a moderate smoker. Of course, if his 

wife smokes then he has to pay for that too. Then that is just too bad. Then of course, he had to pay $10 more for 

medical and hospital care as a result of the tax increase policy of the present Liberal government, so you see, he is 

already $5 in the hole, as a result of these so-called tax reductions, even if the reductions are as much as claimed 

by the Premier, even if the amount which he claims has actually been reduced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it a little hard to work up much enthusiasm for tax reduction which leaves the taxpayer more 

heavily burdened than before. It is a case of simple mathematics that if you are going to reduce the per capita tax, 

if you are going to reduce the taxation burden by $15 per capita, then everybody who smokes is going to pay $10 

more and everybody who has hospital and medical care is going to pay $10 more, he is worse off than he was 

before. It is true that the non-smoker might save $5 providing they don't get him some other way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was asked by the Liberal party in the Hanley by-election whether I would support a proposal to 

reduce the sales tax by one per cent and support a reduction of these other taxes. I said that I would support it 

providing I could be satisfied that the tax reduction would not do the people of Saskatchewan more harm than 

good. Well, what are the results of this tax reduction? It is perfectly clear to anyone who listened to the hon. 

financial critic (Mr. Blakeney) yesterday, that the increases in school grants are not even enough to take into 

account the increased school population, certainly nothing there to compensate for the increase in the cost of 

operating our schools. The resulting increase in local taxation which will come about as a result of the miserliness 

of this government with respect to education, with respect particularly to school grants, will raise the mill rates all 

over this province, more than the alleged tax reductions which the Provincial Treasurer boasted about. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that when this government talks about applying priorities that they applied the wrong 

priorities. For example, the $3,800,000 which they say they have given to the farmers in authorizing the use of 

purple gas in farm trucks, that $3,800,000 would be of more use to the rural people of Saskatchewan if it was used 

to relieve them of the direct burden of property taxes in their municipalities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, as a rural member I have made it my practice for the last seventeen years to visit 

every rural council in my constituency every year and oftener when called upon to do so. I found that, without 

exception, the rural councils in Hanley constituency would have preferred to have received this money in the form 

of a $13,000 unconditional grant to the municipality, rather than as a reduction of gas tax for farm vehicles. This 

would have meant, for a municipality having a $1,300,000 assessment as two of them have in my constituency, a 

ten mill reduction in property taxes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Walker: — And if I ask them whether they would rather have a $40 saving on their farm truck fuel or a ten 

mill reduction in their property tax rate, they would have to be out of their minds to choose the alternative as it 

was chosen by the government across the way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that isn't all. All we had to do was to peruse the 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

565 

estimates to see where we were going to have to extract money from the people of Saskatchewan in order to do 

these things, and I was quite shocked to discover that by and large, it was the most helpless, the most dependent 

groups of people in society who were being fleeced in order to make the Provincial Treasurer's Budget Speech 

possible. 

 

All you have to do is look at some of the items. If the hon. members have their estimates before them, turn to page 

ten under Agriculture — the Saskatchewan River Delta survey. There is a reduction of seventy per cent in that 

item. I hope, when the estimates come up, that the government will reconsider and decide that the future of 

agriculture calls for a proper survey and study to be done in this area, and that the government will give an 

assurance that it does not hope to settle this area in the way that the Sifton administration settled Saskatchewan, 

without any proper survey before the settlement occurred. This seems to me to be a particularly short-sighted kind 

of thrift, Mr. Speaker, to reduce this item by seventy per cent. There may be some explanation of it. If there is, I 

hope that we will hear it before the estimates are disposed of. 

 

If you take agriculture as a whole, the government across the way trumpets and beats its breast about what a great 

friend it is of the farmer. But just look at the estimates for agriculture, Mr. Speaker. You are a farmer, Sir, and I 

am sure that as a farmer you must feel some sense of consternation at not being able to protest against this 

obvious injustice to the agriculture industry. But just look at it. It is proposed next year to spend $4,604,000 on 

the Department of Agriculture compared to $5,276,000 the year before. But indeed, if you add the supplementary 

estimates for agriculture, of another $330,000 in the current fiscal year, the amount spent on ordinary 

expenditures for agriculture is $5,606,000 in the current year, and they only propose to spend $4,604,000 on 

ordinary expenditures next year — a reduction of a little over a million dollars on ordinary expenditures. 

 

Well, if you turn to capital expenditures on page twelve, what do you find? There is one big project in there, the 

bringing of irrigation to the farmers of Broderick. But if you take that out, take out the expenditure that is 

proposed on the South Saskatchewan Dam, and I don't say that should be ignored — it is an important 

expenditure — but if you want to see how the rest of the province is faring, consider that item separate from the 

whole agricultural budget, and what do you find? It is down too, from $7,280,000 to $6,404,000. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, from a government that got elected by claiming to be the friend of the farmer, I think this is an amazing 

about turn. I remember and I am sure the former Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Nollet) remembers, that the present 

Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McDonald) orating eloquently in his place over here on this side of the house, not 

many years ago, when he said, "What this government should be doing is spending, not $5,000,000 but 

$35,000,000 on agriculture". 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Walker: — We remember this and now he joins the government as Vice-Premier and he has to sacrifice both 

the capital and the operation budget. I guess perhaps, it is really too bad that the farmers of Saskatchewan have to 

pave the way to the Senate for the hon. Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McDonald). 

 

Mr. B.D. Gallagher (Yorkton): — . . . jealous ? 

 

Mr. Walker: — What about another area that farmers are vitally concerned with? I refer to the Department of 

Co-operation and Co-operative Development. The hon. Minister representing the constituency of Gravelbourg 

(Mr. Coderre) has, no doubt, raised his stentorian voice on behalf of co-operatives and co-operative development, 

and what has been the result? The total for Co-operative Association services is down from $132,000 to $118,000. 

I am sure that he has cried out loudly on behalf of the credit unions, but we find that in the credit union services, 

the expenditure is down from $128,000 to $115,000. I am sure that he will be an ardent believer in the value of 

research and statistical services, but unfortunately the amount of money is down from $53,500 to $46,000 next 

year. The total sum of money for extension services in the co-operative movement is down from $149,000 to 

$140,000. 

 

Now, there has only been one area I did not mention and that was administration, and it is down too, from 

$50,000 to $42,000. The hon. members on the other side betray their real feeling for co-operation and the spirit of 

human brotherhood, when they applied the pattern of the estimates 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

566 

for the development of the co-operative movement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what are the areas from which this government has extracted money in order to make possible the 

flamboyant claims that the Premier has made? Look at education. He talks so eloquently about the importance of 

culture, the development of the arts, and . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — He only discusses it . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — There is one area which I suppose could be called a frill because it is a cultural and artistic 

matter. I refer to the area of continuing education. This is where you discover what this government really thinks 

of people who need help, who need to have an opportunity, having dropped out of school, having gone to work, 

having been burdened by the failure to acquire the education they might have acquired. The Continuing Education 

Branch was set up to help these people to lead a fuller and better life — but in this area, down from $300,000 to 

$272,000. 

 

Or just look at education generally . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Way up . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — Yes, way up. The Minister of Health (Mr. Steuart) says, "Way up". Well, let us look at it . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — That means higher . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — A great deal is said about the assistance which this government was giving to the university. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, this government was not able to point to any substantial assistance to the public and high 

schools, so it made quite an issue out of what it was doing for the university. 

 

I look at my estimates, and if the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Steuart) wants to look at them too, look at page 

nineteen, and there you find what they are doing for the university. On operation, they propose to spend 

$8,335,000; on construction, $1,500,000; for a total of $1,835,000. The Premier says that in addition, there was 

$3,000,000 out of the current year's budget turned over to the university for next year's program, but that is part of 

the budget that was passed in this house by the previous government and . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Never heard of it . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, every cent of that $3,000,000 was levied out of tax revenues that were imposed by 

the CCF government at the last session of the legislature and that $3,000,000 came about, Mr. Speaker, because 

we resisted the ill-timed demands of the gentlemen who now sit on the other side, that taxes should have been 

reduced. If we had accepted their advice, and reduced taxes by $3,000,000 it wouldn't be there, but it was because 

the people who sit on this side of the house had more sense of fiscal responsibility than to heed this frivolous kind 

of opinion that was voiced by the Liberal party, but that $3,000,000 is there and so, if you add that $3,000,000 . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I counted that . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — . . . which was paid in the current fiscal year, out of those funds appropriated and levied by the 

CCF government, you find that, in the current fiscal year, the sum of $11,200,000 was appropriated for operating 

and construction of the University of Saskatchewan, — $11,200,000 in the current year, and all we are providing 

for in the next year is $9,800,000 or a reduction of a $1,200,000, Mr. Speaker, — a reduction of $1,200,000. But 

oh, they say to the University, "Go and borrow" and that is what the University is going to have to do — borrow 

$7,000,000 in order to be able to carry on their expansion program in the coming year, not because of anything 

that was done by my hon. friends opposite out of current revenues, out of the revenues for the next fiscal year, but 

out of funds that were accumulated, that were found in the till by these gentlemen when they came into office. 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

567 

Mr. Speaker, my hon. friends opposite haven't got a good record in terms of the one area where they have done 

the most shouting and the most cheering, namely in connection with assistance to the university. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, there is another factor that needs to be taken into account. Even though they 

have provided, in the next fiscal year, for $1,400,000 less for the university, they have included within the 

university's costs monies which last year were headed under Regina Teachers' College and Saskatoon Teachers' 

College, Technical Training and Vocational Development Advisors Committee, all together another $500,000, 

Mr. Speaker, that are now included in this university grant, in order to buoy it up and make it look bigger. It still 

falls a $1,400,000 short of what was done in the current fiscal year out of revenues that were levied by the CCF 

government last spring. Well, enough for that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I should think so. 

 

Mr. Walker: — I want to turn to one other area. The members opposite used to say a great deal about this. "Too 

many cabinet ministers", they said, and the expenses were too much. Well, let us look at the budget. Here we are 

— not a reduction. We are now not dealing with university students or dependent groups or unfortunate people. 

We are dealing with the hon. gentlemen who sit across on the Treasury benches, and what happens? Last year 

$296,000 was voted; this year $308,000. You see, Mr. Speaker, where their heart lies. 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . high priced help . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you also that there is no provision in this $308,000 

for these little boys who are going to get their fingers in the pork barrel if the legislation passes dealing with 

legislative assistants. There is no provision for that in the pork barrel, Sir. None whatever. So you have to add 

another $10,000 or more to that $308,000 — $318,000, a substantial increase, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Where else have they economized? Look at the Department of Labour. The previous speaker has already referred 

to the reductions in the Department of Labour. I want to refer to the Labour Standards Branch. This is the branch 

that goes out and inspects places of employment, assists workers in getting their rights and seeing to it that the 

laws are carried out for their benefit — that employers observe the Holidays with Pay Act, and so on. These are 

the people who, if necessary, go to Magistrates' Court, and help the workmen collect their pay. This is the area in 

which a bill is already before the house to try to curtail the rights of the worker and apparently they expect the bill 

to pass, Mr. Speaker, because they are proposing to spend less money on this service. Last year we voted 

$138,000 for this purpose — this year $117,000. 

 

These are people who for the most part are working under the minimum wage; they get fired or they leave their 

job and their employer tries to do them out of their holiday pay. It may not be very much, $25 or $40 or so. These 

are the people that used to get the benefit of this particular vote and now the vote is proposed to be reduced by 

$20,000, some 15 per cent, at a time when most expenses are going up. 

 

That is, no doubt, an example of the kind of thrift and sound produce business-like administration that the Premier 

used to prate so loudly about when he was Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Then, I am really sorry, Mr. Speaker, to see this one on page twenty-eight regarding the Legislative Library. I 

think all members of this house have grown to appreciate the services that are available in the institution, and I am 

sure that most of us could learn better how to use those services and to exploit them to better advantage. This is a 

service which I think is really exceptional and which is an important asset to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan — the finest Legislative Library I believe you will find anywhere. So what happens? Well, when it 

comes to books, when it comes to learning, we can be economical and cut down from $73,000 to $63,000. There 

is a reduction of fifteen per cent, Mr. Speaker. I hope that the Minister or the Premier can give an explanation for 

that when we come to the estimates. 

 

Look at what the farmers' friends are doing to the rural municipalities. True, there is not a very substantial 

reduction here, but if you look at page thirty-three, you will find that assistance to the market road grid is down 

just slightly. I would have thought, Mr. Speaker, that if the 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

568 

government is embarrassed with a surplus of funds that this is an area which would have done the rural people of 

Saskatchewan much good if this amount had been somewhat increased. This item almost always was increased 

under the previous regime, because we recognized the importance of this area, and I am sorry that the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs (Mr. McFarlane) is not about to exert the eloquence on the Treasury Board that he practiced 

here before he sat down a few minutes ago, or maybe they are more immune to it than we are. 

 

We find the total for municipal ferry accommodation also down and total for Municipal Road Assistance 

Authority ordinary expenditure down some $200,000. There is an area, I submit, Mr. Speaker, which the rural 

people of Saskatchewan will regret and that all those who represent the rural people of Saskatchewan will protest 

. . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . keep hoping . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, I do not propose to deal with all these items but I would like to just mention where 

the economies are occurring in the Department of Public Health. On page thirty, Research and Planning — I 

should think that this government probably needs, more than any other government in the history of 

Saskatchewan, to appreciate and understand the value of research. It seems to me that if the problems which they 

enunciate, the problems which they say really exist, they need more research, not less. I guess maybe the Minister 

of Public Health (Mr. Steuart) is going to use his well known talent for ironing out problems and he is not going 

to need the advice of anyone who could do some research on these questions. He is just going to go out and talk to 

these hospital boards and tell them that they should close their hospitals, or they should convert them to some 

other use, or . . . 
 

Mr. Steuart: — Keep hoping, Bob . . . 
 

Mr. Walker: — . . . Well, he doesn't need research. I guess he will just go out and tell them what to do. 
 

Then we find in the Regional Health Services another reduction from $1,900,000 to $1,836,000 and a reduction of 

five in the personnel. 
 

In the Northern Health Services the reduction is greater. These people are more defenceless and less able to fight 

for their rights, and so Northern Health Services get a bigger reduction, $169,000 instead of $197,000 — a fifteen 

per cent reduction. I am sorry that the member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) does not direct his attention to fighting 

for the retention of these benefits for the people of his constituency, and devote a little less effort to seeking to 

advance himself in the eyes of his leader here in this assembly. 
 

Here is another group of people who are pretty helpless, and so just as you would expect, this item is down — 

Psychiatric Services — down from $874,000 to $839,000. Now, Mr. Speaker, members opposite used to chide us 

for not having provided better health services, or better psychiatric services, and that item is down. 
 

Mr. I.H. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — Those fellows had power . . . 
 

Mr. Walker: — . . . or look at the Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford. That item is down and a total of 

twenty people subtracted from the staff. I was up there a year or two ago, on a visit I hasten to add, and I found 

that the people up there are overworked already. Conditions could have been improved there with more staff. 
 

Mr. Steuart: — We are going to improve them. 
 

Mr. Walker: — Oh, you are going to improve them. Like the snail, making progress backwards, reducing the 

staff, and not improving the service. As I say, the sum of money voted is down. 
 

Here is another group that is pretty helpless and pretty dependent — the children in the training school at Moose 

Jaw. I do not suppose they have any way of bringing pressure to bear on the government or the Minister, or the 

Premier, and so they get poorer treatment. Another group is the Saskatchewan Training School at Prince Albert. 

Again a reduction in the staff and a reduction of $19,000 in the money voted. Here is another pretty helpless 

group of beneficiaries, Mr. Speaker. 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

569 

 

They were able to gouge $2,700 out of this expenditure. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I find it a little hard to get excited about the illusory tax reductions which the Provincial 

Treasurer (Mr. Thatcher) talks about when I see what is happening here. I find this a little hard to understand — 

why there should be a reduction in the Department of Public Works of $2,000,000 in capital expenditures for 

senior citizens housing. Maybe that they have just finished up a large institution and they do not intend to start 

building another one, but a $2,000,000 reduction in this important area seems to me, Mr. Speaker, to be shutting 

our eyes to the needs of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

With reference to social aid, I would have thought that the member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt), by going out and 

brandishing his club over the heads of these children who are getting too much to eat, would have been able to 

show some cash benefits from this item and that he would be able to go and jingle some money on the desk of the 

Provincial Treasurer to show that he had succeeded in his mission. 
 

Well, either he expects that there is going to be an economic recession or he does not expect to succeed in his 

venture because the total amount of money for Social aid is estimated at $13,406,000 compared with $12,900,000 

last year. There is a supplementary estimate being proposed for the current year which brings it up to $13,147,000 

but nevertheless he expects an increase of $300,000. 
 

There is a reduction of $200,000, a reduction of almost twenty per cent in the grants for construction of housing 

for the aged and the infirm. This is an important area which I think is not receiving sufficient attention from the 

government. 
 

We turn to municipal affairs, and we find a big reduction in loans to rural municipalities for the purpose of 

financing the construction of grid roads. Last year we voted the sum of $2,000,000 to help municipalities to 

finance their share but this year the total amount was only $500,000, $1,500,000 being taken away from the rural 

areas for this purpose. 
 

I do not propose to go into the estimates any more fully than that to show, Mr. Speaker, just how the government 

is proposing to get the money that it is talking about in its economy drive. If you take the Budget Speech of the 

hon. Premier, and take his own figures with reference to the university, you find that he says this government is 

going to make available next year $10,500,000 provincial financial assistance. He admits that $7,000,000 of this 

doesn't come out of the budget at all, $7,000,000 of this they have got to find for themselves. The province will, 

however, guarantee their debt if they borrow it — but there is a $2,000,000 supplementary grant for capital 

purposes taken out of the current fiscal year, and put over into next year and counted as next year's assistance to 

the university. But there is only $1,500,000 being voted out of next year's capital budget. So the amount being 

provided by the province out of next year's budget is only $1,500,000 out of a total capital program of 

$10,500,000. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it is pretty obvious that the shadows are a lot longer than the substance, that the Provincial Treasurer 

is not really providing for the university in the fiscal year that is about to begin, he is only providing $1,500,000 

out of requirements amounting to $10,500,000. As I say, $7,000,000 of it is being found by the university itself 

and $2,000,000 of it is being taken out of cash which they found in the kitty in the current fiscal year. 
 

What kind of problem does that pose for this government in future years? Well, they talk about the need for a 

$40,900,000 to $50,000,000 capital program for the university in the next five years but all this government can 

muster out of the budget for the coming fiscal year is $1,500,000. Where is the money going to come from for this 

capital program? I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the government has committed itself to a course which is going to 

cost a great deal of money. I am not objecting to the spending of a great deal of money on capital programs for the 

universities. What I am objecting to is that this government is making no proper provision for finding this large 

sum of money in the years ahead and in the budget that we are considering. 
 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this means that if the government 'is confronted next year with a similar demand for 

capital construction at the university of some $10,000,000 or more, that the fund will again have to be borrowed, 

and in four years the university at that rate, will owe something over $30,000,000. Not only $30,000,000 to cover 

their share at the present 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

570 

 

rate, but they will also have to borrow another $10,000,000 or $12,000,000 to cover the funds which this fortunate 

government found in the till when they took office. They will not find it in the till next year. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to a course which cannot but drive them into a policy of deficit 

financing. They are already committed to some $10,000,000 or $12,000,000 of deficit financing, the $7,000,000 

which the financial critic referred to as having been borrowed by the university, the $2,000,000 of capital funds 

which they took out of the previous fiscal year's surplus, and the $1,000,000 which they took out of last year's 

budget for operating expenses, and whatever amount was in the medical care fund. This is all deficit financing, 

and this, I suggest, is the road to ruin which Liberals followed in Saskatchewan from 1905 to 1930. 

 

I suggest that if you can make a $12,000,000 tax reduction, only by borrowing $12,000,000, you are guilty of the 

kind of improvidence that ought not to be found on the Treasury benches of a province, ought not to be found in a 

responsible government in this province. I suggest that is not businesslike administration — to borrow 

$10,000,000 or $12,000,000, to use up reserves and borrow $10,000,000 or $12,000,000 in order to make a 

$12,000,000 tax reduction possible. 

 

I maintain, Mr. Speaker, that the reduction in taxes that the government takes so much pride in, was financed out 

of reserves and out of borrowings, and that it will have to be paid for, not only in principal, but in interest, in the 

years to come. The $7,000,000 borrowed by the university means there has to be a third of a million more found 

every year for operating expenses and this places an additional burden on the Treasury of Saskatchewan, until it is 

paid off — a third of a million dollars a year, plus the capital requirements again next year and in the years ahead. 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Thatcher) ought to have "levelled" with this house and 

with the people of this province and told them that he was running a deficit finance show and that he was using 

these deficits to create the illusion of tax reductions when no tax reductions were possible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Walker: — It would have been much better, Mr. Speaker, if this government had used any surplus funds 

which it had to relieve the burden of taxation upon rural property in Saskatchewan. If they had any surplus funds 

they should have shifted the load of taxation off rural property, off farm land, off urban homes, and recover that 

money instead from business expansion and from the commercial development of Saskatchewan. The choice 

which the government made will result, I am convinced, in the sharpest increase in property taxes, school and 

municipal, in many a year. 

 

The $3,800,000 that the farmers will receive under the tax exemption for purple gas would have done much more 

good had it been made available to the rural municipalities of Saskatchewan at the rate of, say an average of 

$13,000 a piece, because that is what it works out to. This would have made it possible for the municipalities to 

provide for the ever increasing load of maintenance costs for the growing grid market road system. It would have 

made it possible for the municipalities to enjoy greater financial security at a time when the rural people of 

Saskatchewan are suffering a reduction in take-home pay amounting to some $50,000,000 or $60,000,000 

because of the failure of the Liberal party's wheat marketing policies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Walker: — This loss of rural income will make it harder for rural people to pay taxes, even at the present 

level of local taxation, but if they have to pay instead at an increased level of municipal taxation, it will be even 

more intolerable. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — It being 5:30 the house stands adjourned until 7:30. 
 

Mr. Walker: — I had only one sentence left. 
 

The house adjourned at 5:30. 
 

Mr. Walker: — Before concluding my remarks I would like to pay some 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

571 

attention to the estimates of the Department of the Attorney General, if I may. 

 

I want first of all, to compliment the Attorney General for having found some places where he could effect some 

economies in personnel. I applaud him for those places where he has been able, or where he hopes to be able, to 

achieve some economy. I caution him against doing so at the expense of the standard of service which the public 

have come to expect from the Department. The one that causes me just a little anxiety is the economy in the 

Magistrates' Courts. I would have hoped that the government and the Department might have seen fit to effect a 

further increase in the salaries of magistrates. The previous government had felt constrained to set the salaries at 

their present level because we felt that they should be lower than the salaries of District Court Judges and at that 

time the salaries of District Court Judges were quite low but have since been substantially increased by about 

twenty-five per cent. I think it is fair to say that, if the salaries of District Court Judges had been increased a year 

or two earlier, the salaries of judges of the Magistrates' Courts would have been set correspondingly higher and 

maintained somewhat in the same ratio as District Court judges. I think that the Attorney General is well aware of 

the fact that the judges of the Magistrates' Courts are hard working and have a very onerous burden of judicial 

work. People are sentenced to substantial jail sentences by our Magistrates' Courts and it is very important that 

these courts be accorded the dignity and the importance which they deserve, in view of their jurisdiction. I hope 

he can assure me and the house that there will be no curtailment of the standards of that court, as a result of the 

decrease in the estimate from $364,000 to $349,000. 

 

I want to conclude my remarks by saying that the rural people of the province will find this budget a keen 

disappointment. Rural people want a continuation of the policy of the previous government in expanding and 

enlarging school grants so that the increase in school grants will absorb the increase in the cost of education and 

thereby stabilize the rural school tax rates. This government has abandoned that policy. 

 

Rural people will want to see a continuation and an expansion of such services as the agricultural machinery 

testing service, but this government has seen fit to abolish that program. There are other sub-votes in the 

Department of Agriculture which I will not take the time to refer to today, but rural people would wish to see 

them improved. For example, farmers want an enlargement and improvement in the Ag. Rep. service, not a 

curtailment as this budget forecasts. 

 

Rural people will want an expansion, not a contraction, of the grid road system, and they will want some 

recognition given to the increasing costs of maintenance of this road system. The costs of maintenance are 

pyramiding because there are more and more miles in use each year and the average age of the road mileage is 

increasing so that maintenance is becoming an increasingly onerous burden upon rural municipalities. 

 

I think all rural people will be disappointed that this budget appears to make no provision for maintenance and in 

particular to cope with the snow removal problem on these main grid market roads. 

 

It is not much comfort to the people of Hanley constituency to be told that the people of Qu'Appelle-Wolseley and 

the people of Lumsden had had their grid roads included in the highway system. 

 

Rural residents and the residents of the small urban communities will want the government to recognize the 

increasing need for broader educational opportunities, particularly technical and industrial training. Instead we 

have a curtailment of that program on abandonment of the program that was launched by the previous government 

and a failure to fulfil the program that was approved by the previous legislature one year ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the failure of this government to give proper recognition to the needs of agriculture is very difficult 

to explain. They were elected only a few short months ago, Mr. Speaker, as the farmers' friend, they tell us. They 

have said that a majority of the members of the Liberal caucus are farmers. Why then have these farmers not 

adequately represented the interest of farmers? 

 

The Premier announced in December that he was going to meet the Liberal caucus in a few days and that he 

would shortly announce the appointment of a new minister to fill a vacancy that exists in the cabinet. After he met 

the caucus, he said that he would not be making an appointment at this time, but would wait until all the private 

MLA's from the government had gone back home and the session was over. Apparently the caucus would 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

572 

not go along with the choice which he had made to fill the vacancy. Apparently, Mr. Speaker, the rural back 

benchers were able to assert themselves in this instance. Well, now the Premier wants to give six rewards, 

emoluments, salaries, in the form of legislative assistant-ships to distribute each year to the good boys of the 

Liberal back bench. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Walker: — These hand-outs will each cost as much or more than the cost of a master farmer award. Two 

plums for the master farmers of Saskatchewan and six for the faithful little back benchers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, rural people will expect their Liberal members to fight for programs of general 

benefit for rural areas. They will expect their members to resist the blandishments of a $2,000 hand-out for being 

faithful to the business-minded millionaire point-of-view of this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to conclude by saying that the budget of the present government set this province on a 

course which can lead only to increased taxes or to increased deficits or increased borrowings. 

 

I suggest that if this government is not very, very lucky, they will commence to realize in the coming weeks, that 

they are faced with an intolerable economic financial framework and that they will recognize that the sins which 

they have committed in this particular budget can not be lived with for four years, either by the people of 

Saskatchewan or by the members of the government. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that these shortcomings that I have enumerated, if they are not already known to the 

members of the government, will become known to them by painful necessity in the weeks that lie ahead. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, when the full magnitude of these fiscal irresponsibilities become known to the members 

of the government, there will be a clamor amongst them to escape the consequences of their fiscal irresponsibility. 

I suggest that rather than face the consequences which are inherent in this budget, the Liberal leadership will try to 

hide from their just reward . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Walker: — . . . they will try to find some excuse for plunging this province into an election. I suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, that they would rather face probable defeat than face the annihilation that waits for them after three and a 

half years of these policies. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Walker: — Balancing as they will, these two desperate alternatives, I'm sure that they will select what they 

think is the least dangerous and desperate expedient to get themselves out of this predicament. Mr. Speaker, 

certainly four years of this kind of irresponsibility would lead them to defeat. I suppose, Mr. Speaker, that they 

think that by plunging this province into an election, that they may be able to scrape through before the desperate 

consequences of this budget become manifestly known to all the voters. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Walker: — I suggest that the people of Saskatchewan will not be long in finding out just how impossible this 

budget really is. The people of Saskatchewan will not be quite as easily taken in by specious and high flown 

promises, as they were a year ago. They will come to recognize that carrying out promises at the expense of 

worthwhile programs and at the expense of the rural tax payers, can be serious, can be damaging, and can be 

disastrous, and so we may expect that this government will become increasingly desperate to try to find some 

escape from the consequences of their actions. 
 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that I shall try to make the voters of 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

573 

Saskatchewan aware of the predicament that they worked themselves into. I shall certainly try to acquaint the 

voters as quickly as I can, with the position that this government is in, in the hope that they will not be able to take 

advantage of the fact that the full effects and consequences of this budget are not yet fully known. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it ought to be clear to every member of the house that I cannot conscientiously, in the 

interests of the people I represent and the people of Saskatchewan, support this particular budget. I will have to 

support the amendment that was introduced by this side of the house and I am sure that fullness of time will 

vindicate my choice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G. Romuld (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, as I rise to take part in this budget debate, I would like to first 

congratulate you for the high position you have achieved in this house. I have known you for quite some time and 

I know that you bring distinction to the chair you occupy. 

 

I would like to also compliment the new members in the house, on both sides. I know there is one member from 

the Kelsey seat (Mr. Brockelbank) who must be very proud that he has a son sitting in the house with him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romuld: — I have some advice for the younger member of the Brockelbank family, and that is if he is going 

to pursue the course that his father has, I would suggest that perhaps in the future he should cross over to this side, 

so that he will be on the government side for thirty years. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romuld: — Or perhaps not quite that long. 

 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — He will be there but it won't be like that. 

 

Mr. Romuld: — Oh, he will, Brock. Don't you worry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romuld: — I would like to mention the fact that we have on this side of the house, the first member of the 

Jewish faith to sit in the Saskatchewan legislative assembly and I would like to congratulate him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romuld: — I am very happy to be part of a government that has so many teachers in its ranks. I can recall, at 

one time, that I could go through our constituency and practically all through the province, and not find a teacher 

who was a Liberal. Now, it is just the reverse. You can hardly find a teacher who is a CCF. 

 

I think I should publicly thank the hon. member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy). He came into our constituency and 

held one meeting. In the last election I was seven down and this time I was forty-nine up. So you can see what a 

good honest politician can do when you take him into the right poll. I know you don't agree with me, but 

nevertheless it's the truth. To prove it, I am down here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romuld: — I want you people on the other side to know that you can relax. I am not going to reveal any 

dark secrets of your past. I have not been digging down in the files deep enough yet, but I am going to get there. I 

could never quite understand how you fellows ever did get caught that way. You know, your party sort of reminds 

me of a duck that always flew backwards because it was more interested in where it had been than where it was 

going. The former government should certainly have been able to cover up their mistakes. I suppose one of the 

reasons that they looked backwards was not know- 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

574 

ing where they were going. They had to look back to see where they had been. 

 

I would like to compliment the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Thatcher) for the wonderful budget he brought down. I 

think it is a dynamic one. It is positive. It is full of action. It should have been here two sessions ago but I think 

there is still time to save Saskatchewan from the crippling effects that the long Socialist government has had on 

this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romuld: — When I see a budget brought in that is going to increase industry, which is one of our main 

objectives, I am certainly going to be one that is going to support it. When you support industry, you are going to 

bring back one of the main resources in the province of Saskatchewan and that is our people. Now, I do not know 

how the members on the other side feel about people. They always talk about being such humanitarians and I am 

going to deal with that a little later on. At one time they thought that people were very important to the province 

of Saskatchewan, and that was when Tommy Douglas was here. It goes back quite a few years and they always 

like to talk about the dirty thirties. I have here a news release from the Moose Jaw Times. Premier Douglas, 

speaking there, said: 

 

We don't want them on the farms. With increasing mechanization, we need fewer people on the land. 

 

He said in an address to the National Dairy Council of Canada: 

 

We do need them in Saskatchewan to use them in services we have already provided. For instance, we have 

only eight per cent of Canada's population yet we have thirty per cent of its highways. 

 

And the CCF member qualified Sir Wilfred Laurier's prediction that the twentieth century would belong to 

Canada. He said that: 

 

The second half of the century would definitely belong to the West. Western Canada was entering a period of 

mineral and industrial development which doupled with a large program of processing its own primary 

products, a greater contribution to the welfare of the country as a whole. 
 

Tommy Douglas saw this away back in 1951 but we had to wait thirteen years later until a Liberal government 

was elected to see this dream come true. It is amazing to me when I think that the budget was brought down a few 

days ago and today we had another $49,000,000 industry announced for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Romuld: — Was that yesterday? Oh well, whenever it was. It is amazing how fast the members on this side 

of the house were in attracting new industry. I was very impressed. 
 

I wasn't actually impressed by what he said although I was impressed with the delivery of the financial critic (Mr. 

Blakeney). I was amazed too, that he would talk about civil servants. 
 

I would like to say something about some of the civil servants we had back in 1944. Some of them had worked for 

years in the civil service, particularly in the northern part that I represent. What happened to them when the 

government came into power? I do not think it necessary for me to tell you but I have a list of civil servants who 

resigned. The reason they resigned was that the pressure that was put on them was more than they could bear. 

Here is one, in particular, that I would like to mention. (My files are something like those of the hon. member 

from Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky). But they are not quite as bad. They are in a little bit of order.) This is a man 

who had a family of eight and who now lives in Yorkton. He was employed by the Liquor Board Commission. He 

was just dismissed from the civil service without any warning of any kind. To this day, he has not been employed 

in any full time job. He is now, I believe, about eighty years of age but it did create a hardship on his family at 

that time. 
 

Now, these are the fellows who talk about being such humanitarians. 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

575 

How do you think this family feels about socialist humanitarians? I can tell you how they feel because I am 

personally acquainted with the family. Their son has just obtained his Bachelor of Education degree from the 

University of Saskatchewan at Saskatoon. He is forty years old because he had to work his way through because 

you people on the other side saw fit to see his dad relieved of his job. 

 

I would like to say something about what happened in the constituency of Canora. Just prior to the election, we 

heard of people being hired for their qualifications. Well, I know that there are members in the civil service that 

were hired for one qualification and I won't mention what it is. But . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Now, Alex . . . 

 

Mr. Romuld: — But I can mention one person who worked during the campaign and who appealed to the people 

of Canora to support him because he said, "if you vote for Romuld, I am going to be fired". That is how the 

Liberals work. I want the members on the other side to know that we have not fired, or transferred, or dismissed 

one civil servant in the constituency of Canora. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romuld: — This is the trash that you Socialists peddled through the country prior to the election. This is 

why the civil servants of the province of Saskatchewan were scared. This is why a lot of them voted for you, but I 

can tell you today that the civil servants do not live in fear any more and that they are happy with the government 

that is now in office in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romuld: — Now, to get back to the subject. We believe that our policies will stop the exodus of young 

people from the province. I would just like to quote a few facts regarding what has taken place in Saskatchewan 

since 1944. For instance, in 1944, British Columbia had 952,000 people. On January 1st, 1964 its population was 

1,720,000, an increase of eighty-four per cent. 

 

During the same period Alberta had an increase of 75.9 per cent. All the way down the line you see the same until 

you get to Saskatchewan. We had 836,000 on January first, 1944, and on January first, 1964, we had 936,000, an 

increase of twelve per cent. Mr. Speaker, don't you think it should be the policy of a government to try and stop 

this exodus of the best resources we have, our young people, leaving our province after we spend thousands and 

thousands on their education? I congratulate the former government for carrying out and improving our 

educational system, but we spent this money and then what did we do? The people left the province because we 

were unable to keep up with the rest of Canada. Until such time as we stop our young people from leaving the 

province, we cannot say we have been a good government. But I know that we will not have a finger pointed at 

us, such as we pointed at you members on the other side. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romuld: — Mr. Speaker, I was quite amazed with the report from the former Minister of Highways (Mr. 

Willis) when he said he was alarmed and shocked at the agreement with Dumont Forestry Association. I suppose 

he has reason to be shocked because it is a few years since they made any announcement like this, but I want to 

point out the difference between how we announced it and how they brought it in. They used to make the 

announcements before elections. We make them after the election because we know it will be forthcoming. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romuld: — Now, I would like to have you know again, I was not in the wastepaper basket, but I was in the 

library. You fellows have done a lot of speaking over the last few years. I guess you think you are not going to be 

quoted. I have here a copy of a statement made by Russ Brown when he was down in St. Johns, New Brunswick. 

I believe he used to be on this side. He is not even over there now. He was the member from Last Mountain. 

When he 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

576 

was in St. John, New Brunswick he was talking about a merger of the Liberals and the CCF. He said that they are 

not too far apart. Now, when we hear what you say, I don't think we have to worry that there will ever be a merger 

between the NDP and the Liberals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romuld: — . . . the people of Saskatchewan couldn't stand it. But now, I would like to make reference to the 

first announcement that I found. 

 

A $60,000,000 pulp mill for Prince Albert. Agreement signed. Giant construction site near P.A. Forerunners of 

others. 

 

This goes on and the print is a little bit too small for me to read, but however, it is going to employ some 5,000 

people. This was announced on May 31st, 1956, if I remember correctly — I was campaigning that month, I am 

not sure . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romuld: — . . . but I think it was before an election. Then Mr. Fines was up here. I don't know where he 

went but apparently he did not like the socialist policy or philosophy because when he got a little money, where 

did he go? He went to a free enterprise country. I don't think the socialist philosophy used him too good. I 

remember, when he was still one of the boys, and was up there, he said there would be lower gas costs due to pulp 

mill. Now, that was real vision! He could see lower gas costs due to the pulp mill but what he failed to see was 

that the pulp mill wouldn't be in Saskatchewan until there was a Liberal government. 

 

Then we went on further: 

 

Mill important to Saskatoon. Should mean slash in gas prices to Saskatoon. 

 

I am sure that would make Sally Merchant very happy if she could say they are going to have reduced gas prices 

in Saskatoon. I am just trying to point out that we come out and make one little announcement — that in the 

future we are going to get a pulp mill. We didn't bring it in as an election promise, but how you fellows went out 

and spread it before election! It goes on way down here. It says: 

 

P.A. feeling pretty good. 

 

You made them feel pretty good. It took about seven years until they weren't feeling so good, then they sent 

Davey down here and he is going to be here for awhile. The member for Canora at that time, had to get into this 

too. On his first trip up there, the Minister said that they had formed the pulp section. This must have made them 

feel pretty good. It is too long and I don't want to quote only from papers. I would like to say a few things besides 

what you said, but I would like to remind you of what the Minister said: 
 

A ten year forestry inventory was carried out by the experts and completed last fall. It established that pulp 

wood in the province with major wood resource of more than 70,000,000 cords of its stands reaching from 

Meadow Lake to Hudson Bay . . . 
 

It still stands there. It is a lot bigger now. And we are going to get more than 700,000,000 cords -out of it. 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — Thatcher keeps his promises. 
 

Mr. Romuld: — Actually though, I would like to read this here. It is quite a yarn! It goes on and on and on. Then 

I have got some more. I don't have to read this one. 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — Come on. 
 

Mr. Romuld: — The next time the hon. Minister of Natural Resources went up there, it says: 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

577 

Kuziak asks recognition for CCF when mill arrives. 

 

Now, this is really funny. The only thing I am sorry about is that the CCF are not going to get the recognition. I 

don't think you socialists should feel so badly because you say you are interested in people, and to help people is 

by bringing this industry in. But then, after the election was won in 1958, the same Minister of Natural Resources 

goes up and then, in the back pages away from the headlines, we read: 

 

No Saskatchewan pulp mill for a year. 

 

This is the way you socialists work, so don't think that we are doing anything wrong when we come out and make 

announcements that we intend to carry out. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Warming up for the by-election. 

 

Mr. Romuld: — Don't worry. The next time I go up to Hanley you are not going to win either. I never got out 

there in time last time. So much for the pulp mill. The next time I talk about a pulp mill it will be about the one 

that we are going out to open. 

 

I would like to say something about our budget because it seems to me that the members on the other side have 

poked quite a bit of fun at it. These taxes seem to be quite an issue. If I remember correctly, when we were out 

campaigning, one of the things that we promised the people was that we were going to reduce taxes. We said we 

were going to reduce the education tax from five to four per cent. We said we were going to take the tax off 

purple gas for farm trucks. We said we were going to extend the number of goods exempted from the sales tax; 

and to grant newly-weds an exemption from sales tax up to $1,000. I suppose this is a worry to the socialist party 

too because if you encourage people to get married, naturally the population is going to go up and when the 

population goes up, unemployment increases. Toby, you know its true. 

 

Apparently we weren't the only ones that believe in tax reduction. Not at all. I've got a clipping here that says: 

 

Taxes can be cut. 

 

And it goes on and it says: 

 

Keep the Liberals out. Re-elect the CCF government. 

 

Let's see. Is this from the Mayor of Regina (Mr. Baker)? No, oh here it is: 

 

Saskatchewan needs a communist voice in the legislature. In Regina North, vote Norman Brudy. 

 

So even Norman Brudy thought the taxes should be cut. So if Norman Brudy figures the taxes should be cut and 

he says: 
 

Keep the liberals out. Re-elect the CCF government. 
 

. . . then you must believe the taxes should be cut. 
 

Mr. Walker: — Just one of your friends. 
 

Mr. Romuld: — Here it is. Come and look at it! Come and look at it! 
 

Mr. Walker: — Fellow travellers. 
 

Mr. Romuld: — Then recall, when you socialists came into power one of the things I remember was that I was 

sort of sympathetic to the cause at that time. I had grown up during the depression. I had to walk to school. Of 

course, it was kind of easy to think that you were going to solve everything. I was promised a job in the woollen 

mills . . . That is what made me change. New let us see. I have something here I don't think you are 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

578 

going to like too well. It says: 

 

The CCF said that the Liberal sales tax will be repealed under a CCF government. They also said that they will 

shift the basis of taxation from the land to large mortgage companies. 

 

Well, I'm glad they did that because I am a farmer. I want to tell you what the taxes were on the southeast quarter, 

twenty, thirty-five — the quarter I grew up on. In 1944, $44.20. Five years after our humanitarian government had 

been in power the taxes were $155.50 — a shift of $67.30. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Still ahead. 

 

Mr. Romuld: — To the backs of the mortgage company. No, my back! Then we will go on. I am not going to 

quote every year. We will go to 1954, The taxes were then $217.80. A shift not quite as big — $52.30. Then again 

in 1960, they were $227.10 — a shift of $10.70. I guess they cut it down a bit that year. The election was coming 

up. They must have given a little bigger grant. Then in 1963-1964 the taxes were $236.90. That is a total shift of 

$140.10. This is what they shifted on my back. What did you shift on the mortgage companies back? That is the 

figure I would like to know. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Just . . . from now on. 

 

Mr. Romuld: — What was that? 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Keep records from now on. Go over to Manitoba and take a look. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Dollars for poor people. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — I am going to watch that quarter section. 

 

Mr. Romuld: — We have had quite a time just reviewing some of the things that you socialists did. Now, any 

time a government can break its promises as you did — in all these. I have a list of what you promised before. 

You could stay in for twenty years and here we have been in power for nine months and have been a government 

for three weeks, and already we have carried out a big portion of the promises we made to the people of 

Saskatchewan. Then you say that you think we are afraid to go before the people of Saskatchewan. We might be 

there sooner than you think. But if I go, there are a couple over there that are going too. Don't worry about that. 

 

And now my friends, I would like to turn to highways, because this has really been something that has been kind 

of a pet talk of theirs. I guess we'll have to admit they built roads. They couldn't help it. They were there when 

they took over. They only had to build them up a little higher. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What's . . . 

 

Mr. Romuld: — Oh yes, don't worry. I'll get to you later. I have a chart here which shows how much provincial 

governments spend on highways, roads, and bridges per capita. The amount is given in dollars per thousand. 

Now, first of all we hit Newfoundland. You on the other side who don't know where Newfoundland is — it is 

away down east. They have a little fellow there named Joey Smallwood. I have heard a lot of criticism of him 

from the members on the other side, but in that province, Joey spends $40 some dollars per capita; Prince Edward 

Island spent over $70; Nova Scotia just under $40; New Brunswick, over $45; Quebec, just over $30; Ontario, 

over $40; Manitoba, just over $35; Saskatchewan, under $35. The only province under it, on a per capita basis, 

was Quebec. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Liberal government. 

 

Mr. Romuld: — Then we will go on a little further and look at provincial government expenditures on highways, 

roads and bridges. These are broken down under vehicles in the provinces concerned. There is little Joey Small- 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

579 

wood's province, Newfoundland, in dollars almost 300 per vehicle. And here for you people on the other side, if 

your eyes are open. Right on the bottom of the whole works. Every province is over it, Saskatchewan spent 

somewhere under $100 per vehicle in the province of Saskatchewan. These are 1962 and 1963, based on the 1962 

vehicle registrations. The we get further down, we have provincial government expenditures on highways, roads 

and bridges per vehicle mile travelled in the provinces concerned. These are cents per vehicle mile. Again we find 

Newfoundland just under four cents; Prince Edward Island under three cents; Nova Scotia, under two cents; New 

Brunswick over two cents; Quebec under 1.5; Ontario just about equal; Manitoba 1.3; Saskatchewan just over the 

one point. Again the smallest amount spent per vehicle. 

 

Certainly then, when we see figures like this is it any wonder that the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Thatcher) put in 

more money for highways? How are we going to develop our country if we do not have highways? Sure, we 

know we have more miles. But the cost to develop roads in Saskatchewan is not as great as it is in some other 

provinces. 

 

We know that we must develop our highways if we are going to attract industry and if we are going to attract 

tourists. We are not going to build a highway only for politicians. We are most interested in people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romuld: — We are not going to have pavement in one section of the province and then go jumping over 

from another section because a constituency isn't on the government side. We are going to serve the best interests 

of the whole province. I think they well could have built more highways if they had not been so concerned about 

slogans. It is strange when you see a government that had more slogans than it had highways. It had a two-fold 

purpose, one was to hoodwink the voters in election time, and the other was to throw out a smoke screen to cover 

up their shortcomings. 

 

I am confident that our government will carry out a program of highway expansion and we will develop roads in 

the north. Therefore, I have no alternative but to support the budget that was brought down by the Provincial 

Treasurer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn to the constituency that I represent, for a while anyway. It is thirty years since a 

Liberal was elected in Canora constituency. I can't apologize for the fact that we haven't been here before and I 

can't offer any condolences to the Scandinavian people because most of them are on the other side of the fence. 
 

Mr. Nollet: — They are all gone. 
 

Mr. Romuld: — However, in the constituency where I live, and I am very proud of it, we have a large ethnic 

group — a very fine group of people. They worked very hard for me during the campaigns in 1960 and 1964. I 

think that the people of the Canora constituency are very happy that the Canora constituency is no longer on the 

socialist side of the government. They already realize the benefits that will be theirs. They know what they are 

going to get in the future because they already know from the way we brought down the budget that we don't 

make promises and not keep them. 
 

Our constituency is a mixed farming area. We have a lot of problems with roads. We have a lot of people. The 

half-section farmer is above average in our constituency. We have good fishing . . . 
 

Mr. Nollet: — They are all gone. 
 

Mr. Romuld: — No, they are not all gone. They are coming back since we changed the government too. 
 

In our constituency the best resources are people. We want to get industry in our constituency and now that the 

government is more favorable, I don't think that the people are going to be moving out as much. They will invest 

more money in the Canora constituency. 
 

One of the things that we have is timber which we have heard a lot about from the other side, as well as talk about 

monopoly. If it had not been for the timber in the northern part of the constituency, the people 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

580 

would have been pretty hard up, quite a few years ago. A lot of people in the northern part of the constituency 

made their living from the resources at hand and they were able to take out homesteads and build houses, barns, 

granaries and fine buildings. 

 

Then this other government got in that was going to socialize resources for the benefit of all. But what did this 

help the people in the northern part of Saskatchewan? I live twenty-three miles from the reserve and until a fire 

went through, I couldn't get a permit. Once it was burned down, then we were able to get permits in order to get 

rid of this lumber. They had to cut it in the next year. How has this benefited the people in the north? I can see no 

benefit. I am positive that, when this government has been in for a while, the people who live in the northern part 

will be able to receive benefit from the timber resources they have close at hand. They say that they save us 

money. I would like to give you an example. When we built the municipal office in the town of Preeceville, — do 

you know, Mr. Speaker, that we put this on tender? And do you know that the highest tender out of the three was 

the timber board? The highest tender. Two other private companies that bid on it were able to sell lumber to the 

R.M. No. 334, cheaper than the timber board. Is this how to help the people? How can the lumber company that 

had to ship its lumber in from B.C. quote us a lower price than the timber board? This has not helped us one bit in 

the northern area. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to deal with telephones. We thought we would have great telephone development 

in the north when the CCF took over. This has not happened with the exception that they have improved the 

services that we had when they took over. I can recall people in the village of Endeavour practically pleading with 

the government every once in a while. They would tell me they had been down here. Do you know that there 

wasn't an announcement of the telephone going into Endeavour until after the election in April? For fifteen years 

they have been begging and pleading for telephones. Now they are going to get them. We are not worrying about 

winning the next election. We feel that if we do the things that are right, we automatically will win the election. I 

can tell you that the people in the northern part of my constituency appreciate these services. I am not going to 

have to go around and tell them next time what I did. I can remember hearing all the promises many times before 

elections. I can recall one time, I think it was in 1952, where the same group were campaigning year after year, 

promising us black-top. 

 

Once I was in the bank when the bank manager was leaving for Regina. I asked him if he would stop in and see 

how our highway was coming along. This he did. When he came back, I happened to be in the bank again, 

borrowing money to pay the taxes that the CCF raised. I asked him if he had inquired about our highway. He said, 

"Well, there is only one problem. They don't know what color to make it." I don't think we will ever have such 

confusion on this side of the house. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if I were to vote against the budget, I would be voting against industrial expansion. I would be 

voting against money for education. I would be voting against more money for public schools; more money for 

student loans; more money for universities; more money for highways; more money for northern roads; more 

money for Indians and Metis. Pardon me, did I say "if" I voted against it? 

 

An Hon. Member: — You are right, Keep right on going. 

 

Mr. Romuld: — Right. If I did not support the motion, I would be against more money for teachers and public 

service pensions. I would be against more money for the Arts Board, against more money for agriculture. Do you 

people on the other side feel, that after I have been elected for the constituency of Canora, that I could oppose 

such a budget? Why, I wouldn't dare to go home! Now, they tell me that when I come home, they are going to 

have a real big shindig for me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the amendment but I wholeheartedly support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.F. Loken (Rosetown): — Mr. Speaker, before I proceed with my maiden speech, I should like to join 
the rest and congratulate you on your appointment on the high office of Speaker, in this legislature. Your sense of 

justice and fair 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

581 

play will be recognized by both sides of this house and I wish you well. 

 

I am honored, Sir, to address you, as a representative for the constituency of Rosetown. I want to assure you that I 

do not take my responsibility as a member lightly. I realize that the good people of my constituency, in electing 

me as their representative, expect that my service in this legislature, will be of some benefit to them. I hope that 

the confidence they have placed in me last April will be warranted. It will be my pleasure to do all within my 

ability to serve them well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the constituency of Rosetown, which is located in central Saskatchewan, is known as the heart of the 

wheat belt. To have this distinction, in a wheat province, such as Saskatchewan, makes my constituents justly 

proud. Not only does our constituency raise great quantities of grain and wheat, but we also produce the finest 

quality. Mr. Speaker, this is established by the fact that five awards were won by farmers at the provincial seed 

fair this year — one of which was the award for hard red spring wheat. These people should certainly be 

congratulated for this worthwhile achievement. My constituency, although proud of its farming achievements, is 

also concerned with mineral resources, such as the oil industry. It is hoped now that this industry can continue to 

expand and grow. 
 

Mr. Speaker, areas in this constituency are connected with the South Saskatchewan River Dam development. This 

development, although at times controversial, promises to open new fields of industry. The benefits to my 

constituency could be of great future importance. I am sure that with proper legislative action and management, 

the dreams of a great achievement can be realized. At the present time, the irrigation agreement signed by the 

former NDP government in Saskatchewan and the federal Conservative government in Ottawa, causes great 

concern to some farmers. This situation can be rectified by proper public relations and suitable government 

assistance. 
 

Over the past number of years I have had the opportunity, through community associations and community 

affairs, to be closely associated with the young people in this area. This association has always made me keenly 

aware of their ambitions and their problems. Mr. Speaker, my constituency has had the distinction of being the 

childhood home of such distinguished gentlemen as the now Premier of Alberta, the present president of the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, and the late Dean of Agriculture at the University of Saskatchewan. These are just a 

few of the notable citizens that have had their early training in the Rosetown constituency. What concerns me, Mr. 

Speaker, is that I have only mentioned a few. There are many more capable young people who have found it 

necessary, not only to leave the constituency, but to leave the province to find suitable employment and 

opportunities. Mr. Speaker, I believe that the failure of the former NDP government to cope with this employment 

situation has done more permanent damage to our province than any other single factor. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Loken: — Mr. Speaker, in the period from June, 1944 to April, 1964, a period of socialist government in 
Saskatchewan, the population of this province increased by 107,000. In that period, our natural increase in 

population, the excess of births over deaths, was 326,000. 
 

An Hon. Member: — Where did they go? 
 

Mr. Loken: — In the same period, 55,000 immigrants came to Saskatchewan from outside of Canada. Had we 
just merely held our own in population increase, it would have been the total of these two groups or 381,000, but 

the actual increase as reported by the Dominion Bureau of Statistics, was only 107,000. We therefore, lost some 

274,000 people. This is over one-quarter of a billion. This loss is equal to the present total population of the four 

largest cities in Saskatchewan. In the period of socialist government the population of Canada, as a whole, 

increased by 61.8 per cent. The population of Saskatchewan increased by only 12.8 per cent — the smallest 

increase of any province in Canada. 
 

This loss of population has had disastrous effects on our province. Many of those who left us were voting people, 

trained at our expense in our high schools and in our University. They left to get jobs and they used their 

education and talents in other provinces and in the United States. We have been left with far too few people to 

maintain our social services, to 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

582 

build our roads, and to carry the cost of the greatly increased gross debt of the province, which took place under 

Socialist government. As a result, our average provincial per capita tax has been one of the highest in Canada. We 

missed the period of increased industrialization and the population increase which was enjoyed by every other 

province in Canada. 

 

We may never overcome the loss sustained and, in any case, it will take us decades, or a century, to do so. The 

Socialists, in their futile efforts to draw attention away from their failures and incompetence frequently refer to the 

decline in Saskatchewan's population from 1936 to 1944. There is no comparison between this period and the 

period of Socialist government. In the thirties this province suffered the twin disasters of depression and drought. 

For seven years, preceding 1936, this province had its leanest years. The total of farm net income in those seven 

years averaged less than $28,000,000 a year. In the period of 1936 to 1944, the total of farm net income averaged 

only $112,000,000, while in the twenty years of Socialist government from 1944 to 1964, the average was 

$334,000,000 or three times as much as in the period of 1936 to 1944. 

 

Also, in this period, from 1939 to 1944, large numbers of our people were leaving this province to work in 

factories, producing arms, machinery, and equipment required for the nation's war effort. The Socialists held 

office in the two decades following the second world war. In all other provinces it was a period of great industrial 

expansion and population increases. 

 

In this province, because of good crops and the price and marketing policies of governments at Ottawa, it was by 

far the most prosperous period in agriculture this province has ever experienced. But, because we had a 

government addicted to Socialism, we had but an impoverished share in the nation's industrial expansion. About a 

quarter of a million of our people left to obtain employment under free enterprise governments. Mr. Speaker, we 

now have a free enterprise government. Already we are experiencing an influx of persons to fill our industrial 

development needs. We understand from reliable sources that Saskatchewan will be experiencing a labor shortage 

by July of this year. 

 

I want to congratulate the Premier on his presentation of this development budget. I will not support the 

amendment but will support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. D.W. Michayluk (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in the budget debate, I would like to 

take this opportunity to extend to you my congratulations on your appointment to the esteemed position of this 

legislature, a position which carries with it respect, tradition, and impartiality. 
 

Having had the opportunity over the last five sessions to observe two members of this legislature acting in your 

present capacity, I know that your task is somewhat difficult and will require good judgment, wise and courteous 

decisions, and honest and unbiased judgments to the members of the government and to this side, occupying the 

position of Her Majesty's loyal Opposition. This tradition, Sir, I am confident you will uphold. 
 

Before proceeding, may I take this opportunity to congratulate all the members who have been re-elected to 

represent their respective constituencies in this house. Undoubtedly the confidence and trust placed upon all hon. 

members by the electors is an inspiring challenge to our responsibility and self-dedication to our respective 

constituencies and to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

To the members who were elected for the first time, may I offer my congratulations. I am confident that by now, 

Sir, they have adjusted themselves to the legislative atmosphere, irrespective of the side on which they sit. 
 

To me, Sir, the duties and obligations entrusted by the electors of the Redberry constituency have been pleasant 

and rewarding. I would at this time take this opportunity to convey to the people of my constituency my sincere 

thanks for the confidence and trust conferred upon me at the last provincial election. I will, as in the past, fulfil 

my obligation with humility and dedication in their best interests and in the interests of all the people of this 

province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, listening to previous members who had participated 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

583 

in this debate, reference has often been made, quips have been thrown across the floor of this legislature as to why 

we have a small farm representation. Well, I don't know if we consider ratios, Mr. Speaker, our ratio is fifteen 

farm representatives to eleven city representatives and the ratio on the side to your right, Mr. Speaker is 

twenty-nine to three. I will agree that the government has a larger representation on behalf of rural constituencies, 

but I do not want, and may I suggest to the government not to use this device as a thin edge of the wedge to divide 

the farmer and labor. This device has been tried by the hon. gentlemen when they sat on this side of the house. It 

is being tried practically in every speech that is made by any member speaking in regards to labor and farmer 

during the present session of this legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — It is correct, Mr. Speaker, that some of the members who represent rural constituencies are 

not sure whether they are elected as yet. 

 

May I mention a few things in respect to the budget, Sir. The hon. member for Regina East made some reference 

to budget cutting particularly in the field of Public Health. If you look at the comparative figures of the estimates 

that were provided for public health in 1964-65 estimates, and the 1965-66 estimates, you will note that the 

budget for public health for the ensuing year is cut by some $6,000,000. 

 

In the Department of Municipal Affairs, assistance for municipal road grids has been cut by $100,000, and the 

total decrease for municipal road assistance was $154,000. Likewise, Mr. Speaker, in the Department of Public 

Works the amount of money for the Department, has been cut by some $956,740. Of course, the goal of the 

Minister of Social Welfare (Mr. Boldt), who has made all sorts of threats to the cities, to the people, and to the 

local governments, somehow did not decrease the estimates of the Department of Social Welfare. I wish to 

congratulate him. It appears that he has a slight increase in his estimates of some $210,000. 

 

Now, may I say a few words with respect to some of our people receiving supplemental allowances. I have here, 

Mr. Speaker, what is reported to be a standard form used by the Department of Social Welfare to notify recipients 

of old age assistance, who have been receiving supplemental allowances, that their payments will be discontinued. 

This was given to me by an elderly lady who is well into her eightieth year, a lady who had been hospitalized with 

a broken hip in the Notre Dame Hospital at North Battleford. She owns a small home in one of the northern 

communities and had a bank account of $300 which she had saved for her funeral. May I read the standard form 

which she received while she was in the hospital? It reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

For some time now you have been receiving an allowance from the Department of Social Welfare. Because of 

this you were also issued with a Health Services card entitling you to a broad range of health benefits at public 

expense. It has been learned that your allowance has now been cancelled. It has been learned consequently the 

Health Services card which you have is no longer valid. 

 

It is important, therefore, if you have not already done so, you return your Health Services card as soon as 

possible in the enclosed self-addressed, stamped envelope. To replace this card, we are enclosing a medical and 

hospital card valid for the remainder of this year. 

 

This card entitles you to those services insured under the Hospital Services Plan and Medical Care Insurance 

Commission, as described in the enclosed pamphlets. It does not entitle you to any assistance with drugs or for 

dental or optical services. 

 

Your medical premium, medicare premium and hospitalization tax have been paid by the province until 

December 31st of this year. However, payment of this joint tax for next year will be your own responsibility if 

you are residing in 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

584 

Saskatchewan. You will be required to pay it before November 30th in order to get coverage beginning January 

1st, next. Present this letter to your tax collector when making payment. 

 

Sincerely yours, 

 

W. J. Totten, 

Administrator of the Medical Services Division. 

 

Now this is humanitarian! A lady who had given her best years to the development of the province of 

Saskatchewan; a widow with a broken hip; an elderly lady who had saved $300 for her funeral; receives a card 

from the Department of Social Welfare to this effect. A good Christmas present! 

 

Hon. D. Boldt (Minister of Social Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, would the hon. member permit a question? 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Would you mind asking the former Minister whether these are the identical forms that have been 

sent out by the Department on previous occasions? We have made no changes in regulations, since this is the 

former government's policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Mr. Speaker, may I continue? 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Speaker, I challenge the former Minister of Social Welfare to . . . 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Am I allowed to continue, Mr. Speaker? Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that the Minister of 

Social Welfare (Mr. Boldt) feels very uncomfortable, but this form was not received by this lady during the time 

when the CCF was the government of the province of Saskatchewan. This form was received by the Minister of 

Social Welfare when the Liberals became the government. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I have other people in the same situation . . . 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Do you want to speak? 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . they have got them from March last year . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Before he continues with something else, I ask him to table it now forthwith, with the 

date of the letter and the signature thereon. 

 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, this is completely out of order and I object to your statement 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The member is quoting from a piece of paper. He is quoting from a letter. He hasn't stated the 

date and I ask him to state the date. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. I think a member of this house deserves some respect too. 

I was asking a point of order and you rose and interrupted. I don't think you should do that as long as I am 

speaking properly to a point of order. I do not think you have that right, Sir. 

 

Now, it is one rule that Ministers of the Crown must table correspondence. It is another rule entirely for private 

members of this legislature, and I object to your ruling. 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

585 

Mr. Speaker: — . . . the date on it to begin with. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — . . . or interfering with the letter at all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Give the date. Give the date. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — This was a standard form used by the Department of Social Welfare, and if this isn't the 

standard form used by the Department of Social Welfare, who is W.J. Totten, administrator of the Medical 

Services Division? This was given to me by the son of this lady and if the Minister of Social Welfare want to 

know the lady's name I will give it to him in private. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What do you think you have found? 

 

An Hon. Member: — I could give you a hundred names . . . 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Now, much ado has been made about the great progress that has been made since the election 

of the new Liberal government in development of minerals, and potash, and industry generally. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What about heavy water? 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — I must give you credit for heavy water, but this completely contradicts your belief in private 

enterprise because this is socialism and private enterprise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — If this is heavy water, give us more of it. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That is a soft water plant. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Mr. Speaker, I was the member who last year moved the Address-In-Reply to the speech 

from the throne, and I hope, Mr. Speaker, that I am allowed to revert back a year. I want to read to this house and 

to the members of this legislature, what I said with respect to potash development. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . give us some more. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — I will give you some too, Mr. Minister of Public Health (Mr. Steuart), don't worry. 
 

Another shaft to triple production at Esterhazy. Stagnation? Thirty thousand . . . 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — Private enterprise. 
 

Mr. Michayluk: — 

Thirty thousand dollar potash of America Plant at Patience Lake — stagnation? Alwinsol Potash at Lanigan, a 

$50,000 investment. Continental Potash at Unity, stagnation? 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — Private enterprise. 
 

Mr. Michayluk: — 

Booming business for the steel mill in Regina, stagnation? 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — Private enterprise brought in by the Liberals. 
 

Mr. Michayluk: — We all recall, Mr. Speaker, that prior to the Hanley by-election, the present Minister of 

Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) and the present Premier (Mr. Thatcher), made quite an effort to claim credit for 

U.S. Borax coming to the Allan district to develop another potash mine. As a. matter of fact, if I am not mistaken, 

the Liberal government and the Lib- 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

586 

eral party tried to take credit for convincing U.S. Borax to come into Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a copy of the Saskatoon Star Phoenix of Friday, May 15th, 1964, and of course, the Liberals 

didn't form a government until May 22nd . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You fellows were getting your files out about then. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Here is the title, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Company plans two shafts near Allan. 

 

These $50,000,000, $60,000,000 plants or companies don't fly in over-night like a crow to roost in a tree. And 

here is what it says: 

 

U.S. Borax which plans a major potash mining venture in the Allan district, east of Saskatoon, will be sinking 

two large shafts simultaneously, it was learned today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the hon. gentleman who is now Premier was not even sworn as Premier yet. Here was the 

announcement in the Saskatoon Star Phoenix of the coming of U.S. Borax to the Allan community. 

 

Mr. Allan Guy (Athabasca): — Have you a clipping about Noranda that says the same thing? 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — I will find that one too, don't you worry. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Table it . . . 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say this . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — May I proceed, Mr. Speaker? I think I am entitled to the same courtesy that all other 

members are. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think possibly that this is as good a time as any to draw the attention of all the members of the 

house to regulations that are fairly well known. Rule 126, citation 126 from Beauchesne: 

 

The rule is well known, that interruptions should not be tolerated. On the 25th November, 1932, when a 

member interrupted with these words: "May I ask the honourable member a question?" and the request was 

refused, Mr. Speaker took the opportunity to give the following ruling: "It is out of order to interrupt a speaker 

in this way. When a member speaking is asked whether or not he will permit a question, he signified his 

willingness to be interrupted by taking his seat; when he does not do so, he indicates that he does not wish to be 

interrupted." 

 

It goes on further to say that no member should interrupt while another member is making a speech. I am not 

going to spend a lot of time repeating all the citations from all the various books that there are. Let me merely 

close by saying that I most sincerely hope that the senior members of the house will follow the very excellent 

example which has been set throughout this session by the junior members of the house, making their first 

appearance. This is the rule, this is the regulation. I hope all hon. members will obey it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — I thank you heartily, Mr. Speaker, for your ruling. I want to say a few words further in 

respect to mineral development in the 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

587 

province of Saskatchewan. Mineral production first commenced in what we now know as Saskatchewan in 1886. 

By 1944, when the CCF took over, Saskatchewan had produced a cumulative total of $170,000,000 of mineral 

wealth over a span of sixty years. In 1963 alone, the mineral wealth production is going to surpass or has 

surpassed the $280,000,000 figure. It took Saskatchewan seventy-three years, from 1886 to 1958, to produce the 

first billion dollars worth of minerals. In June of 1963, and in less than five years, another or a second billion 

dollars worth of minerals was reached, and at that time, it was predicted that a third billion dollars worth of 

minerals will be reached in the next three years. 

 

Now, direct government revenues from mineral resources in the form of royalties, fees, mineral land sales, have 

risen from $233,000 in 1944 to an estimated $28,000,000 in 1963. Is it any wonder then, Mr. Speaker, with the 

discovery of potash and with the location within the province of Saskatchewan of five or six companies, that 

several companies were in the process of negotiating with the government when it was defeated on April 22nd of 

last year, that more and more companies are locating in Saskatchewan to extract potash from the core of our 

province? 

 

I would say that the credit is due, not to any particular party. Credit is due to nature that awarded us with this 

plentiful supply of potash which will provide future generations with economic resources for the benefit of every 

man, woman and child living in this province, providing that it is used wisely. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am going to turn my remarks to a few things which are of some concern to me personally, and to 

some people within my constituency. Much has been said in respect to people in public service; people who have 

been appointed by Order-In-Council by the past government. I am concerned with what is being done to some of 

the people within my constituency with things which we in the CCF would consider as petty, too small to trifle 

with politically. Yet, Mr. Speaker, this is being done within my constituency. I want to make reference to only 

two items. I have a letter here dated December 12th, 1964. It states: 

 

I am sending you two copies of letters, one I received, and one I wrote. I was talking to Eiling Kramer . . . 

 

It happens that Mr. Kramer lives very close to the boundary of my constituency, about five miles from the city of 

North Battleford. 

 

. . . about this and he advised me to write the letter to Mr. Flynn, which I did. This is unfair and there is no good 

reason for the change except for politics. I just wanted to let you know what was going on and see if there is 

anything you can do to help me keep this agency. 

 

And this is in respect to a Saskatchewan Transportation Bus stop. 

 

I would appreciate an answer to this letter. 

I hope you can help me in some way. Thank you. 

 

Yours truly, 

 

Mr. B.D. Gallagher (Yorkton): — Will the member tell the house who the letter was from? 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Yes. I have no fear. Mrs. May Deery of Cochin, Saskatchewan. Now, here is the letter that 

Mrs. Deery received from Mr. W.W. Flynn, General Manager of the Saskatchewan Transportation Company: 

 

As provided in the agency agreement between yourself and the Saskatchewan Transportation Company, we are 

giving 30 days notice of termination of the said agreement to become effective October 19th, 1964. 

 

The letter from Mrs. Deery to Mr. Flynn: 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

588 

Dear Mr. Flynn: 

 

In reply to your letter of September 2nd, stating that you are moving the bus depot, and giving me thirty days 

notice as provided in the agency agreement. I would like to know the reason for this change, as the agency 

contract was signed for a period of five years, and to my knowledge there has been no default in the accounts or 

complaints as to service. 

 

It is not inconvenient for the bus driver or unsafe for the passengers when loading or unloading. The bus has 

stopped here for a good many years. 

 

The only reason they gave me for moving the agency was that the bus would stop closer to the highway at the 

new place, but that is right on a very busy highway where it would not be safe for loading and unloading. Also, 

the bus would be crossing and re-crossing a very busy traffic lane where there are no stop signs. It is also in a 

very busy part of a resort, whereas here it is off the main highway enough so as the heavy traffic does not 

interfere with the unloading and loading of passengers and express. 

 

The roads are in good shape and we do have stop signs here. It is also more convenient here as we are right 

across the street from the hotel and cafe, and the majority of the passengers come from this side of the resort. 

 

I hope you will reconsider the decision in this matter. An early reply would be appreciated, as I can, if 

necessary, take further action to retain this agency. 

 

Yours truly, 

 

Mrs. Deery. 

 

I wrote this letter to Mr. Flynn, whom I know personally. I had an opportunity of meeting him on one occasion at 

the bus depot. This is a copy of the letter I wrote to Mr. Flynn: 

 

September 25th, 1964 

 

Dear Mr. Flynn: 

 

Re. S.T.C. Bus stop at Cochin 

 

The decision of the Saskatchewan Transportation Company to reallocate the bus stop in the above hamlet has 

been brought to my attention by Mrs, Deery, agent for the S.T.C. there. Would you kindly, at your convenience, 

inform me as to the reason for this move on the part of the S.T.C? 

 

With kindest personal regards to you, I am 

 

and my name. On September 28th, about three days later, I received this letter from Mr. Flynn: 

 

Please be advised that your letter of September 28th, 1964, has been referred to Hon. G.B. Grant, Chairman of 

the Board of Directors for his attention and action. 

 

Yours truly, Mr. Flynn. 

 

This is the letter I received from the Minister (Mr. Grant). 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

589 

September 30th, 1964. 

 

Re. -— S.T.C. Bus Stop at Cochin. 

 

Mr. W.W. Flynn, General Manager of the Saskatchewan Transportation Company, passed on to me your letter 

of September 25th, dealing with the above. 

 

I feel that the relocation of the bus stop at Cochin was justified, due to the highway changes and also because 

the new location has many features superior to the former location. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know Cochin. It so happens the first bus stop is on the left hand side of the highway. The 

present bus stop is on the right hand side of the highway, going north. The only relocation that was made was that 

the highway no. 4, instead of turning in towards the hotel and making a small bridge, the highway was 

straightened, so that the bus, when it turned off, turned off to a grid road, to the bus stop across the little bridge 

with a stop sign, and kept on going. It was only moved, possibly not even a hundred yards, across the road. Now, 

I am just wondering Mr. Speaker, I don't want to infer to the hon. Minister in charge of S.T.C., but I would 

suggest to the government that these little petty things are of no benefit to anyone; they are of no benefit to you as 

a Liberal party. This little change of the bus stop which could be called a nuisance because those people have to 

be there to meet the bus. The commission for the sale of tickets is very small. It is causing enemies in small 

hamlets and communities in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I don't know whether other changes have taken place, but Mr. Speaker, I am sure that the Minister isn't happy and 

I am not happy. I am just suggesting to the government not to meddle in petty things that are too trivial to talk 

about in the legislature. I know that the Minister and Mr. Flynn did not act on their own. I am sure that possibly 

an active Liberal executive said, "Look, we have two people, two premises where buses can stop. Let us take it 

away from the one who may be CCF or may have voted CCF and give it to a fellow whom we know is a Liberal 

supporter". I am not sure. 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Highways): — Would the hon. member permit a question? 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the hon. member argues that the present location at Cochin is inferior, in 

accommodation, convenience, and facilities to the previous one? 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — No, Mr. Speaker, I certainly do not. I am not inferring and I do not want to infer in any way, 

shape, or form, that the present place is superior to the place where it was located originally; or that the original 

place is superior to where it is located now. But I am speaking on a matter of principle. I know personally that this 

has caused ill feeling, not only between these two people in this little hamlet and between certain groups in this 

community. I want to say too, Mr. Speaker, that I am certain it did not cause ill feeling between parties as such, 

but as a matter of principle, because surely the people in a small community can assess action like this on its own 

merit. 

 

Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member inferred that this action was taken on authority other than mine. I 

will take full responsibility for it and I claim it was just for the reasons cited, namely convenience, 

accommodation and facilities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to one other matter which, to people who devote some 

time to politics, is of vital importance. It is also of vital importance to the gentlemen of the press. I am referring to 

propaganda. We use radio broadcasts to inform the people of the province of Saskatchewan regarding proceedings 

in the legislature. This is a form of propaganda that propagates whatever takes place during the hour and fifteen 

minutes of proceedings in this house, but I want to speak about propaganda 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

590 

generally. 

 

You know it is quite a device, Mr. Speaker, It is quite an instrument that kills, devastates and builds. It is a device 

which some of the hon. members on the government side, and maybe some on this side, try to use to influence the 

electors. It is used effectively to misrepresent and to catch the public unaware. It is a device, Mr. Speaker, which I 

said at the offset, destroys and builds. I presume, Mr. Speaker, that this is the reason why some of the hon. 

members opposite try to use propaganda. Continuous efforts are made to capture the minds of the unsuspecting 

public in the interest of some policy or idea. Technical instruments, unknown in previous ages, are now used to 

influence the thinking of millions of people. With respect to this elaborate web of communication, a modern 

writer says: 

 

Our nation has become a small room in which a single whisper can be magnified thousands of times. 

 

The purposes for which these facilities are employed are of primary concern to all Canadians who are interested in 

constructive citizenship. I want to refer to the meaning of the term College of Propaganda — an organization 

founded in Rome. It had a purpose in the educating of missionaries. Later, this term came to be applied to 

activities carried on for the purpose of spreading any doctrine or belief. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it seems that no important undertaking is carried on in modern society, and particularly 

politics, without propaganda. Whether a community is planning a centre, an open football season, a fight against 

cancer, or a safety campaign, we must have the approval of the public for success. It seems, Mr. Speaker, that 

without effective advertising even the most worthy project fails to make a wide-spread impression. Without fear 

of contradiction, Mr. Speaker, it is not this type of propaganda that I and the members of this house consider 

objectionable. It is rather, the distortion of facts and the insinuations that I view with alarm. It is only too obvious 

to me, Mr. Speaker, that unscrupulous interests can use the most up-to-date techniques of publicity for their 

selfish purposes just as persuasively as those who employ them for socially desirable ends. One other writer said 

this of propaganda: 

 

It is a method, an instrument, equally available in starting wars. It may appeal to the generous and tolerant 

impulses of men or their brutal instincts. It may be compared to a garden hose. Through it may pass water from 

a cesspool or crystal clear water or a mixed muddy stream. Propaganda may present the clear truth or a muddy 

mixture of truth and lies, or a poisonous stream of prejudice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how can one recognize dangerous propaganda? Socialist scientists, who are experienced in 

analyzing the ways of publicity agents, believe that it is possible to distinguish between the appeals of trustworthy 

leaders and those of dangerous unscrupulous demagogues, be they political or otherwise, by listing seven 

common tricks employed by modern propaganda. With your permission, Mr. Speaker, may I name the seven? 

First, the name-calling device — a simple old trick or practice of giving a dog a bad name. A movement is 

condemned by fixing a label to it which is known or thought to be unpopular. Anyone whose policies or politics is 

disliked, is said to be leftist, red, socialist, agitator, or free enterpriser, and so on. 

 

The next one is a glittering generality — a sweeping statement for a clever slogan, backed by no evidence . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — A slogan from your end. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — . . . which is obviously agreeable to the reader or listener. This is the trick employed by 

politicians. "Virtue" words in which people like to think they believe, are used freely such as: progress, 

democracy, free enterprise, truth, freedom and civilization. Policies are put forward as being in perfect harmony 

with the way of life. 

 

The third, Mr. Speaker, is by transfer. Propaganda attempts to win support by association with a symbol which is 

universally respected and accepted. In this way, cartoons make effective use of the Christian Cross, the Union 

Jack, the Maple Leaf, John Bull and others. In other phases skill- 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

591 

ful employment of music is used. Testimonials are commonly used in advertising where people of popular fame 

associate themselves with products. Hockey stars use "Bee-hive" syrup and of course movie stars use certain 

brand of make-up. 

 

Then there is the "plain folk" technique. "I am for the under dog". The plain folk technique is often used by 

politicians to win confidence by appearing to be just "plain folks", therefore, wise, good and trustworthy. 

 

The card stacking trick is another device. This is a good one, Mr. Speaker. This is the use of faulty logic or the 

suppression of known facts in order to promote a cause such as breaking of a tape to discontinue a rebroadcast of 

an explanatory portion of legislative broadcasts. Information which would be embarrassing to one's own cause is 

conveniently overlooked or an argument is shifted from a point of major importance to those of little 

consequence. Every effort is made to conceal the truth and to mislead the public. This is used by the Leader Post 

and the Saskatoon Star Phoenix exclusively during times like this. Every effort is made to conceal the truth and to 

mislead the public. Reports on events of vital importance are found among the want ads. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the trick to which the party and hon. members to your right will employ is the "band wagon" 

device. It is the old method of attracting followers by creating the impression that everybody is doing it, 

everybody is with them, the people are supporting them, and so on. Mr. Speaker, if it can be demonstrated that a 

certain cause is bound to win, the inclination is to "climb on the band wagon". By this means, Mr. Speaker, the 

opposition is made unpopular, hopelessly weak, and perhaps just a little queer. In using this technique, appeal is 

directed at whole groups, which share common interests. Prejudice, hatred and fear are the main stock-in-trade. In 

all these efforts to direct the interest and tastes of people, Mr. Speaker, the propagandist avoids the test of reason 

and logic. 

 

A steady battle is waged to control people and human emotions. Without it, the propagandist is helpless. With it, 

he tries to make people glow with pride or burn with indignation. The unsuspecting public, completely unaware of 

what the purpose is, stops thinking and follows the leader. Political campaigns, Mr. Speaker, are orgies of 

propaganda. Unfortunately they reveal an almost irresponsible use of every device I have mentioned. Elections 

are conducted in an atmosphere of color and excitement, and I wonder who tuned some of our leaders in this 

province during the last provincial election? Some people didn't even appear to be their natural selves. They were 

tuned down, to make it appear that they were respectable and that they could be trusted and be relied on. 

 

Hon. A.H. McDonald (Minister of Agriculture): — Tune him down a little. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Elections are conducted in an atmosphere of color and excitement. The successful leader is 

expected to be a showman as well as a statesman. We have noticed, Mr. Speaker, that our Premier has been toned 

down to the personality type of Premier, not to his true self, as we on this side of the house know him. Thus, Mr. 

Speaker, propaganda is a menace to Canadian democracy when it is directed by selfish interests towards sinister 

ends. 

 

Vast sums of money may be used to purchase newspaper space and time on television and radio — a very 

expensive media which is somewhat beyond reach of those who have limited financial resources. Thus the 

campaign proceeds to capture the minds of people for political or business purposes, and public opinion is 

influenced by powerful interests without the real design being disclosed. 

 

Another device that I want to mention is the suppression of fact. There was . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — How come you know all about it? 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — . . . an example of this, during the Hanley by-election, Mr. Speaker. You know the Star 

Phoenix (and I am sure they have a representative in the press gallery this evening) as a matter of principle, 

accepts letters to what is known as "The Letter Box". 

 

An Hon. Member: — Free press. 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

592 

Mr. Michayluk: — Just when the Hanley by-election was announced, on November 16th, the following item 

appeared in the Star Phoenix Letter Box: 

 

The Letter Box page of the Star Phoenix has been closed to letters. Letters on hand, considered by the editor to 

be strictly political propaganda, will not be published until after the December 16th election in the Hanley 

constituency. A person attacked directly will be allowed to reply on the editorial page as is the usual custom. 

 

Now, the ruling has been forced on the editor by propaganda raised by letters. Several politicians were warned 

some time ago of this matter. The Letter Box is meant to be a forum for the discussion of subjects of interest. I 

presume, Mr. Speaker, that the Hanley by-election was not in the best public interest. It will not be allowed to be a 

propaganda outlet for any political party, in power or out of power. Now, this is what I mean by black-out. 

 

I hope that these few things that I have mentioned with respect to propaganda will enlighten some of the members 

on both sides of the house and I want to say to the members opposite that we know what they are trying to do. 

 

During the present session, it has been stated frequently that we refused to call by-elections when they were made 

necessary. Now, I know that the calling of the Hanley by-election, Mr. Speaker, was the last thing that the 

Premier wanted, but the hon. member for Hanley (Mr. Walker) put him up against the wall so that he had to call a 

by-election under the Controverted Election Act. 

 

I want to say something about by-elections that we had some years past. In the 1960 election, the hon. member for 

Turtleford (Mr. Wooff) who is now representing this constituency, was elected by a mere eleven votes, and of 

course, his opponent presumably went throughout the constituency and found eleven people who were not 

qualified to vote under the Election Act, as it existed at that time. 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . all Liberals too. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — On January 17th, 1961, that was before the session was called, the election of the hon. 

member, now member for the constituency of Turtleford, (Mr. Wooff) was declared null and void. What did the 

then government do, Mr. Speaker? The writs were issued for a by-election in the Hanley constituency on January 

18th the next day. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Turtleford, I am sorry. Yes. The writs were issued on the 18th, and the election was held on 

February 22nd. In other words, one day the election of the hon. member, now sitting in his seat was disallowed, 

and the next day the writs were issued. The election was held on February 22nd, and the legislature took every 

action to make it convenient for the elected member who was not on the side of the government, to take his seat 

and represent the people of Turtleford constituency. 

 

You will recall that the hon. Mr. McIntosh died during the session, March 17th, and that we adjourned to attend 

the funeral. The session ended on April 14th. There was no time to hold an election during the balance of the 

sitting days, but the first question that the now Premier asked when this house came to order after the funeral was, 

"When are you going to hold a by-election in Prince Albert?" 

 

An Hon. Member: — Before the body was even cold. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — I do not think that the deceased Minister's feet were cold when the election was requested. 

 

You know what happened during the summer of 1962. This would have been the opportune time for the party 

who were in opposition to hold a by-election during the medical care crisis. They had a lot of things going. They 

had the now Premier kicking on the door; they had what was commonly 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

593 

known as the K.O.D. Yes, they had the members of the then opposition speaking at K.O.D. rallies and enticing 

people to march on Regina in July. Then they wanted an election. You know, it is nice to catch fish in muddy 

water. The by-election was held on November 9th and of course, we were defeated. However, at no time was the 

Prince Albert constituency unrepresented. 

 

Mr. Speaker, then of course, we had the by-election in Weyburn. You know the then Premier resigned November 

7th and the writs were issued on November 8th. The by-election was held on December 13th, and again we were 

defeated. Again Weyburn did not go unrepresented in this legislature. 

 

In 1952, Mr. Speaker, I acted as a returning officer for the Redberry constituency and we had a very close vote. 

You know, Mr. Speaker, that Redberry has had a batting average of 500 since 1944, but it has now changed that 

status. I have taken it twice in a row. But at that time, the then member, Mr. Dick Zipchen, was elected in the final 

count, by forty votes. The Liberal opponent called for a recount. 

 

Personally, I don't see much wrong with the Election Act, providing that good will exists on both sides. This is 

what the hon. member for Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) said, five ballots remained uncounted, but of course, his 

majority was 207. In my constituency they counted every vote, but my majority was 207. When a majority is 

pretty close and good will is non-existent, then there seems to be difficulty, and difficulties were found in Hanley, 

Canora, Pelly, and Kelsey. In Regina East, difficulties ceased to exist after the Hanley election. All that is 

necessary is good will. The Redberry recount was the first to be held in twenty-one years. All parties appeared 

before his Honour Judge Nye, in the courthouse of North Battleford. Judge Nye carried out the count and declared 

Mr. Dick Zipchen elected by twenty-four votes. However, the difficulties of the 1964 election are more than I can 

comprehend. I cannot recall, Mr. Speaker, during the time that I sat in this legislature, that any of the members 

opposite made reference to the Election Act. They did make reference to a soldier vote. 

 

When you were in opposition, you did make reference to the soldier vote, but you know our defeat was not as 

spectacular as the members opposite would want the people of Saskatchewan to believe. You know there was a 

little bit of hide-and-seek. The hon. member for Arm River (Mr. Pederson) is not in his seat, but you know there 

was quite an attempt made by the now Premier for what was called a saw-off. I have here a statement made by the 

now Premier, and reported in the Leader Post of Saturday, March 14th, 1963. I want to quote this section: 

 

Party officials say that most of those leaving early were known Liberals. What were they doing at the P.C. 

nomination convention? 

 

Thatcher calls for P.C. saw-off, Tuesday, February 11th, 1964. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Not a saw-off. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Well, it gives good saw dust. Speaking at Moose Jaw and I quote: 

 

Speaking at the Moose Jaw Liberal provincial constituency nominating convention, Mr. Thatcher declared flatly 

to the P.C.s, "if you will come along with us, we will finish the job, and then we can have our squabbles after 

the job is done". 

 

Mr. Walker: — Said the spider to the fly. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Now, if we look through the Saskatchewan Gazette, it is amusing to note the way things 

seemed to stack up. They could not find a Conservative candidate in the Canora constituency, and yet that area 

which the hon. member for Canora (Mr. Romuld) represents, has a Conservative in the House of Commons. Yes, 

in a federal seat, which includes your constituency . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — . . . they found me. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — . . . includes your constituency. They couldn't find a Conservative in Elrose. Coincidental, 

isn't it? Both Ministers, the Hon. A.G. 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

594 

Kuziak and Hon. O.A. Turnbull, both Ministers, had no Conservative opponents. That is not all. They couldn't 

even find a Conservative in Gravelbourg. Kerrobert-Kindersley, did you have a Conservative? 

 

Mr. W.S. Howes (Kerrobert-Kindersley): — No. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Well, you were fortunate. Then the member for Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) said that this time he 

had a two-way fight. They couldn't find a Conservative in Moosomin, so a two-way fight. How about Morse? You 

know that the hon. Premier's majority is smaller than mine. He said in one of his speeches, "I had a squeaker in 

Morse". 

 

Mr. MacLennan (Last Mountain): — A real squeaker . . . 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — It sure was a squeaker. No Conservative. Oh no. Regina South, no Conservative. No 

Conservative in Souris-Estevan; and of course, no Conservative in the hon. member's constituency representing 

Swift Current -a two-way fight. No Conservative in the constituency of my hon. friend from The Battlefords (Mr. 

Kramer). Last but not least, the hon. member for Watrous (Mr. Broten) had to put up quite a fight to win Watrous 

in a two-way fight. 

 

Mr. Speaker, do you mean to tell me that this was all coincidental? That there were no Conservatives in all these 

constituencies? I think that these bold calls made by the then leader of the opposition paid off. However, we did 

take Swift Current; we took The Battlefords; we took Kinistino; we took Watrous; but we lost a few which caused 

the defeat of the government. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . we took the government. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — You sure did, but it won't be for long. 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Try it again. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Mr. Speaker, I think I have said enough for this evening. I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MOTION: — ASSISTANCE RE — SCHOOL BUS ROUTES 

 

Mr. M.P. Pederson (Arm River) moved: 

 

That this Assembly recommends to the consideration of the government that a special emergency grant be 

established to provide assistance to rural municipalities for the purpose of opening school bus routes where 

snow-clearing facilities are inadequate, resulting in the inability of pupils reaching school. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in speaking to this resolution, I believe that members on both sides of the house are very 

well aware of the extreme conditions that have existed in the province this winter, insofar as our roads, 

particularly grid roads, are concerned, and as they affect the transportation of children to school. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have had several representations, as I understand members on both sides of the house have 

had, from various groups, the school units, municipalities and individuals, suggesting that the machinery in 

existence in a great many of these areas at the present time for the opening of grid roads to allow the passage of 

school buses, has broken down. In my own constituency of Arm River, I have a group of twenty-eight pupils who 

live out at the far end of a grid road, and who are blocked off from access to their school by a mere half mile of 

road. This is in a fourteen mile piece of road. 

 

I understand, Mr. Speaker, that this situation can be duplicated in literally dozens and dozens of communities in 

this province. My recommendation to the government, Sir, is that they would consider the possibility of providing 

some type of a special emergency fund to deal with this situa- 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

595 

tion. I realize that this is not a permanent type of an answer, and I was very pleased to hear mentioned in this 

house that the Minister is aware of this problem and is planning some steps to correct this through the 

construction of further grid roads to bring them up above the snow level. For the present time, and because I 

believe this matter is very urgent, many pupils having already been deprived of the opportunity to get to school, I 

would hope and would earnestly suggest that the government give consideration to this resolution. 

 

My own suggestion would be that a very nominal amount could be made available; I believe that it would be quite 

within keeping for municipalities to approach the Department of Highways for the rental of their equipment on a 

per hour basis. The costs are relatively modest and many of these areas that are affected, if they had just one good 

cleaning out job done on these roads, would probably last until spring. In many municipalities, this would require 

a matter of only two, three, four, up to eight or ten hours of work for snow removal, in order to ensure easy 

passage for the busses from now until spring. 

 

I have tried to calculate what the cost would be and I would think something in the neighborhood of a maximum 

per municipality, say of a couple of hundred dollars, would probably be ample to look after this particular 

problem. Many municipalities have expended what little money they had available for this kind of work and most 

of them have not allocated such funds on snow clearing and are unable to go further. 

 

Snow Plow Clubs have done a tremendous job, but with the hard crust that is formed on the snow, with repeated 

plowings, their machinery is inadequate, and unless, Mr. Speaker, something is done, and done almost 

immediately, we are going to have literally hundreds and hundreds of children in this province deprived of the 

opportunity of attending school for literally weeks on end. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this is serious enough that I 

hope the government will take this into consideration and act on it as quickly as possible. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by Mr. Wooff of Turtleford: 

 

That this assembly recommends to the consideration of the government that a special emergency grant be 

established to provide assistance to rural municipalities for the purpose of opening school bus routes where 

snow-clearing facilities are inadequate, resulting in the inability of pupils reaching school. 

 

Mr. R.H. Wooff (Turtleford): — To anyone who has lived for almost sixty years and has had experience with 

drifted roads and water conditions, realizing that these conditions literally bring winter traffic to a standstill, one 

who has had experience facing these roads as a youngster going to school, who has literally driven oxen over 

three miles to school, followed by the era of horses, it has now come to the point where snow plowing for some 

time has been essential. 

 

I think a resolution like this does have considerable appeal. The situation, as it exists today, with our cars, trucks, 

and our bus traffic, running all winter, it is even more vulnerable to winter weather than was old Dobbin. 

 

I would like the members to let their minds run back only three days, and picture what would have happened had 

we had only two inches of loose snow last Saturday with the wind reaching sixty miles per hour, winds that 

covered the entire province. 

 

I think that the resolution, Mr. Speaker, speaks for itself, that it is intended as an emergency form of assistance, in 

its application to problems of school bus routes. 

 

The mover, the hon. member for Arm River (Mr. Pederson) I think has made this abundantly clear. Such a fund is 

for the assistance in difficult and extreme situations where through lack of funds and heavy enough equipment for 

snow removal, the students are unable to attend school regularly because of the blocked conditions of the roads, 

and many students are losing valuable time from their school term, time which, I think we all realize, as parents, 

they cannot afford to lose. I would like to emphasize the fact, Mr. Speaker, that there are many areas, especially 

throughout the 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

 

596 

north, where rural municipalities, L.I.D.'s, or local ratepayers have neither the funds nor the equipment to cope 

with these emergency conditions. 

 

I am not speaking without experience, Mr. Speaker. For two years I have been plowing snow myself, and I find 

that the equipment I have is unable to cope with road conditions after they become blocked and have been 

plowed once or twice. So, in these cases where it seems impossible to have the roads open in time for the school 

buses, I would suggest that this resolution has real merit. I have great pleasure, Mr. Speaker, in seconding this 

resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Members of the Liberal party, year in and year out, while they were in 

opposition, advocated that something should be done in this province for snow removal to help our municipalities 

and our L.I.D.'s. Just as often as we made suggestions in estimates, or wherever the place might be, this group 

across the way, who were then the government, turned it down, refused to do anything, so I would find it very 

strange today if they should support this motion, moved by the hon. member for Arm River (Mr. Pederson) and 

seconded by the hon. member for Turtleford (Mr. Wooff). 

 

I do not know whether it was one of his seasons when this matter was discussed before, but as I say again, this 

government, all the years they were in office, refused to do one single thing to help the municipalities and L.I.D.'s. 

with snow removal. 

 

Now, I can tell you that the government has this matter under consideration. We said in the last election campaign 

that we would do something about this problem, and we intend to do something about it. We cannot carry all our 

promises out overnight but we are doing pretty well at it, and I may tell the hon. member for Arm River (Mr. 

Pederson) we are sympathetic to this principle. I am not saying whether we can move in the immediate future or 

not, but move we will. Mr. Speaker, I move the adjournment of this debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier) moved second reading of Bill no. 30 — An Act to provide for the 

Appointment of Legislative Secretaries to Members of the Executive Council. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I think I can, perhaps in five minutes, state what the government is trying to do in this 

particular bill. When introducing bill no. 30, providing for Legislative Secretaries, the government is placing 

before the house an innovation to our provincial administration. 

 

We are proposing to appoint not more than six Legislative Secretaries to assist Cabinet Ministers with heavy 

portfolios. It is the suggestion that each will hold office during the calendar year and under the bill it will be 

possible for the government to rotate personnel from year to year if the government feels it is desirable. We are 

interested in establishing the policy that a number of members will have a turn at filling these positions. 

 

As hon. members probably know, this practice has been used in many parliaments throughout the world. I am 

informed that the system originated in the British parliament, but it has been used in other parts of the continent, 

and at Ottawa, it has worked very satisfactorily for a long period of time. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You're kidding. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — It is our contention that the system would work the same way here in Regina 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — My hon. friends may laugh, 



 

February 23, 1965 

 

597 

but the system worked very well and I am quite sure that if my hon. friends were ever fortunate enough to achieve 

power in Ottawa they would use the same system because I have certainly heard their members support the 

system in the House of Commons. 

 

Section three of the bill, which is now before us, provides that a Secretary's duty shall be to assist the Minister in 

such manner as the Minister directs. At the present time the Minister in charge of a department is the only 

political officer in the department. As I say, Secretaries will be appointed in the department where the portfolio is 

heavy. 

 

We think that a parliamentary assistant could relieve the Minister of many routine duties. Where the work-load 

faced by a Minister is extremely heavy, the time which is taken to perform these routine tasks would be better 

spent on more vital policy matters by the department's chief policy maker. 

 

Legislative Secretaries assigned to a department could perform many of these secondary functions. A Secretary 

could assist the Minister in answering questions in the house and in aiding in the presentation of the legislative 

programs. They could lighten the burden placed on the Minister by speaking at various functions, where the 

Minister is called upon to attend. Deputations of citizens who come in, hour after hour, some days could be met 

by the parliamentary assistant. 

 

I would point out that the former government had fifteen Cabinet Ministers. It is not the intention of the 

government to make these legislative appointments full time. However, each Secretary will be expected to keep in 

touch with his department fairly frequently each month throughout the whole year. 

 

I contend that this system would have several major advantages to the government and to the people of 

Saskatchewan. First of all, I say again that the work-load of senior Ministers will be lightened; secondly, members 

will be given the opportunity of obtaining direct and intimate knowledge of the operation of the administration; 

thirdly, this system offers a valuable training ground for promising young members who are future cabinet 

material; 

 

Mr. C.G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — Promising what? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Fourthly, an additional benefit of the bill is the fact that it will allow the government to bring 

members of the legislature from all parts of the province, one time or another, into the administration of the 

government. 

 

The bill, as you will understand from reading it, provides for a salary of $2,000 per year to be paid to the 

Legislative Secretary. I would point out that the total salary paid to all six Secretaries, if the government should 

appoint six, would not be as much as one Cabinet Minister. These assistants will not be provided with cars. 

However, provision is made for reasonable expenses for travelling. In the light of the valuable addition that these 

Legislative Secretaries would be to the administration of the public business, I suggest that the cost is nominal. 

 

For the reasons I have given, Mr. Speaker, I am quite sure that any sensible member, on either side of the house, 

will want to support this particular motion. 

 

So I move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the hon. Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McDonald), the second reading of bill 

no. 30. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, in the event that on examining this bill I find myself not one 

of the sensible members of the legislature, I would beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The assembly adjourned at 10:00 o'clock p.m. 


