




















































Hansard: February 04, 1965


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

1st Day 

Thursday, February 4, 1965 
 

3.05 o’clock p.m. 

 

This being the day appointed by Proclamation of His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor, dated the eighteenth day of 

December, 1964, for the meeting of the first session of the fifteenth Legislative Assembly of the Province of 

Saskatchewan and the Assembly having met: 

 

His Honour, the Lieutenant-Governor entered the Chamber and took his seat on the Throne. 

 

Hon. Mr. Heald (Attorney General): — I am commanded by his Honour, the Lieutenant-Governor to inform you that 

he does not see fit to declare the causes of the summoning of the present Legislature until later today, when the 

Legislative Assembly shall have elected a Speaker, according to Law. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor then retired from the Chamber. 

 

The Hon. Mr. Thatcher, addressing himself to the Clerk, moved, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Heald, That James Edward 

Snedker, Esquire, member of the constituency of Saltcoats do now take the Chair of this Assembly as Speaker. 

 

He said: Mr. Snedker is a well known farmer and business man of the Saltcoats area and has been a member of the 

Saskatchewan Legislature since 1960. During that time he has been an eloquent speaker for his constituents and the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. I have confidence in his ability and integrity. I believe he is well qualified to 

carry out the duties of the office. In Canada, Speakers have traditionally refrained from taking part in any political 

activity outside of the house. Mr. Snedker has assured me that if the legislature honours him with this appointment he 

will fulfill his duties with impartiality and neutrality. I know that he will place before all else duty to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The question being put by the Clerk, it was resolved that James Edward Snedker, Esquire, do take the Chair of this 

Assembly as Speaker. 

 

The Clerk, having declared James Edward Snedker, Esquire, duly elected, he was conducted to the Chair, where, 

standing on the upper step, he returned his humble acknowledgements to the Assembly for the great honour they had 

been pleased to confer upon him by choosing him to be their Speaker. 

 

Thereupon he took the Chair and the Mace was laid on the Table. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor re-entered the Chamber and took his seat upon the Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker then addressed His Honour to the following effect: 

 

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR. 

 

The Legislative Assembly have elected me as their Speaker, although I am but little able to fulfill the important duties 

thus assigned to me. 

 

If, in the performance of those duties, I should at any time fall into error I pray that the fault may be imputed to me and 

not to the Assembly whose servant I am, and who, through me, the better to enable them to discharge their duty to their 

Queen and Country, hereby humbly claim all their undoubted rights and privileges, especially that they may have 

freedom of speech in their debates, access to your person at all 



February 4, 1965 

2 

 

seasonable times, and that their proceedings may receive from you the most favourable consideration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Heald (Provincial Secretary): — Mr. Speaker, I am commanded by his Honour the Lieutenant-Governor to 

declare to you that he freely confides in the duty and attachment of the Assembly to Her Majesty’s person and 

Government, and not doubting that their proceedings will be conducted with wisdom, temper and prudence, he grants, 

and upon all occasions will recognize and allow, their constitutional privileges. 

 

I am commanded also to assure you that the Assembly shall have ready access to His Honour upon all seasonable 

occasions, and that its proceedings, as well as your words and actions, will constantly receive from him the most 

favourable constructions. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor was then pleased to open the Session with the following speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislative Assembly, it is my privilege to welcome you to the First Session of the 

Fifteenth Legislature of Saskatchewan. 

 

Jubilee Year Celebrations 
 

This year, 1965, we celebrate the diamond jubilee of the founding of our province. 

 

It is an occasion for giving thanks to Providence for all the blessings of the past 60 years. 

 

A wide range of activities has been planned, designed to encourage our people to review the history of the province, to 

reflect on our inheritance and accomplishments, to visit Saskatchewan’s beauty spots, and to envisage our bright and 

challenging future. 

 

Economic Development 

 

1964 has been a year of signal importance for our province; for it has seen our people enjoy a remarkable degree of 

economic growth, chiefly in the field of industry. 

 

Although grain production did not reach the record level of 1963, it was above average and good prices and ready 

markets prevailed. 

 

Chief among our developments in the non-agricultural sector was the outstanding growth of the potash industry, in 

which investment in our province surpassed three hundred million dollars. 

 

We also saw the establishment of Saskatchewan’s first base metals mine in the Lac La Ronge district. 

 

My Government has pursued a course of private enterprise methods to encourage development and private initiative 

throughout the province. 

 

These efforts were marked by a thirty per cent increase in the number of new companies registered in our province 

during 1964, as compared to 1963. 

 

This adds greater impetus to my advisors’ efforts to further diversify Saskatchewan’s economic base. 

 

Johnson Commission 

 

My government has also recognized the need for vigilance, efficiency and effectiveness in the discharge of public 

business. 

 

To this end, it established a Commission on Government Administration to study ways and means of improving 

efficiency, and the practice of economy in the administration of government. 



February 4, 1965 

 

3 

 

It is hoped their report will be available to the government before the Legislative adjourns. 
 

There are already indications that their recommendations will be most useful in making significant savings in the 

expenditure of public funds. 
 

Tax Reductions 
 

My Government believes that taxes in Saskatchewan are a burden greater than that borne by Canadians in other parts of 

the country. Therefore, although large expenditures are planned in the forthcoming year, my Government will propose 

major tax reductions. 
 

Increased Highway Spending 
 

To facilitate the development of our primary industries, my Government plans a greatly expanded program of highway 

construction, so that our province’s transportation standards will meet those of the other developed provinces of 

Canada. 

 

You will be asked to approve capital expenditures which are about fifty per cent greater than in the past year for 

highways. 
 

Youth Department 
 

My advisors have expressed concern about our failure in the past to retain a large proportion of our young people in 

Saskatchewan. You will, therefore, be asked to approve the establishment of a new agency for youth. The purpose of 

this agency will be to co-ordinate and promote the cultural and recreational facilities available throughout the province 

for our young people. 
 

Education 
 

You will be asked to sharply increase our assistance to education. 
 

In addition to increase in ordinary expenditures, the Legislature will be asked to provide for the extension of technical 

school facilities in centres now not providing these facilities, in order to meet the increasing demand for skilled labour 

in a province that is fast industrializing. 
 

You will also be asked to extend financial assistance to a number of private high schools. 
 

My Government is fully aware of the problems facing our institutions of higher learning, due to ever-increasing 

enrolment and capital and operating costs, which are now greatly increased. 
 

To alleviate this situation, you will be asked to approve substantial increases in operating and construction grants to the 

University of Saskatchewan in both Saskatoon and Regina. 
 

Pensions for Teachers and Civil Servants 
 

My Government will ask the Legislative to provide financial assistance for the purpose of increasing the pensions of 

teachers and public servants who retired some years ago with deplorably inadequate pensions. 
 

Arts and Culture 
 

My Government realizes the tremendous importance of encouraging the growth of the arts and culture if our distinctive 

Canadian way of life is to continue to develop. Therefore, you will be asked to approve the granting of larger funds to 

materially aid this development. 
 

Indian and Métis Branch 
 

You will be asked to approve of legislation setting up a New Indian and Métis Branch of the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 
 

The task of this department will be to raise the standard of living of the Indian and Métis people to a level closer to that 

enjoyed by 



February 4, 1965 

4 

 

fellow citizens. 
 

The immediate problem that will face this branch will be the task of securing employment for these people. 
 

New Institutions 
 

My Government plans to construct a new Women’s Correctional Institution in Prince Albert. 
 

It will also build a modern home in Regina to give proper care to approximately forty children. 
 

Hospitalization and Medicare Amendment 
 

Amendments to the Saskatchewan Hospitalization and Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Acts will be introduced, 

to prevent citizens from being jailed for failure to pay the hospitalization or Medicare tax. 
 

Minimum Wage 
 

My Government will make proposals to increase the Saskatchewan minimum wage. 
 

Wire Tapping 
 

Legislation will be introduced to make wire tapping illegal in the Province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Legislative Secretaries 
 

My Government will ask the Legislature to authorize the appointment of a limited number of legislative secretaries to 

help my ministers with the heavier portfolios. 
 

Election Act 
 

You will be asked to amend the Saskatchewan Election Act to prevent, in future, confusion such as resulted in the last 

election. Absentee ballots will be largely discontinued and members of the armed forces will be given the same voting 

privileges as other citizens. 
 

Insurance Company Amendment 
 

The Government will introduce legislation which will permit all insurance companies to compete on a tender basis for 

insurance on such institutions as schools, hospitals, and sanatoria. This insurance has heretofore been awarded 

automatically to the Government Insurance Office. 
 

Retail Store Opening 
 

Permissive legislation will be introduced to enable municipal councils to pass legislation allowing retail stores to 

remain open either Friday night or Saturday night, but not both. 
 

My Government intends to introduce a number of measures which will be of particular help to agriculture. 
 

Lease Land 
 

The problem of leasing Crown lands has caused much concern throughout Saskatchewan. 
 

A new point system has been set up for allocation of pasture lease land. An independent appeal board whose members 

were nominated by Saskatchewan farm organizations, has been set up to ensure that leases are awarded on a fair and 

equitable basis. 
 

Where conditions warrant, the Government will sell grazing lands for establishment of economic farm units to farmers 

now renting the same. 
 

It will, when requested, sell cultivation leases to farmers now renting, with a 10 per cent down payment, with 30 years 
to repay, and a low interest rate. 
 

Master Farm Awards 
 

In order to draw attention to the wholesomeness of the family 



February 4, 1965 

 

5 

 

farm and the dignity of rural life, Master Farm Family awards will be instituted. Each year, two “Master Farmer” 

awards will be given, one in the North, one in the South. These awards will be given to individuals who have made 

outstanding contributions to agriculture during the year. 
 

Coloured Margarine 
 

Legislation will be introduced to permit the sale of coloured margarine. 
 

Rail Line Abandonment 
 

The railway network is Saskatchewan is the life blood of the community and the vital factor in its economic well-being. 
 

My Government believes that wholesale rail abandonment in the province would be completely unthinkable. 
 

A Special Committee of Cabinet has been established to receive representations from farm organizations and other 

interested parties. 
 

When proposals are before the Government of Canada, this Committee will make representations to Ottawa. 
 

My Government is determined to make every effort to guarantee that a policy is devised which will provide for a 

proper rationalization of transport services. 
 

Liquor Outlets 
 

You will be asked to approve amendments to The Liquor Act which will permit the establishment of a very limited 

number of new agencies. These agencies will be used to provide services in communities where size of population does 

not warrant the present type of outlet. 
 

Tourist Industry 
 

My Government is dissatisfied with the progress which Saskatchewan has made in developing the tourist industry. 
 

The Tourist Bureau will be expanded this year and you will be asked for increased expenditures for tourist promotional 

purposes. 
 

Provincial Parks 
 

My Government will continue the expansion of provincial parks. It is expected that 11 new regional parks will be 

established during 1965. 
 

Canada Pensions Plan 
 

You will be asked to co-operate with the Government of Canada in introducing the Canada Pensions Plan. 
 

At the appropriate time, if necessary, legislation will be introduced into the Legislature to effect such co-operation. 
 

Constitution 
 

You will be asked to approve a resolution which, in conjunction with similar legislation now before the Government of 

Canada and the other provinces, will permit Canada to amend her own constitution. 
 

The Public Accounts for the last fiscal year, together with estimates for the year beginning April 1, 1965, will be 

submitted. 
 

I leave you now to the business of the Session with full confidence that you will favourably discharge your duties and 

responsibilities. 
 

May Divine Providence continue to bless our province and guide the Legislature in all its deliberations. 
 

The assembly then adjourned at 3:40 o’clock p.m. 


