



















































Hansard: February 08, 1965


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

3rd Day 

 

Monday, February 8, 1965 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

CORRECTION IN VOTES & PROCEEDINGS 

 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank: (Acting Leader of the Opposition) (Kelsey) — Before the Orders of the Day are 

proceeded with, I would like to call your attention to an error in the Votes and Proceedings of Friday. Under the 

lists of committees — in the reports of the committees — under the Committee on Agriculture the last name is 

WOOD. It should be WOOFF. 

 

CORRECTION — REPORT IN THE LEADER POST — Feb. 6, 1965 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — One other thing I would like to say is also regarding a correction of a report in the 

Leader Post of February 6, the final edition, p. 5, c. 2. This is what they are talking about in 1941 when Mr. 

Patterson introduced the motion on wheat. They said the debate ended at that time automatically without the 

question being put and without the vote being taken. Now, that was not correct. Three votes were taken that day in 

connection with Premier Patterson‟s motion. Two of them were recorded votes and the final one was to pass the 

motion unanimously. After that, the house was adjourned and this, of course, is a vote too. You will find that in 

the Journals of Saskatchewan for February 28th, 1941. 

 

The other thing I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, is also in connection with certain editions of the Leader Post. On 

Page 9, February 5th issue, the last edition, there is a very fine picture of you, Sir, and of our Sergeant-At-Arms. 

The Leader Post has placed a small advertisement right below your picture and it protrudes up into the rectangle 

occupied by the picture. The advertisement has the caption “Chest Congestion: and is advertising an ointment. 

Now, this, in my opinion, is very close, if not an insult, to you, Sir, and to this house. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

WELCOME TO VISITORS 

 

Hon. Douglas T. McFarlane (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are 

proceeded with, I would like to draw your attention to two gentlemen in the speaker‟s gallery, the Messrs. 

Langley, who are the sons of a former member of this legislature and a former minister in the Liberal government 

of this legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



February 8, 1965 

 

 

32 

 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

Mr. Allan R. Guy (Athabaska): Moved: 

 

That a humble Address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor as follows: 

TO HIS HONOUR THE HONOURABLE ROBERT LEITH HANBIDGE 

 

Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty‟s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly, of the Province of Saskatchewan, 

in Session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious Speech which Your Honour has been 

pleased to address to us at the opening of the present Session. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, first of all I would also like to offer my congratulations to the rink mentioned by the hon. 

member from North Battleford (Mr. Kramer). I also hope that this spring they will also represent the province and 

when they go further, they will not only be successful in representing our province but will also win the Dominion 

Title. Being a curler myself, I am very pleased to see these young people today, who are representing our 

province, with such success. In fact, in the last few years the province of Saskatchewan has been noted both for 

their junior curlers and their senior curlers, both in male and female categories. We would hope that this year on 

the occasion of our Diamond Jubilee, that these curlers will continue to have the success that they have in the 

past. With the Dominion Briar in Saskatoon this year we would, I think, perhaps more than ever hope that our 

senior men‟s provincial champions, who will be selected in the next few days, will go up to Saskatoon and have 

overwhelming success. It would certainly be a very worthwhile effort on their behalf if they could bring the title 

to our province in our Diamond Jubilee. This would also be true for our ladies, our mixed curlers and our high 

school curlers. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I rise with pride to move the Address-In-Reply to the speech from the throne, I wish to 

thank those responsible for this honor bestowed on the constituency of Athabaska, and on northern Saskatchewan 

generally. It is further evidence of the faith which our new government has in the northern part of our province. I 

humbly pray that 7 will be equal to the task. It is especially gratifying to have been given this honor, since this is 

the first Throne Speech of our new Liberal government, and it is one of which they can be justly proud. There is 

more hope, Mr. Speaker, promised for the people of Saskatchewan in this first speech than there was in the twenty 

preceding ones of the socialist administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — For the first time in twenty years, we have a speech that breathes action and progress. The verbiage, 

the platitudes, and the self-praise of the socialists‟ speeches have been replaced by a concise, clear, and direct 

outline of what the liberal government is prepared to do for the people of this province during the next 12 months. 

 

This is not a speech that confuses. It was not written with that intent, as the previous socialist speeches were, but 

rather, this is one that enlightens our citizens to the fact that the change that they want, and the change that they 

voted for last April 22nd, is well under way. 

 

I believe that the most remarkable facet of this speech is that 



February 8, 1965 

 
33 

it has the welfare of all Saskatchewan people in its sights. In going back through past socialist Throne Speeches, 

one cannot help but notice they were aimed at dividing our people, instead of uniting them. The socialist 

philosophy of divide and conquer, pitted farmer against worker, the co-operator against tile private owner, the, 

professional against the non-professional man, and the individual against the government. 

 

The principles of Marxism, with their class struggles and hope of eventual revolution and dictatorship permeated 

the thinking party opposite for 20 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — This was not surprising when one considers the backgrounds of the individuals and organizations 

that support and comprise the CCF-NDP movement, both past and present. It was only the continued 

determination and watchfulness of the Liberal opposition and similar organizations throughout the province that 

kept us free, and protected us from losing the democratic rights that we on this side of the house cherish. 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, this first Throne Speech of the new government is a clarion call for all the citizens of this 

province to put aside past prejudices and unite under the Liberal philosophy of freedom and equality for all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave to refer to my own constituency of Athabaska for a few minutes this 

afternoon. 

 

The constituency of Athabaska has waited for this honour a long time, as never before has a member from this 

constituency had the privilege of Moving the Address-In-Reply. The main reason for this, of course, is that during 

the past 20 years, only once did the people of my constituency succumb to the smooth talking promises of the 

socialists and return a CCF member to the legislature to represent them. In 1956, after 12 years of socialist 

wooing, they decided by a slim majority, to give the socialist candidate a chance to represent them in the hope 

some attention could be focused on their problems. But it was an action they regretted immediately, as matters 

became worse, instead of better. So, in 1960, with full knowledge that the next four years would see a socialist 

government again in power, they soundly repudiated the socialist party and once again returned a Liberal member 

to represent them. It was my privilege to be that member, 

 

Last April, it was again my honour and privilege to be elected to represent the constituency of Athabaska, this 

time in a new Liberal government. I am truly thankful for their faith and support and will do my utmost to 

represent them to the best of my ability. The constituency of Athabaska is a great constituency, and one that any 

member would be proud to represent. It is great in size, stretching from the Alberta to the Manitoba border, from 

the 55th latitude to the Northwest Territories. 

 

It is great in people — perhaps not in numbers — but in quality, and I am proud to say it is the only constituency 

in the province with a majority of people o£ Indian ancestry. It is great in history as its rivers and lakes were the 

pathways for early explorers and the sites of trading posts, it is great in resources potential, timber, mineral, fur, 

fish, tourist and human. The only aspect in which it‟s not great is the development of this potential over the past 

20 years, It is my firm belief that the future, under a Liberal government, will see my constituency make a 

contribution that will be great and worthwhile to the economy, growth and development of our fair province. All I 

ask is that our government give the people and their resources a fair chance to contribute to our province‟s 

progress and become an equal partner with the south, rather than a poor relation to be exploited as was the policy 

of the past government. 



February 8, 1965 

 

 

34 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you on your appointment to the high office of 

Speaker. No one will deny that your mastery of the English language and your knowledge of parliamentary 

procedure amply qualify you for this important position. It is also a . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — . . . pleasure to congratulate our two charming lady members, one on each side of the house, for 

winning election to this legislature. They have the important duty of keeping the men on their best behavior. I am 

pleased that our fair lady, the member for Saskatoon (Mrs. Merchant), has been given the additional duty of 

Seconding the Address-In-Reply, and I am sure the city she represents will be proud of the way she carries out 

this important task. 

 

To our Premier, a special tribute, on behalf of all the supporters of the Liberal party, to the man who was 

responsible for our victory last April — without whose devotion, fervor, dedication, and unending hard work, our 

victory would never have been won. His example was the spur the Liberal party needed for its candidates, 

workers and supporters to scale the supreme heights in support of‟ the leader they had chosen to lead them to 

ultimate victory. 

 

At the first Liberal cabinet in 20 years, congratulations on your appointment. The wisdom and foresight of our 

Premier is reflected your selection. You have a tremendous responsibility in cleaning up the mess that was 

bequeathed to you by the preceding administration, and resurrecting a new free Saskatchewan out of the ruins of a 

socialist state. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — To the member for Arm River (Air Pederson) and still leader of the Conservative Party — 

congratulations. You are the first member of your party to be represented in the legislature for 31 years and 

whether or not you are a Tory remains to be seen. Past elections and by-elections have shown that Liberals are 

Liberals — Socialists are Socialists — but Tories are whatever seems to them to be politically expedient at any 

given time. They will vote socialist to defeat a Liberal and Social Credit to defeat a Socialist, and if there is 

nothing better, they will vote Conservative — even though their candidate will lose his deposit. 

 

The Conservative Party in Saskatchewan (and in Ottawa as well) is the only Party with no principles, no 

programme and no purpose. It is even doubtful as to whether they have a leader. It will be interesting to see in the 

next few weeks how many times the so-called free enterprise Tory votes with the anti-free enterprise Socialists. I 

think we saw an example of that last Friday. But, welcome to our legislature — your victory as the only Tory 

MLA should assure your continued leadership of your party — and subsequently, our role as the government of 

this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — To all other members, congratulations on your election or re-election in your respective 

constituency — and may you find your term of office interesting and gratifying. 

 

I would certainly be remiss if I did not acknowledge the belated presence of the member from Hanley and the 

former Attorney General who won the by-election in Hanley. 

 



February 8, 1965 

 
35 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — As indicated by the applause opposite, it is quite obvious that in the next six weeks or so 

we will hear nothing bur of the success they had in Hanley. It was an ill-fated day for the people of 

Hanley, and I must admit the result of the by-election was a disappointment to us. It was a 

disappointment, not because we lost a seat in the legislature, but because we lost a man. Saskatchewan 

lost a man. We lost a man of honor, a man of integrity, a man of ability, and although Herb Finder 

may have had a short stay in the government of Saskatchewan, he will go down in history in this 

province as initiating the greatest industrial development program that we have ever seen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, Herb Pinder was a minister such as this province has been privileged to have the 

service of, on only too few occasions in the last 20 years. It was with deep regret that we saw the voters of Hanley 

constituency see fit to repudiate a man who could have done so much for a man who will do so little — for a man 

whose actions in the past have been criticized most severely, for a man who unwillingly got caught up in the 

election monstrosity he had created while Attorney General to the point where he was forced to admit he was 

unduly elected due to irregularities under the act and by officials he had been responsible for; and finally, by a 

man who defied and ignored the regulations of Saskatchewan Government Telephones and when caught, 

attempted to hide behind a woman‟s skirts, by intimating that his secretary was not qualified for her position, and 

when this was not accepted by the public, he further stretched his imagination by blaming the Mafia. 

 

With the admission by the former Attorney General that he was unduly elected, the Liberal government had two 

alternatives. They could continue the practice of the former government of calling an election when it appeared 

politically expedient to do so, or they could call the election with the best interests of the Hanley constituency in 

mind. 

Mr. Speaker, thank God, the Liberal government can face the people of Hanley and the people of this province 

because they chose the honorable alternative and put the interests of the people ahead of political gain. It would 

have been so easy for us to follow the same pattern of our predecessors and leave Hanley without a member for 

eight months, as the Socialists did in the constituency of Prince Albert. But we did the honorable thing, and it is 

on the record books of this province, that we called the fastest election after a seat became vacant, that has ever 

been called in the history of this province. tie knew we were going into the campaign at a disadvantage. There are 

always actions that a new government must take when first assuming office that are not always understood by the 

electorate. We were still campaigning on promises since we were unable to call a session, due to the malingering 

of the former government, after their defeat, to put into effect some of our tax reductions and other programmes, 

beneficial to the people. 

 

However, we and our candidate make no excuses for taking the honorable road and for fighting an honest 

campaign in spite of pressures from areas of his constituency to do otherwise. The people of Hanley spoke. We 

are prepared to accept their decision and we know that Herb Pinder will still continue to contribute a great deal to 

our province and its people in the years that lie ahead. 

 

The year 1964 was an important one for the people of Saskatchewan, as it marked the final end of the Socialist 

government which had plagued them for 20 years. For four years the Socialist machine had been crumbling as 

they lost by-election after by-election and, except to the Socialists high up in their ivory tower, it was becoming 

obvious that the end was near. When the Socialists finally wake up it was too late. In spite of desperate moves to 

save themselves, they found they had produced too little, too late, and their empire had bankrupted itself. Still 



February 8, 1965 

 

 

36 

hoping to scrape through, they made a mockery of last year‟s session with their haste and confusion; and then 

they broke precedent by calling an April election. 

 

This was done for two reasons. First, they knew an early election when roads were at their worst would 

disenfranchise many farmers whose support they knew they had lost — and secondly, it would disenfranchise 

many of the trappers and fishermen in the northern seats, whose support they have never had. 

 

The issues of the campaign became evident, Was Saskatchewan going to have four more years of stagnation under 

the Socialists? Or were we to break forth and take our rightful place as a province in the Dominion of Canada 

under free enterprise? Were we to support the Liberal Party with its positive program or the CCF-NDP Party 

campaigning on past failures? 

 

The most important issue of the campaign, oddly enough, was raised by the former Premier of the province, T.C. 

Douglas, when he said: 

 

the sole issue of the campaign was a question of leadership. 

 

Never were truer words said. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — During the years that Tommy Douglas was Premier, Socialism was barely palatable under the thin 

veneer of his ready wit and humor. By making people laugh, they forgot for a while their problems and troubles 

brought on by a socialist state. But when his successor took over, his dull, unimaginative, stubborn approach to 

government, soon weighed heavy on the souls and minds of the people of Saskatchewan. They no longer laughed 

and they became increasingly resentful at the arrogance of a man who found it beneath his dignity to listen to 

10,000 citizens gathered on the front steps of the legislative building, during the medicare crisis. Rather, he found 

it more practical to hide under his desk until the crowd had dispersed. 

 

By April, 1964, they had had enough. A new image was gaining their interest. Admiration was growing for the 

man who brought a fresh honest approach to government — the man who had moved victorious through four 

legislative sessions, the man who had engineered four consecutive by-election victories for the Liberal Party, and 

the man who promised with their help, to lift the oppression of socialism off their backs. 

 

Or. April 22nd, the question of leadership was resolved once and for all as the people of Saskatchewan said with 

their ballots “Let us move forward under the fearless, dynamic personality of W .  Ro s s  Thatcher as Premier.” 

He has proved himself in Opposition. His stature will continue to grow as Premier. In fact, few weeks had gone 

by before the rest of Canada began acclaiming the progressive, businesslike approach to government of 

Saskatchewan‟s new Premier. The Financial Post reported: 

 

Equally significant for Saskatchewan‟s future, is the drive of Premier R o s s  Thatcher to remake the image 

of Saskatchewan and present it as the place where government administration is friendly and hospitable to 

business. 

 

The Windsor Star said, after our Premier had been East: 

 

What Mr. Thatcher says, makes sense, and he should have the support of Canadians, wherever they may 

live for his forthright talk. 

 

The Edmonton Journal, after Mr. Pederson had criticized our Premier in a speech to the Edmonton 

Young Conservatives: 

 

Mr. Pederson may be surprised to hear that 



February 8, 1965 

 
37 

there are those abroad in Canada, who view Mr. Thatcher‟s approach to government as long 

neglected, but basically sound — sound to the point of being essential to the health of a society 

striving for ordered freedom. 
 

It was worth noting that the last statement in the  same paragraph said that:  
 

If Mr. Pederson‟s charges were serious political analysis or measured and sober criticism, they 

were painfully, even pathetically inadequate.  
 

Similar to the utterances of a man who promised, during the election campaign, to build a railway across 

Manitoba and who later advocated the union of the three prairie provinces and no doubt similar to the 

many more ridiculous utterances we will hear from the Deputy Socialist Leader during the next few 

weeks.  
 

In the October issue of Western Business and Industry, the editor writes:  
 

Their task (Mr. Thatcher and Cabinet) is enormous — to bring Saskatchewan per capita into line 

with other western provinces, not handicapped since the war by a new deal that was no bargain. 

Can they do it? With some trump resource cards and the experience of proven business success at 

his disposal, many people think Ross Thatcher can turn the trick.  
 

All these commendations were aptly summed up by Patrick Nicholson, a strong 

Conservative, when he said about our Premier, after hearing him address the Canadian 

Club in Toronto. He said:  
 

I am sure I heard the first public utterance of a voice of reason which is needed in our public life today. 
 

April 22nd, 1964 — Election Day — saw the people head for the polls in record numbers. What would their 

verdict be? That night we knew. They had elected 33 Liberals; 25 NDP and one lone Conservative, giving the 

Liberal Party a majority of seven. 
 

April 23rd dawned fresh and clear. Freedom was once again in the air. The sighs of the oppressed were heard no 

more, but only the groans of those who had grown fat from Socialist favor. These groans were even heard from 

south of the border, where a former Provincial Treasurer, although long gone from the Saskatchewan scene — felt 

a cold shiver run down his spine. 
 

The citizens of Saskatchewan could now lift their heads with the knowledge that opportunity had come again — 

that an individual had inherent worth, that initiative, profit and private enterprise were no longer forbidden terms, 

but were representative of a free way of life, where an honest days work brines an honest days pay as well as the 

personal satisfaction of what has been accomplished. 
 

However, as the day wore on, a story began to unfold. A story unheard of in the annals o£ Canadian history. The 

defeated government. refused to resign They pleaded that a seven seat majority, in a 59 member house, was not 

decisive enough. Somewhat different to the Conservatives in Britain who turned the government over the next day 

when they had lost only four seats in a 600 member house. Mr. Speaker, this denial of the process of democracy 

as practiced by the former premier and his government, will go down in history as the most unwarranted, uncalled 

for piece of chicanery ever witnessed in the democratic world. 
 

There are only three reasons why they acted in this way. First of all, their pompous arrogance refused to admit the 

possibility of defeat. They were unprepared. Records of twenty years of socialist action must be destroyed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



February 8, 1965 

 

 

38 

Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, I know you would never let me infer, let alone use outright, the word „corrupt‟ in this 

legislature. In deference to you, Sir, I shall not use that word. However, whatever the motives may have been, the 

next mouth saw members of the government, from the ministers to the office boys, destroying the evidence that 

would have proved to the people of this province what they suspect to be true. 

 

The second reason for hanging on to the government was to give the ministers the opportunity to give as many 

contracts as possible to their friends before they were put out of office. 

 

The third reason was to give them time to organize a spy and espionage system among their supporters in the 

government to disrupt and sabotage the Liberal take over. 

 

What effect did this delay have on the province? First of all it meant that the many programs which were 

continued during the month that the Socialists kept office were programs the public had voted against; and on 

which public money was being spent when the Socialists had no moral right to spend it. Secondly, appointments 

were made and people were hired by a cabinet that no longer represented the people. This in itself was a blatant 

disregard for the principles of democracy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Thirdly, our cabinet ministers were delayed in taking over their departments to the point where it 

became impossible to call a fall session of the legislature to give the people the tax relief they had been looking 

forward to and to start implementation of our election program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — However, this is in the past, Mr. Speaker, although the unheard of indecision and delay of the 

former premier and his colleagues will never be forgotten, let alone forgiven, by the people of this province. 

History will record that one month to the day after being defeated at the polls, the ex-premier, Woodrow S. Lloyd, 

worried, harassed, and unable to put off the day of reckoning any longer, succumbed to the pressure of public 

opinion and wended his weary way to the office of the Lieutenant Governor and asked to have the remnants of his 

government removed from office. Hours later, a new Liberal government was sworn in to lead Saskatchewan out 

of the Socialist wilderness. 

 

Since that day when the new Liberal government took over the administration of our province, they have taken 

determined steps to provide the stimulus and atmosphere to start our economic recovery, to halt the exodus of our 

people from the province, to eliminate the waste and inefficiency so prevalent in the former government and to 

provide the businesslike leadership we had promised during the election campaign. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, the defeated socialists took just as determined steps to prevent us from carrying 

out our program. Their attitude has been pitiful to behold. They have forgotten completely the role of an 

opposition party. Their frustration, chagrin, and depressed mental attitude resulting from their election defeat have 

blinded them completely to their responsibilities as an opposition party. They have ignored completely the fine 

example set by the Liberal party in opposition. It was their constructive criticism which made the voters say, 

"They have been so effective an opposition, let us give them a chance in government." 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Never did a government accept defeat with less grace and dignity than the socialists. They were no 

better than a spoiled child who had lost his candy. Of course, in many cases this was true. They had lost their soft 

way of life. They have been impatient, impotent, illogical and completely oblivious to the fact, which today has 

escaped them, that as a government they were a dismal failure and the people of the province put them out of 

office because they wanted a new approach to government. 



February 8, 1965 

 
39 

This cancerous attitude has shown itself in two main areas. The lines became quickly drawn after the election 

when the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour held their annual convention at Moose Jaw. After showing a 

rudeness to the new Minister of Labour, which was ignorant and disgraceful, they passed a resolution whereby 

they would do everything possible to bring about the defeat of the new government. Certainly, this was a strange 

resolution from a supposedly responsible group representing the welfare of all their members, community, and 

province. Since that time they have attacked the government loudly, irresponsibly, and with little attention to the 

truth. Their actions are living proof that the N.D.P. is completely dominated by labor unions which have been 

running the party since their merger with the C.C.F. several years ago. 

 

We would like to assure the people of Saskatchewan that the liberal government has no intention of being coerced 

by a power hungry group of labor leaders and politicians out to feather their own nests. The government is going 

to run the province, not the labor unions. In spite of the attitude of their rabble-rousing leaders, the individual 

member will receive fair and just treatment from the new government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — I was interested in a statement made by the federation program director, Mr. Davies, who today is 

sitting on your left, Mr. Speaker. He told the Saskatoon Labour Council, a few weeks ago, that there are problems 

of communication between the leadership and rank and file members. For once, the hon. member made a true 

statement. But what he didn‟t tell the Saskatoon Council was that this problem of communication was deliberate 

on the part of the labor leaders. They had no desire or willingness to receive direction from the rank and file for 

fear they would lose their prestige and power. I would respectfully suggest to the rank and file of the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, that at the present time, under the present leaders, with their attitude to our 

government, your organization will do very little to help you. In fact, they had their nerve, shortly after this 

attitude was displayed, to present a brief to the government asking for favors that even their socialist friends had 

continually turned down. 

 

If you are concerned with the welfare of the province, as well as your own welfare, you can help us immeasurably 

by cleaning your own house. Now that you are free from the political reprisals of the N.D.P., oust your 

irresponsible leaders, replace them with men dedicated to the welfare of the individual rather than the power and 

glory of any one political party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Unions have learned in the past and they will learn in the future that their greatest progress came 

when they held the respect of all political parties. If you will take these steps, the leaders and politicians who have 

exploited you for so long, will disappear. Respect and faith in your movement will return and you will enter into a 

new period of achievement of your aims. 

 

The second area of government harassment by the opposition has been in the public service. By means of half 

truths and deliberate misrepresentation, they have tried to spread fear and dissension throughout the public service 

and crown corporations. However, most people are more realistic in their approach to the role of the civil service 

in our system of government. They recognize, for instance, that the top positions in government must be filled 

with men and women whose loyalty to the party in power is beyond question. Obviously, when there is a change 

in government these people find themselves in the unfortunate position of implementing programs and policies 

based on a philosophy in which they do not believe. They have two choices, to change their philosophy or leave 

that position. The first is not always easy to do if they are dedicated to their philosophy, so they choose to leave 

their position. Men who do this are to be commended for their loyalty to their beliefs and when they leave they 

retain their respect of everyone concerned. 

 

In 1944 when the CCF took over the government, we saw many examples of this. Men who believed in free 

enterprise had no faith in socialist programs, so they left quietly with no regrets, no hard feelings, but a strong 

belief in their convictions. These men did service to themselves and to their province. 



February 8, 1965 

 

 

40 

In 1964 when the liberals returned to office, it was expected that the same would he true and in some cases it was. 

A few men in top positions resigned, quietly left, sincere in their belief that they could not carry out our policies, 

and secure in the knowledge that they were true to their principles and to the party which had hired them. But was 

that party true to them? It was not. Mr. Lloyd and his followers sacrificed the privacy of a man‟s own mind and 

brought unnecessary embarrassment to them and their families for political gain by accusations that the men had 

been fired by the Liberals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — This is the reward that you can expect for your dedication to the Socialist cause. Then, of course, 

there is a small group who are political hirelings of the Socialists, and because of no qualifications for their job, 

must be removed. But for political reasons they attempt to draw much publicity to themselves in the hope of 

discrediting the government. The result being, Mr. Speaker, they only succeed in discrediting themselves. In fact, 

however, the number of dismissals has been small. The Liberal government has been most fair in giving all 

employees the opportunity to adjust to a new philosophy and administration. But a government, to be effective, 

must have loyal and faithful workers, and to date we are thankful and proud that the vast majority of our public 

employees have seen fit to give us this loyalty. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Their faith in our good intentions was shown by the fact that new contracts with the Saskatchewan 

Government Employees Association were completed in two days, a record for the province and far ahead of the 

weeks and months taken by the former administration. 

 

Further destructive actions of the opposition have consisted of letters to the newspapers, statements by members 

and former cabinet ministers after each new announcement by the new government. These statements all magnify 

the fact that the former government is barren of thought, resistant to progress, and slaves to a philosophy that was 

outdated before it was born. 

 

In spite of this continued obstruction by the NDP, Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan has seen a boom in 

the last six months never before witnessed in its history. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Already our aims of providing a government based on the principle of private enterprise and sound 

business is reaching fulfillment. Already our objective of industrial and resource development is gaining 

momentum and our promise of major reduction will be achieved in our first budget a few weeks hence. 
 

One cannot help but be amused by the antics of our friends opposite. For twenty years they failed to reduce taxes, 

failed to develop mines, failed to produce jobs for our people. Now, all of a sudden, they want us to do in twenty 

days what they couldn‟t do in twenty years. According to them, what we do today, we should have done 

yesterday, and what we will do tomorrow we should have done today. Mr. Speaker, it appears to me that 

equivocation in government breeds haste in opposition. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind our friends to your left and the people of Saskatchewan, that our election 

platform was a four year program and that we intend to fulfill our promises steadily over the next four years. 

Unlike the former government we haven‟t made any promises which we cannot fulfill. Ours were promises based 

on the potential and financial strength of our economy rather than on the ability to buy votes. Thus, as the steady 

growth of our economy continues at an ever increasing rate, we will not only keep our promises but we will go 

much further in providing the relief from taxation and the increased services we all desire. 
 

Good business government can only be achieved in an atmosphere free from waste and inefficiency. Thus the 

attention of the new government is focused first of all on this area of administration. It was a fertile field to begin 

cultivating, for if the former government excelled 



February 8, 1965 

 
41 

in anything it was in being inefficient and in the accumulation of waste. Their programs and expenditures had no 

relation to the benefits to be derived by the economy as a whole, but were geared solely to the political 

implications they might have. Within six months of taking office, a few well aimed clips of the provincial 

scissors, and more than $12,000,000 of the taxpayers money had been saved. By the time the final trimming has 

been done many more savings will have been achieved. 

 

As mentioned in the throne speech, these savings will be returned to the citizens of the province in the form of tax 

reductions. During their twenty years in office, the Socialists had achieved the unenviable record in Saskatchewan 

of making this province the highest taxed province in Canada. The Saskatchewan Utopia of the Socialists was 

available only to those who were willing to pay five per cent more in sales tax, six per cent more income tax, and 

higher corporation taxes and royalties. 

 

They worked on the assumption that the higher the taxes the more dependent an individual became on the 

government and thus less likely to vote against it. Their policy was to raise taxes for everybody for the benefit of 

a few, mostly socialists, while the liberal policy is to reduce taxes for everybody for the benefit of all. 

 

We still cling to the belief that people can spend their own money more efficiently than the government can. Mr. 

Speaker, the greatest success story to date for the new liberal government has been in the field of economic 

development. I have not time today to outline all the developments that have occurred but it will suffice to say 

that never in the history of our province has so much interest been shown in the potential that we have to offer. 

This is due entirely to the private enterprise approach of the Liberal government. For twenty years those interested 

in our resources were frustrated by the restrictive policies and regulations of the socialist philosophy. Companies 

were not prepared to risk their capital and then have the government expropriate their properties and investment. 

Nor were they prepared to compete with the monopoly of government owned industry. So they waited patiently 

for the day that they knew would eventually come when the red light of socialism would go out and the green 

light of private enterprise would flash on. Our new ministers were hardly settled in their desks before being 

besieged by individuals and companies stampeding to be first into the new economic paradise of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — For the first time in twenty years the welcome mat was out and an atmosphere of trust and faith 

prevailed. Meetings with the various industries were held, regulations were overhauled, incentive programs were 

introduced, encouragement was given. The reaction and results have been encouraging beyond all expectations. 

Revenues have risen. 1964 oil and gas production reached an all time high. Exploration activity increased 

substantially. Five major potash and one base metal mine are coming into production and five times as many new 

companies were registered in the province at the beginning of 1965 than there were in 1964. 

 

In the northern part of our province the new look is even more evident. Excitement is high, interest is at a fever 

pitch, and the future is bright. A major impetus to northern development came with the breaking of the timber 

board monopoly of our timber resources and the announcement by Anglo Rouyn that they were developing the 

first base metal mine in Saskatchewan on their property north of LaRonge, in my constituency, this was the 

same company which in 1957 was forced to halt operations after the CCF refused to assist them in providing 

transportation facilities and the minister of Mineral Resources intimidated them with the fact that the government 

might take them over should they see fit to do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before closing, I would like to refer briefly to an important promise that the Liberal government 

made during the election campaign which we are in the process of keeping. During the campaign we were the 

only political party to have a definite program aimed at improving the economic and social status of our people of 

Indian ancestry. For twenty years the CCF had used the Indian people as pawns in their political gains. They 

created distrust between the Indians and the federal government. They used the Indian reserves as laboratories for 

anthropologists and sociologists. They tried to turn treaty Indians against the Métis, and they promised assistance 

which never materialized. This is at an end. The Liberal government is prepared to do all in its power to 



February 8, 1965 

 

 

42 

assist our Indian brothers to take their rightful place in the life of our province. Already a start has been made. 

Within four months of taking office, we honored our promise to hold a conference between our government and 

the people of Indian ancestry. Despite attempts by employees of the former government to sabotage the 

conference, it proved to be a success. This was followed by a federal-provincial conference where Saskatchewan 

made a presentation which will have far reaching effects on the future of our Indian people. 

 

The next step in our program, as outlined in the Throne Speech, is the establishment of a branch of government 

whose sole aim will be to assist Indians in solving their economic and social problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on, comparing the progress of our new Liberal government with the stagnation of 

the former administration, but time does not permit. However, the content of His Honour‟s speech from the throne 

and the comparisons I have made, will show that our new government is a government of action. We have a 

program to implement and we intend to implement it. It is true that in the next four years this province will see 

many changes. That is what the people voted for last April. That is what they want. That is what they are going to 

get. There will be changes aimed at restoring the rich heritage of our province — changes that will provide a high 

standard of living to those with the initiative and desire to carve out their own destiny, changes that will allow 

those less fortunate than ourselves to live in dignity, and changes that will make Saskatchewan an equal partner 

with the rest of Canada. 

 

As we celebrate our diamond anniversary the province of Saskatchewan stands on the threshold of a great future. 

Much greater than when we celebrated our golden anniversary ten years ago. Following the war, Saskatchewan 

was caught up in the boom of a post war economy, but unfortunately, under the Socialists, the boom soon became 

a bust. By 1955, when the economy had begun to level off, we had fallen far behind and our future was anything 

but bright as the dark clouds of a recession appeared on the horizon. 

 

During the next few years we suffered more than any other province in Canada, due to our lack of economic 

development and our ever increasing rate of taxation under the Socialists. But, today, Mr. Speaker, in 1465, on 

our Diamond Jubilee, we can face the future with dignity and with faith, confident that our province will be able 

to contribute her share to the Canadian economy as we march toward our Centennial year. Let all Saskatchewan 

people rejoice and participate wholeheartedly in the activities of our Jubilee celebration, secure in the knowledge 

that our future is in the hands of a new Liberal government which is dedicated to the objective of making 

Saskatchewan a better place for you and me to live in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to move, seconded by the hon. member for Saskatoon (Mrs. S. Merchant): 

 

That a humble Address be presented to His Honour, the Lieutenant-Governor, as follows: 

 

TO HIS HONOUR THE HONOURABLE ROBERT LEITH HANBIDGE 

 

Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty‟s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly, of the Province of Saskatchewan, 

in Session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious Speech which Your Honour has been 

pleased to address to us at the opening of the present Session. 

 

Mrs. S. Merchant: (Saskatoon City) — Mr. Speaker, I rise to second the motion and as I do I would like very 

much to join with the hon. member for Athabaska (Mr. Guy) in his congratulations to the Cabinet, to new 

members within the house, and in his congratulations to you, Mr. Speaker, on your election to this office. I would 

like to express, Mr. Speaker, my own confidence 



February 8, 1965 

 
43 

in your ability to conduct the proceedings of this house in a just and fair manner. May I also congratulate the 

mover, the hon. member for Athabasca for so very ably expressing the sentiments of very many of the people in 

this house and of a great proportion of the population of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

There are very many things that as a member for a northern constituency are very close to his heart and we can 

understand the sympathy and understanding with which he would approach the proposition of an Indian Affairs 

Department with the provincial government. 

 

There will be very many measures, Mr. Speaker, introduced for consideration that are bound to find particular 

favour with members from one part of the province or another. But there is no legislation or no act of government 

that influences one part of our province or any segment of our population without at the same time influencing, 

for weal or for woe, the entire population of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a member newly elected to this house, may I express the hope for myself that I shall never lose 

sight of the fact that my first concern here is for the welfare of the people who constitute the whole province. On 

the other hand, I hope that I may be forgiven if I am just a little jealous of those things that most directly affect my 

own city of Saskatoon. 

 

I feel that it is a tribute to Saskatoon, that as its representative here, I should second this motion today. On my 

own part, I feel it a very great honor to represent Saskatoon here and Mr. Speaker, I should add that it is a great 

deal of satisfaction that I represent it on this side of the house. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Merchant: — As a member for Saskatoon, I am representative of people of varying political persuasions — 

of widely differing economic backgrounds and economic aspirations — and I am representative of interests as 

widely divergent within that one city as you would find across the entire province. I hope that I can serve all those 

interests well — but all of Saskatoon has one interest in common. We hold common cause for the development of 

our city in whatever way that may be, whether it be educationally, economically, culturally, whether it is in its 

recreational facilities — in whatever ways will make a better life for the citizens of Saskatoon. Saskatoon also 

recognizes that its future is inexorably bound to the future of the province. If Saskatchewan prospers, so do we, 

and at the moment we, in the city of Saskatoon, bid fair to be in fact the potash capital of the world, with all that 

that will mean to the city of Saskatoon and more important, to its people. Mr. Speaker, I would like very much to 

thank the people of Saskatoon for the opportunity that they have given me to sit in this house, to serve the 

province and to speak in their behalf. 

 

I would also like to express my gratitude today to the premier for the honor that he paid Saskatoon in choosing me 

for this task today. Mr. Speaker, may I express something of my own personal esteem for the leader of my party. 

It has been a party long devoted to the interest of the individual within the society, and the premier is a man 

dedicated to that principle with is a fundamental of responsible government. The highest tribute that I can pay is 

to say that I see in the premier a man who feels a deep and sincere responsibility to the people not for them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Merchant: — This is a kind of dedication that preserves the hard won freedom that can find its self in peril 

under other philosophies. This is a man, Mr. Speaker, whom I am proud to own as a leader and as a Liberal, 

delighted to call him Mr. Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, the program of legislation that we have heard outlined, is one designed as a 

fulfillment of our commitment to the elector as well as a program to set the province again on the class of 

development. In this year, our jubilee, it is time, I think, to reflect on how far we have come in those 60 years. It is 

a time to pay tribute to 



February 8, 1965 

 

 

44 

those men and women who came from every part of the globe to make here the kind of lives that were denied 

them in the land of their origin. 

 

I think it is time to pay tribute to the men and women who guided the province during those 60 years and in 

fairness I include in that tribute some of those members who  sit opposite. I am not one of those people who 

feel that the last 20 years have been entirely unproductive, but I am one of those people who regret very much that 

they have not been as productive as they could and should have been. As we mark the jubilee, I think I may be 

forgiven, Mr. Speaker, if I point to the fact that of the first 40 very crucial years, 35 were years under Liberal 

guidance and so it is a great source of satisfaction to be a part of a government that will restore to Saskatchewan, 

the reputation that it once held around the world as a land of opportunity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Merchant: — Much of what this government offered for the development of the province is accomplished 

by the very fact of the change. Long before there was many opportunities for a session and an actual legislation, 

we began to see the results of that change. It has been our contention that it is not the function of government to 

legislate industrial development and in fact the legislation that produced so many ill-famed and long deformed 

government industries, proved beyond a doubt that industry cannot be legislated. We have held that it is the 

function of government to create an atmosphere to foster development, a climate in which industry can flourish 

and from which benefits will flow. These are the job opportunities that we were talking about that Saskatchewan 

lacked and in Saskatoon in particular, we begin to know already the benefits that can flow from industrial 

development. We look forward to a payroll in Saskatoon of 1500 in one potash mine alone, the new Cominco 

development at Delisle. No one in this province can fail to know what has happened since the change of 

government. I do not intend to recount here the kind and manner of industry that have located here or the amounts 

of investments that have been made in this province since April. I would point out that the investment is being 

made in a potential that had lain for 20 years behind what has come to be known across the country as a straw 

curtain and the change of government has swept aside that straw curtain, the results are common knowledge. The 

development that is taking place is inextricably bound with the commitments that this government made with 

regard to tax reduction, We are, in this session, making a start on the tax relief which we are so sorely in need of 

and we are able to do so and will be able to continue because of increasing revenues from economic development. 

There were dire predictions that tax reductions could only result from a decrease in services. There were those 

who felt that these allegations that came from the members opposite were nothing but pre-election political 

propaganda. Well I never thought that they were, I think that it was their sincere belief. I think that the Socialists 

see government as a vast employer of as many people as possible, as a great agency for the collection of taxes and 

at the same time a huge dispensary of every kind of services from the cradle to the grave. They seem to regard 

government as the source and end of existence, and so according to their lights, I think that they sincerely believe 

that tax reductions must mean decreased services. They didn‟t seem to see the common sense, Mr. Speaker, in 

letting someone else share the cost of services that must not only be continued, but must increase and this is 

precisely and simply what is happening. We are able to broaden the base for revenue so that the cost of services to 

the people of the province will no longer continue to come entirely out of peoples own pockets and so we will 

welcome the news of tax reduction the more, knowing for sure that it is not resulted of decreased services, but that 

it is coupled with increased services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Merchant: — We are this year proposing more money for the university than any government in the history 

of the province. There will be increased grants for capital costs to ensure adequate buildings and facilities, but 

there will be increases for operating costs as well which will be reflected in part by the educational standards that 

our university is able to maintain. We will be proposing also increased spending on highways. There are parts of 

this province which are virtually unserved by highway communication and others where highway services is 

totally inadequate in terms of needs. 

 

Practically every department of government is involved in 



February 8, 1965 

 
45 

plans for increased services in spite of tax reductions. The Department of Welfare is building a new women‟s jail 

which is something that has been asked for, and asked for, and asked for, in this province. The department is now 

doing it, and they will be replacing inadequate facilities at Dale‟s House for the care of children who come under 

their protection. 

 

The Department of Health is involved in increased facilities all over the province. It is true, I think, Mr. Speaker, 

in every department that there will be increases in services with the single exception, Mr. Speaker, of the 

Department of Information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words at this time about the matter of services. Over the last 20 years, there 

has been an increasing tendency to persuade the people that government service is a personal thing. There has 

been an over-emphasis in talking about government service on matters of health and of welfare. There almost 

appears to have been a deliberate attempt to create a personal feeling of dependence on government. I suppose 

that again this may arise from a philosophy of the function of government, but whatever its source, I feel that it 

produces a most unhealthy relationship between government and people. 

 

To illustrate, Mr. Speaker, it has been announced in the public press by the member for Kelsey (Mr. 

Brockelbank) that the opposition will have three main concerns in this house and I have forgotten the phrase, 

but they all had to do with health. There has been already much talk of health in this province, and I must give 

credit where credit is due, to the members opposite who first talked about a comprehensive medical care 

program but I think I must also give credit where it is surely due, to the doctors of this province who at the 

Saskatoon agreement, took the idea and put it into acceptable and workable form and in fact, gave us the 

medical care plan under which we now operate. I think we must also give credit to the present Minister of 

Health, (Mr. Steuart) who, since taking office, has spent many long hours in a way that was not open to the 

former government because of their attitude, and has been able to take a good deal of the rancor and the 

bitterness out of the medical care situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Merchant: — There has been so much talk about health, that if we continue, Mr. Speaker, we are going to 

have a population of hypochondriacs on our hands. We have a good medical care plan that will need and will get 

expansion in due course, but in the meantime in the name of heaven, let us get on to talking about something else. 

 

There has been a good deal of talk about health, but there has been entirely too much talk about fear of ill health. 

One is inclined to think that the fear that the opposition talks about is fear of quite another kind. I am reminded of 

the fear of some over-protective mothers, because in telling a child to hold tightly to her hand for fear it will fall, 

the real fear is not for the child, but that the child will discover that it can walk alone. She needs of course to stand 

by if he stumbles, but she cannot in conscience actually encourage the utter dependence of the child upon her, just 

to satisfy her own need to be needed. 

 

I cannot help feeling, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan are tired of being told what to fear. We are 

ready, I think to stand on our own two feet and to turn on the lights and find that there is no boogy man after all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Merchant: — Health, after all, is one of many services for which the government accepts responsibility, 

and the program that the government proposes, indicates a very careful balance of the total public welfare. It is 

not designed in the interest of anyone economic or occupational group to the detriment of another. It is not 

designed to serve only particular parts of the province, it is not designed to serve the political purposes of the 

government, and above all, Mr. Speaker, it is not designed as a carbon copy of government program elsewhere. 

Saskatchewan has had enough, we think, of following patterns from Sweden or New Zealand or where ever else. 

We are Saskatchewan people, and this is Saskatchewan. Our problems are uniquely our own, and the government 

has set about coping with these problems in our own way. We have to approach them in a way that will serve the 

purpose of the people who live here and who 



February 8, 1965 

 

 

46 

have built this province, who have invested their lives in Saskatchewan, and who would like very much to see 

their children and their grandchildren able to continue to live here and enjoy the fruit of their labors. 

 

In this very connection, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say something about the proposals of the government to give 

special attention to the youth of the province, who are our greatest asset and who until now, sadly enough, have 

been one of our greatest exports. 

 

Youth, of course, within the population, profits from a general well being in the province, but because they are a 

special group within our society, they are a group with special needs that must be met. To paraphrase Mark 

Twain, Mr. Speaker, “youth is something that everybody talks about and nobody does anything about”. We as the 

government intend to do something about them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Merchant: — It just isn‟t good enough to divide life into two parts. The early part for which the educational 

institutions are responsible and then to thrust youth willingly by whatever means, whether by accident or by 

design into adult life. It just doesn‟t happen that way. A life is never that black and white. Youth in the course of 

their development is subject to many influences and they are in need of many more influences that never contact 

them. Education will of course always remain the most important influence on young people, but I would hope 

that any agency of government set up to serve youth would be designed to serve it simply because it is young and 

at a special stage off their development, and I would hope that out of such an agency, would come a greater 

liaison between and control over all those forces to which the young are subject because they are young. It should 

infringe in no way on education but it should extend, in a formal way, the areas of interrelationship between youth 

as it is educated and youth as it lives in a community and enters adult life. It should be an acknowledgement that 

government has a responsibility that goes beyond education. Not in ways, Mr. Speaker, that prolong adolescence, 

but in ways that assist the transition to adulthood. Something that I hope will receive particular attention is the 

problem that youth faces in entering the labor force. There have been extended opportunities for technical 

education and advances in trades training courses, but in spite of this, the fact remains that too many of our young 

people are entering the labor force without a skill of any kind and this at a time when the demand for unskilled 

labor is decreasing alarmingly. It seems to me that a department of youth should devote itself to this problem 

above all. In a way that is concerned for the problems that youth faces, rather than the problem as it concerns 

labor in its general sense. Here is an area that calls, I know, for a great deal of co-operation between education and 

labor. More perhaps than exists anywhere on this continent. The additional technical institutes that are to be built 

in the province will be perhaps a first opportunity to be sure that they are planned, not perhaps in a way that they 

were planned two or three years ago when the original technical institutes went up, because we live in an age 

where times change so quickly that two or three years makes planning out-moded. This is an area that should get 

attention from a department of youth and immediately. 

 

There are other fields in which the department of youth must be concerned, and I would like to at least touch on 

that area that unfortunately strikes very many young people, because not all young people are fortunate enough to 

grow up without running afoul of the law. When a young man does, he finds himself dealing with a variety of 

agencies, and each of them is equipped to deal with him because he is an offender, but none of them is equipped 

to deal specifically with and for him because he is young. No one denies that the problem of delinquency is 

increasing and any department of youth that will serve its purpose, must be concerned with the causes and the 

prevention as well as with the rehabilitation of the young offender. These are not small problems, Mr, Speaker, 

but if a department of youth will serve the purpose that it is designed to serve, it must be prepared to tackle the big 

ones. I envisage the department of youth as a source of assistance and co-ordination for community groups who 

already conduct programs for young people. Public spirited citizens all across this province are working and 

sometimes against great odds to provide recreational facilities. 
 

There is help of course from government branches but it is not always in the way that permits the local control 

that is necessary along with the financial assistance that is required, and any department of 



February 8, 1965 

 
47 

youth that will do its job, must be prepared to co-operate with community groups in the ways that best suit local 

needs, not in the ways that suit departmental patterns. An area that surely must have a good deal of attention, is 

amateur sports, because we have had so many service clubs and local organizations or individuals who are willing 

to undertake this under their direction. We have had, I think, reasonably adequate attention to teen sports, though 

always, I think, under hardship, because funds and facilities are always inadequate and it is often due to the 

doggedness and determination of groups across the province that sports exist at all. But the state in this province 

of individual sports for young people in which they can participate is pathetic. There is, Mr. Speaker, no shortage 

of people who would willingly give their time as coaches in, for instance, track and field sports, in tennis, in 

swimming, in skiing, in anyone of the sports that make up so much of international competition and all of these, 

Mr. Speaker, are sports in which people can participate who are not in the normal sense athletic. 
 

There are people ready to work with young people, but we simply have no facilities for these sports, and it is 

important that these young people have an opportunity to engage in sports in which they can participate. Not 

everyone can play the competitive team sports but everyone can enjoy individual sports according to their 

physical capacity. 
 

Then there is another problem in Saskatchewan. There are those top athletes in these sports who are enticed out of 

the province by university scholarships, and very often by the level of competition that they can find in other 

places and which they must have, in order to improve. There are potential medalists who have left Saskatchewan 

simply because we did not give them the opportunity that we should have done for athletics. Almost worse than 

all of these, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that opportunities for participation in sports should not only be by way of the 

university. Unfortunately, this is largely true, and the university people themselves are conscious of it. They do 

not want it this way. Youth in any occupation must have a means of training and of competition in sports of all 

kinds, and if a department of youth is to serve athletics and I believe that it must, then it must promote sports for 

young people in every walk of life. The young man who is a brick layer or a mechanic needs the same opportunity 

exactly as a budding engineer or a physicist. There must be initiation of a whole new approach to this problem. 

We live at a time when hours of work are shorter, when actual jobs are increasingly less difficult physically. I feel 

that we have an obligation to lead the way in making sports available to all young people. I can see a department 

of youth making this possible through government co-operation with communities or by making it possible for the 

schools and universities to co-operate with local bodies. In whatever ways it may be accomplished, it must be 

done, because we in Saskatchewan are very far behind. 
 

There are many fields in which department of youth must take action, not the least of these is in the arts. Music, 

whether for groups or individuals, painting, sculpture, theatre arts, all of these have been initiated and supported 

by community groups and individuals with a minimum of government assistance. It is a welcome thought that 

there are proposals for increased grants to cultural activities and to the arts in general, because there has been 

serious limitation for the lack of funds. I hope that there will be particular emphasis on the performing arts as a 

responsibility of the department of youth and that some of these increased funds will be earmarked for investment 

in our young people. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I am afraid I may have dwelt at too great length on what are essentially my own aspirations for the 

new department of youth. It is in fact not yet formed, and we have no way of knowing what form it may take. I 

have referred to it as a department and yet I have no way of knowing where it will fall within the administrative 

structure. What I do know, is that attention to youth is long over due and it is my pleasure to be associated with 

the government that at long last accepts the responsibility for initiating some action in this area. 
 

As I speak, I didn‟t expect to have any interruption from my own side of the house. As I speak of departments, I 

would like briefly to comment on changes that we will be asked to make in one of the existing departments of 

government. There will be a motion to change the name of the Department of Industry and Information to the 

Department of Industry. This, Mr. Speaker, goes much deeper than a name, because it strikes to the heart of the 

difference between this government and the last. No one who lived in this province needs to be reminded that 

there was more emphasis on information than on industry. 



February 8, 1965 

 

 

48 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Merchant: — Sometimes looking back one wondered if the information releases were not on a rotating file, 

because I think of the regularity with which that one about the pulp mill kept coming out. 

 

We were never quite sure, though we will be from now on, whether the information side of the department 

actually ever was taken into the confidence of the industry side of the department. An information office is a 

necessity, of course. There is a place for one. Interested people must be apprised of government programs, and 

there must be an information service to carry on departmental services. An information office is necessary for 

publicity outside and inside the province, regarding facilities for industry and tourism. I think we will see an 

expansion of this in an effort to bring more tourists to the province of Saskatchewan. However, there is no place 

for an information service devoted to selling the political philosophy of a government to the people it governs. 

Both parties will now have to do that job out of party funds, we as well as the CCF. 

 

We are putting the emphasis on industry in that department and with the kind of development that this has already 

produced, Saskatchewan people won‟t have to be told how happy we are, we will know it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Merchant: — I am sure that the people of the province will approve, not the change of name, but the 

change of function that it indicates. Mr. Speaker, as the legislation we have heard outlined in the Speech from the 

Throne unfolds, we will find basic in all, I think, a respect for the principle of local control. There has been an 

alarming tendency toward centralization of powers in all governments of recent years, but it has been more 

marked in Saskatchewan than elsewhere. And it has been cause for real concern that provincial government 

becomes stronger and stronger at the expense of municipal governments, of local boards and ultimately of the 

individual man and woman. There are many changes in the legislation that will come before us that are designed 

specifically for this end, but I think perhaps the proposal regarding the sale of crown land is one of the best 

examples of government withdrawing what can become a very heavy hand in every part of rural Saskatchewan. 

We are dedicated to a belief in a minimum of government intervention, and the sale of the million acres of land 

presently leased by people in every corner of
 
this province, is a vital step in this direction. This kind of 

government tentacle that reaches into the personal existence and livelihood of farmers across the province cannot 

avoid becoming a political football, and we intend to end once and for all, the temptations to influence that crown 

lands have presented. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the crown lands are not the property of the government of the day. 

They are the property of the people of this province . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Merchant: — . . . and we intend to honor the right of ownership in the most equitable way that can be 

devised, we have as a party in opposition pressed for the sale of crown land, in government we intend to 

accomplish it. 

 

There will be another measure introduced into this house, that I feel particularly exemplifies the principle of local 

control that has been so much in jeopardy and that is a measure regarding retail store hours. It is a denial of 

individual and of local rights for us in this house to legislate over matters that are of local concern and that are 

different in every locality. With this legislation, we will be returning to the proper authorities, the municipal 

government, the right to control their own hours of store closing, and their decisions in this matter will not all be 

alike. The city of Saskatoon may have very different regulations than the city of Prince Albert or Regina, but 

these cities have asked for the right to make different regulations and we believe that it is their right to do so, in 

the light of local circumstances. Within each city, and I know this is true in my own city of Saskatoon, there will 

be people who will have very different views, and all of them for very good reasons, and they, I know, will be 

making these views known to their city councils. Some of them, I know, will regret that the blanket coverage 



February 8, 1965 

 
49 

of the present legislation is withdrawn, but all of them I am sure will recognize that we cannot pick and choose 

those areas in which we will ask to be over-governed and those areas in which we want to govern ourselves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Merchant: — We serve the interests of local self-government in giving these cities control over their own 

affairs. 

 

I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that during the life of this government, there could be an element of local control over 

Geriatric centres. The whole circumstance in which the provincial Geriatric centre exists is, I know, an extremely 

complicated one, but their existence alongside the non-profit nursing home creates inequities between the person 

who is a patient in one or the other. It is not always the patient whose need is greatest, who is in the provincially 

operated and relatively free provincial Geriatric centres. But whether or not the change in the administrative 

structure regarding such centres would solve that problem would be a question that I hope might get some 

attention. It is true that local control of some kind would increase interest and concern for conditions generally 

within these centres. In its own concern for the standard of care in nursing homes, the government will be 

introducing a bill designed to control these standards. 

 

We are all of us very conscious of the scarcity of homes for the care of the elderly and the chronically ill. The 

very scarcity places those who are in need of such care at the mercy in some cases of substandard conditions. 

Steps should have been taken long ago to protect the elderly and the chronically ill who are in this circumstance 

and this is a measure that I am sure will find support from all sides of the house. In view of the scarcity of 

facilities, encouragement in the building and operation of nursing homes is also long overdue. I mean real 

encouragement. It is not enough that government should merely assist when asked. This is an area of 

responsibility where government must take the initiative. We need an active program of encouragement for local 

or religious groups who with government help can supply a crying need in nursing homes in this province. More 

provincial geriatric centres for terminal care are not the answer. They could not begin to catch up on the backlog, 

much less supply the needs for the future. We intend as the government to see that there is adequate provision for 

care, particularly of the elderly in a way that will guard the highest standards and also in a way that will preserve 

local control and in a way particularly, that will not penalize patients who are not in the provincial centres. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many pressing questions with which this house will be asked to deal, ranging all the way 

from matters of wide public policies to matters that concern more limited groups. I am glad to see attention given 

to the injustice that has existed regarding the pensions of teachers long retired. To these men and women 

Saskatchewan owes a great deal because they remained in their classrooms through the depressed years when 

salaries were low and not always certain. They retired at the rate of pension that now 10 and 20 years later is 

impossible to live on. 

 

The present-day teachers have seen this injustice and through their federation have assessed themselves a portion 

of their own salary to try to alleviate the injustice. It is in fact not the present day teachers responsibility. It is a 

government responsibility because it is a debt that the people of Saskatchewan owe to these devoted teachers of 

another day. I am very proud to be associated with a government that will accept that responsibility, we intend to 

correct and improve the situation of these retired teachers by bringing their pensions up to a living standard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, there are many things about which I would like to speak, but as a member for 

Saskatoon, I have particular interest in the changes in The Election Act. It is a strange thing that people don‟t 

really pay very much attention to legislation if it does not seem at the time to affect them directly. This is the case 

with The Election Act in which we in Saskatoon found ourselves enmeshed, perhaps a little more than would 

happen in any other constituency because for some unexplained reason we were designated a five member seat. It 

is possible that the act may work in smaller constituencies although the number of constit- 



February 8, 1965 

 

 

50 

uencies that are still in doubt would lead one to believe that the act as it stands now wouldn‟t even work 

effectively in a rotten borough. But the fact is that the act has not been reviewed thoroughly far many, many years 

and meantime there have been added complicating factors like absentee votes, like advanced polling, over which 

there is very little check. It has become a most complicated act and an act that out of its own provisions would, in 

a city like Saskatoon with a population over 100,000, have denied us the recourse to the provisions of the act. I 

don‟t think I need to go into intricacies that make the act an unworkable one, I think the fact is that there is very 

little defence for it on any grounds. As a matter of fact, the member for Hanley (Mr. Walker) is on public record 

as demanding a change in the act, but this only after he himself found himself entangled in its complexities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Merchant: — Strangely enough, as Attorney General, he was responsible for the present act, 

which only goes to prove, Mr. Speaker, in my mind that not only people at large pay too little 

attention to the legislation as it happens but that sometimes ministers themselves are riot sufficiently 

interested until it affects them personally.  

 

The people have been in some measure, responsible when things like this happen. Our democratic 

system gives us the means of checking and we are inclined to leave it to government to do, but when 

people abdicate their rights to hold the rein on governments, then it scents to me that it puts the onus on people in 

government to guard them more carefully. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Merchant: — They have accepted responsibility of public affairs and with it the obligation to guard the 

public interest. The election, of all the processes in a democratic system, is probably the most valuable. We will 

be insuring safeguards for people‟s votes with the changes that we purpose in this Election Act. 

 

In the speech from the throne, Mr. Speaker, we have also heard reference to the Johnson Commission. The 

Commission was asked to eliminate waste that can grow up if government and people are both alike, not very 

watchful. Obvious waste they have found and waste that will be watched very carefully as time goes on, but there 

are ways in which administration can grow complex that are much more subtle and much more dangerous than 

economic waste. Inevitably there must be boards and branches of government empowered to deal with given sets 

of circumstances but I am afraid, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan has far outstripped any other government in this 

matter. In fact, I know that some of the members opposite have expressed concern but only since leaving office. 

They have echoed the concern of the opposition of years gone by at the amount and the scope of power that is 

delegated by government to boards of various kinds. They have expressed concern that these powers should 

properly be within the jurisdiction of the courts. I cannot help feeling that perhaps this might be an area needing 

inquiry by a body such as the Johnson Commission, or some other specifically appointed for the purpose. In 

matters directly related to departments of government, Mr. Speaker, we have watched a great super structure of 

bureaucracy grow, that I feel denies in many ways, the principle of responsibility under which people think that 

we live. There are endless branches and division and committees of government departments that might bear 

review by such a commission. Some of the existing branches of government have long since lost sight of their 

original purposes of existence and have moved over into other areas of service sometimes already served by other 

branches of government and as well as overlap in service. There is, in some cases, conflict of service and at the 

same time there are often whole programs of endeavour never undertaken. I feel, Mr. Speaker, that there are 

branches of government that have never even had their function decided much less their area of endeavor 

delineated, yet they exist and they add much more to the bureaucracy of the government than they ever could 

hope to do to the service of the people who pay the bill. We are committed on this side of the house and as a party 

to the ideal of a minimum of government intervention and I think we have a real responsibility to examine very 

carefully just how big government needs to be and whether in fact being big, makes it necessarily better and it 

must be better, Mr, Speaker. 

 

This house might give some consideration to a very real danger 



February 8, 1965 

 
51 

that I feel exists and of which I think the people of Saskatchewan are very, very, conscious. If we must look in 

this province to the establishment of the office of an Ombudsman for the protection of the peoples‟ rights, then 

surely we should be looking to controlling the growth of a bureaucracy that creates the necessity for an 

Ombudsman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, I find myself back at the point which I began, which I hope will not suggest to 

any gentleman here that women are guilty of circular thinking, but we are all of us here representatives of the 

people of this province and our deliberations here must be directed, not by party politics, not by the welfare of one 

group or another in society, not by one area over another on a partisan basis, but towards the general welfare of 

the province itself which is our whole responsibility. 

 

As we celebrate our jubilee, would it not be a good idea to adopt the attitudes of the people who settled this 

province. Of late years, it seems to me that we have lost our courage, we have lived in the shadow of a world 

depression that was compounded by a drought on the prairies, and ever since we have been looking fearfully over 

our shoulders and in fear of what has been. We have not looked ahead and made haste towards what might have 

been. If the people who flocked to this province had been terrorized by the lives that they left behind them, they 

would never under the sun have seen the wonderful opportunities that this country offered. Without their courage 

and confidence, we would not now be here, and Mr. Speaker, we stand again on the same kind of threshold that 

they did not fear to cross those 60 or more years ago. I cannot think that their kind of people no longer live in this 

province. I cannot think that we will turn aside in fear from this second chance. If we continue to live in fear of a 

depression that happened 35 years ago and that we survived, and that we left behind, we cannot have confidence, 

and confidence is going to be the main ingredient now as it was then in the development of the province. We are 

charged with guiding this province in new directions and we have heard here in the Speech from the Throne, Mr. 

Speaker, a program of legislation designed to that end, and I think I need hardly add that I take great pleasure in 

seconding and supporting the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) (Acting Leader of the Opposition) — It is my pleasure to take part in this debate 

at this time, and I regret very much indeed that my leader, the Leader of the Opposition, the member for Biggar, 

(Mr. Lloyd) is not here to take his part at this time instead of me, and I certainly hope and I think all 

members of the house will agree with me, that we wish for him a very speedy recovery  and return to 

this legislature . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — . . . where he has had a great deal of experience and certainly has made a 

great contribution. 

 

I want to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the high office of Speaker, and I want to say in my opinion this 

office is extremely important in this legislature. If we are going to have a good legislature, and any member sitting 

on any side of the house can say this, it is extremely important that we have the office which you occupy, Sir, 

conducted well. That does not mean that you are responsible, Sir, for all of the behaviour of this legislature. You 

must also have co-operation from the members in the legislature and I hope you will get that. I do want to say that 

no one more sincerely has good wishes for your success, Sir, in doing an excellent job in your high office as 

Speaker of this legislature. I wish you well. 

 

I want to congratulate all members of the legislature who have been elected, and to remind us that it is not a light 

thing to be elected a representative of the people of this legislature. It is something that we should take very 

seriously, very honestly, and certainly with a good deal of humility. 

 

I want especially to congratulate the new members that we have in this legislature, quite a number of new 

members, many of whom I have 



February 8, 1965 

 

 

52 

not become acquainted with yet. I would like to say to them, that the work of being a member of the legislature is 

sometimes onerous. Sometimes you will think it is a nuisance. Sometimes maybe, you will wish it would go away 

and leave you, but always I think you will find it interesting because you are dealing with people, either here in 

the legislature or in your constituency and throughout the province. People still are the main concern and the main 

interest of all of us, I don‟t know of course how long the new members or for that matter any of us will last in the 

legislature. That is another question but certainly while we are here, I hope that all of us will do our best to serve 

well the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to offer some very special congratulations to the member for Hanley (Mr. Walker). I want to comment later 

on some of the remarks made by the member for Athabaska (Mr. Guy) in regard to Hanley. These battles in the 

political arena take a lot of work, sometimes quite a bit of courage. They are not easy and the member for Hanley, 

(Mr. Walker) has come through this battle victorious. I‟m very glad he is here and I‟m sure he is too. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — He will do an excellent job as a member of the opposition as he did an excellent 

job as the Attorney General of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — If I might be pardoned for a personal remark, I would like to say to you, Mr. 

Speaker, that I am enjoying a bit of a thrill and a bit of pride in the fact that I do have my son here in this 

legislature as a member with me. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — It was published in the local paper that this was the first time it had happened, and 

I just want to correct that. This isn‟t the first time it has happened in the province of Saskatchewan. The first time 

was in 1944, when the member for Melfort, Mr. Valleau, the first Minister of Social Welfare, and his son Delmar, 

representative of the Armed Forces, were elected. So we did have a father and son combination on a previous 

occasion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is our Diamond Jubilee year and we can, I think, make this a wonderful year. The Diamond 

Jubilee banquet held on January 30th and the province day on January 31st, I think was a wonderfully good idea 

and certainly a great many people in the province of Saskatchewan took part in these activities and it gave the 

year a good kickoff. It was a wonderful thing that His Excellency The Governor General came and spoke to us on 

that occasion and I think that his words were certainly words of wisdom, and that we can pay a great deal of 

attention in our behavior if we are interested and I am sure we are all interested in maintaining Canada as a 

country. It was good to have greetings from the Prime Minister of Canada and nearly all provincial Premiers, but 

we did not have a word at the banquet from the Premier of Saskatchewan. He was away some place. Where was 

he? I heard he was down visiting his Goldwaterish friends across the border. I think that probably as he has a little 

more experience in this job that he has undertaken, he will realize that probably he has enough to keep him busy 

at home without trying to run the affairs of the United States of America or to help Mr. Goldwater. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — That‟s just a small point. Now I come to the hon. member for Athabaska (Mr. 

Guy), and the hon. member is an educated man . . . Oh yes, he is, he has a certificate to teach school anyway. 

Now maybe that isn‟t educated, I don‟t know, but I always thought it was. I once had a certificate that enabled me 

to teach school. 

 

Mr. Guy: — They were hard . . . 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — Yes, they were hard up in those days, that‟s right and the member has had four 

years experience in this house but I‟m sorry 



February 8, 1965 

 
53 

to say to the new members, don‟t fall into the habits he has. If you look up citation 149 in Dr. Beauchesne‟s 

edition, you will find that it is not permitted to refer to a member by name, but when the hon. member (Hr. Guy) 

was saying some very unkind things about my seatmate, the Leader of the Opposition, (Mr. Lloyd) who is not in 

his seat, he didn‟t even have the grace or the propriety to recognize him as the Leader of the Opposition, but 

called him by name. This wasn‟t a slip of the tongue or an accident either, because he was reading a written 

speech, and it says in the book too it is prohibited to read from a written previously prepared speech, and, Mr. 

Speaker, I am justified in having very serious doubts as to who wrote that speech. I don‟t know whether he wrote 

it or not. 

 

Mr. Guy: — I did. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — Then, Mr. Speaker, he should be ashamed of it, I didn‟t think I would get him to 

confess here. Now, Mr. Speaker, when he was speaking about the Hanley by-election, he spoke about how prompt 

they were in calling this by-election. Well of course you know, they had nothing to lose, they had lost the election 

on the recount. They were out, the man was gone, and if they wanted to fill this gap in the legislature or in the 

government, why shouldn‟t they call a quick election? In fact it was told to me that the Premier said, "we 

wouldn‟t have called this election unless we were sure we could win it." So the hon. member for Athabaska (Mr. 

Guy) wants to make a virtue out of a necessity. Let me tell you something that happened before, because the 

Liberal party in Saskatchewan has never been hurried about calling by-elections unless they thought it was in their 

interest. Back in 1943, on February 18th, the member for Redberry died. The session of the legislature opened on 

February 23rd and four days later Redberry had no representative. In the session of 1943, Redberry had no 

representative. It had no representative in the session of 1944. For two sessions the people of Redberry didn‟t 

have a chance to elect a member. We had a legislature for six years when we had the Liberals in power. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — If there is any group of people, any political party that shouldn‟t brag about their 

democratic practices, it is the Liberal party. The member for Athabaska (Mr. Guy) seemed to take a great deal of 

pleasure in lecturing the Leader of the Conservative party, the member for Arm River, (Mr. Pederson). As far as I 

am concerned that‟s up to him if he wants to do that, that‟s fine with me. I want to compliment the member for 

Arm River, (Mr. Pederson) and the Conservative party on their success in electing a member. They‟ve worked 

and tried hard for a long time and I want to point out to my hon. friends opposite, that the Conservative party has 

had some tough luck. They have had the tough luck to get elected when the Liberal governments in both 

Saskatchewan and Canada had brought this province and this country right into a depression and dumped them 

there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — Alright, alright, that was tough going, what a difference is the situation we have 

today, taking over this province when it‟s booming. Now the Conservatives also have had some other tough luck, 

and my hon. friend over here on the left won‟t agree with me on this, but I think they‟ve had tough luck in 

leadership and I agree with my French Canadian friends that they had better get a new leader. I don‟t think this 

chap is much good for them. But he isn‟t alone, the Conservative party isn‟t alone in that. The Liberal party in 

Canada could do very well with a new leader too. A leader who could keep his people on the straight and narrow 

and behaving themselves a little bit. 

 

I wonder how many people sitting opposite looked at “This Hour has Seven Days” last night. You missed it if you 

didn‟t see it — about all the „Guys and Guys‟. It was a wonderful show. Of course, the Liberal party in 

Saskatchewan has never been too fortunate in its leaders either. They had quite a few changes. They had the one 

that was defeated in 1944, and another one and another one, and this one. I don‟t know how long he will last. By 

anyway, he may be around for a little while. Now, I just 



February 8, 1965 

 

 

54 

want to make one other comment or two, Mr. Speaker, in regard to the remarks of the hon. member for Athabaska 

(Mr. Guy), concerning the Anglo-Rouyn mine. The fact of the matter is not that this mine had to shut down or 

cease operations. They came in here when we had a CCF government, They got the property and put down a 

shaft. They spent hundreds of thousands of dollars in exploration. This didn‟t look like they were afraid of 

investing. They were hoping to find an ore body that would make a mine. They found a small ore body — about 

2,500,000 tens of low grade copper — the price was too low. It didn‟t make an economic proposition so they left 

it, and under the regulations provided by the government of Saskatchewan, they were able to hold that land. 

 

They came to us a couple of years ago - to us, the government — and they said, “The price of copper has gone up. 

It looks like we‟ll be able to mine that copper at LaRonge”. They said, “One thing is the question of transportation 

to a smelter because there isn‟t enough of it there to warrant building a smelter.” We said, “Well, when you make 

up your mind that it is economic and you want to get the transportation problem taken care of, come back to us 

and we‟ll be right there, because there is nothing we would like better than to see a mine at LaRonge.” 

 

When the Member for Athabaska (Mr. Guy), suggests that they were threatened with expropriation, he is telling 

something that I think he knows isn‟t true. 

 

Mr. Guy: — You threatened . . . 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — They were never threatened. Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that my friends over 

here bring the Hon. Robert Winters here to Saskatchewan again and let him... 

 

Mr. W.R. Thatcher: (Premier) — Read . . . 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — Let him appear before this Legislature. Let us question him to find out what is the 

truth. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Oh, we . . . 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — This mine was going ahead not because of a change of government but because of 

a change of economics, because of the increased price of copper. Now, I‟m glad to see it mined but, remember it 

isn‟t a big one. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Four hundred . . . 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — We‟ve had far bigger. We‟ve had, in the past, far bigger mines than this in 

northern Saskatchewan - base metal mines. Our part of the mine at Flin Flon was ten times as big as this one — 

more than ten times as big. That mine at Flin Flon has been in operation for over thirty years and 80 per cent of 

that mine is in Saskatchewan. These people, Mr. Speaker, still say, “Saskatchewan‟s first base metal mine”. Either 

they want to misrepresent the facts or else they just don‟t know any better. 

 

My special compliments to the lady Member for Saskatoon (Mrs. Merchant) on her maiden speech in the 

Legislature. Once upon a time I presumed to tell a lady that I admired her for her intellect and I nearly got 

slapped. In seconding the motion, she did a good job, as good as anybody could do, with the material she had to 

work on, but she certainly did have some funny statements. She said, “A Liberal government would restore to 

Saskatchewan the reputation it had around the world”. What reputation did it have? The reputation for being the 

poorest place in Canada — the worst roads in Canada — no highways. People travelling across Canada said, 

“When you get to Manitoba go south into the States and miss Saskatchewan. Don‟t take a chance on the roads”. 

She talked about the Cominco Development at Delisle. The Cominco people took the land up while there was a 

CCF government — the potash land. All of these potash companies had to go ahead with their potash 

development and even this government couldn‟t have stopped them. 

 

When the lady said that we have so much talk about health that if we continue it we‟ll have a nation of 

hypochondriacs on our hands — I don‟t think anybody that would say that, ever was in the position that 



February 8, 1965 

 
55 

many thousands of people of Saskatchewan have been in, where the getting of health services was a matter of life 

and death. Most people in Saskatchewan know the facts about this. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think I‟ve said enough for this afternoon and I would ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

NOMINATING COMMITTEE — CONCURRENCE IN REPORT 

 

Hon. J.W. Gardiner :  (Melville) — moved: 

 

That the Report of the Select Special Committee appointed to prepare lists of the Members to compose the 

Select Standing Committees of this Assembly, be now concurred in. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in rising to make the motion that this assembly concur in the composition of our Select 

Standing Committees, I would like to first say a few words with regard to Committee work and also with regard 

to the Select Special Committee that was appointed to undertake the job of selection of Committees for this 

House. 

 

I would like to say, as one of the Members who has spent some years in the house, that committee work, I believe, 

is one of the most interesting and rewarding parts of the work of a Member of this legislature. I think quite often 

the public is probably led astray by the fact that they hear very little in our daily broadcasts from the Legislature 

and some people get the idea that that is the major part of the work of Members in this house. Whereas, I think 

any of us that have spent time in the Legislature realize that the important part of our work, much of it, takes place 

in committees of this house. Within the last year a few of the Members have had the opportunity of sitting in the 

committee which considered the activities of one of the committees of the house and I think in so doing felt and 

realized that the committees should be constituted in such a way as to make them a more important part of the 

work of this Legislative Assembly. Members who were on that Committee will recall the suggestion that the 

particular committee we were considering should be cut in numbers. By so doing the work of that committee 

would, they felt, from the evidence that was given to them, become more effective. 

 

When the members of the Select Committee met to discuss the formation of committees of the house at this time, 

I believe, some of the Members of the Committee felt that the larger committees of the house should be reduced 

in number in order to bring about more effective work of the larger committees of the Legislature. On top of this, 

we have the job of trying to work up a reasonable committee in every regard, including the question of numbers 

and representative of the various groups in the Legislature. I think it is very difficult for us to go back very far and 

try to get a true picture in figures as to how committees should be established because of the fact that membership 

of the house changes and has changed over the years to such a great extent. I think any of us realize that when 

there are only five members in the Opposition it‟s very hard, as there has been on two occasions in the history of 

the province, it would be very hard to work out a proper percentage of representation for committees. So you can 

go down through the history of the Legislative Assembly and you would find it very difficult to work out proper 

numbers or probably a proper history of the establishment of the committees in this Legislature. 

 

I think probably the best example that we have and the one that should be used on this occasion, is the one which 

we have in the few years that we have immediately come through, and I believe that the majority of the members 

of the committee felt that using the yardstick probably in the last house, and particularly in the last year or two of 

the last Legislature, we would probably come up with a better picture of how the committees should be formed. 

So I think that the figures that have been arrived at of the special committees have been based largely on the 

experience of the last few years in this Legislature and I think probably, I could also add to that, a time when the 

numbers were perhaps somewhat in relation to what they are in the house at the present time — a little closer 

together than they have been at other times — and that is the period from 1948 to 1952. We find that the 

Legislature at that time decided that the government of the day should have a slightly higher ratio in 



February 8, 1965 

 

 

56 

proportion to the Opposition than their numbers would indicate. So we find that in the sessions from 1948 to 1952 

that the Government of the day did take a slightly increased percentage over the members that they have 

representing them on the government side of the house. 

 

Then we come to the last session in 1964, when we find that the same circumstances existed with regard to the 

formulation of committees. We find that, by and large, and particularly in the larger committees of the house, that 

the government of the day took anywhere from two to four per cent higher than the percentage of membership in 

the Legislature. So in committee, the committee decided by majority vote that the committees should be 

organized pretty well on this basis, providing the government, with a slightly higher percentage of members on 

the committee than they actually enjoyed in the house. We find, for example, when we go through the 

committees, Agriculture, which is the first one I will take, in the last house had 13 members from the government 

side of the house, 7 from the Opposition. In the present house, it is suggested in the Resolution that is before you 

that the government have 14 members on the committee, the official Opposition nine members and the 

representative from Arm River (Mr. Pederson) be included on that committee as a tenth member. In other words, 

14 government representatives and 10 representing the Opposition. 

 

The other committees that are made up of 24 members which include Education, Law Amendments and 

Delegated Powers, Municipal Law, are all formed an the same basis of membership — 14 from the Government 

side of the House and 10 from the Opposition. 

 

Then we get down to the Library Committee which in the last house had a membership of 10 from the 

Government and 5 from the Opposition we find that this time there will be 10 from the Government side of he 

house, 6 from the official Opposition and one being the member for Arm River (Mr. Pederson), making a 

proportion of 10 Government members to 7 for the Opposition. 

 

Then we go to private bills where the total number which is recommended is 26, we find that there will be 15 

representing the Government, ten the official Opposition, and once again, the member for Arm River (Mr. 

Pederson), — making a ratio of 15 Government Members to 11 Opposition Members. 

 

On the Privileges and Elections Committee — there will be 22 members made up of 13 Government members, 

which will be the same as in the last Legislature, eight representing the official Opposition and one again, the 

member for Arm River (Mr. Pederson), making a total of 13 government members on the Committee, nine from 

the Opposition - whereas in the last Legislature there were 13 Government and seven representing the Opposition. 

 

Then we come to our two major committees - the Committee of Public Accounts and Printing and the Committee 

on Crown Corporations where there was a majority wish of the Committee to have smaller committees in each 

case than has been followed in the past. In the last Legislature there were 24 Government members, 12 members 

representing the Opposition side of the house. The present recommendations state that there should be 18 

representatives on the government side of the house, 12 of the official Opposition and one, the member for Arm 

River (Mr. Pederson), making a ratio of 18 to 13 instead of 24 to 12 as existed in the last Legislature. 

 

Then we find on the Standing Orders Committee, the ratio is to be the same as in the last Legislature, six to the 

Government, the same as last time, three for the official Opposition, and one representing the member for Arm 

River (Mr. Pederson). 

 

On the Radio Broadcasting of Selected Proceedings, a total of four Government Members, two for the Official 

Opposition and one again, represented by the Member for Arm River (Mr. Pederson), making a total of four 

Government Members and three Opposition, compared to four for the Government and two for the Opposition in 

the last Legislature. 

 

I believe that the Committee took very seriously their work in drawing up the committees for the consideration of 

this house. I believe that it has been done in a very fair manner, taking into account experiences of the past in the 

formulation of our committees. I think that most hon. members would agree that in relationship to the position of 

the government in the house, and I‟m not here criticizing the action of any previous government in taking a larger 

percentage because I think this is 



February 8, 1965 

 
57 

only fair, because I think all hon. members will admit that the Cabinet Ministers in any government 

may not find it possible at all times to attend meetings of the committees. Therefo re, it would place 

the government at a disadvantage at any time with three or four members on the committee and 

maybe having to have those members absent from the committee on government business at the time 

the committee was meeting. This might be a circumstance which would be impossible for the 

government to overcome on particular dates and so I think it is only fair that the government, at any 

time, whether it was the last one or this one, should be given the consideration of a slightly higher 

proportion of membership on committees than is enjoyed by the Opposition.  

 

So Mr. Speaker, I‟m very pleased to move that the report of the Select Special Committee appointed 

to prepare lists of the members to compose the Select Standing Committees of this assembly b e now 

concurred. 

 

The question being put, Mr. Speaker declared the motion carried.  

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney: (Regina West) — Mr. Speaker, I was on my feet to speak to that question. I‟m sorry that 

your eye didn‟t catch me. I put it to you, Mr. Speaker, that I was. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I‟m sorry that I didn‟t see the hon. member. I‟ll try and be a little more careful next time but I‟m 

afraid the vote has been taken, and I have no alternative but to declare the motion carried. 
 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 
 

Yeas — 30 
Thatcher Howes McFarlane 

Boldt Cameron Steuart 

Heald Guy Merchant (Mrs.)  

Loken MacDougall Gardiner 

Coderre McIsaac Trapp 

Cuelenaere MacDonald (Milestone)  Gallagher 

Breker Leith Bjarnason 

Romuld Weatherald MacLennan 

Larochelle Asbell Hooker 

Radloff Coupland Pedersen 
 

Nays — 24 
Brockelbank (Kelsey) Cooper (Mrs.) Wood 

Nollet Walker Blakeney 

Davies Thibault Willis 

Whelan Nicholson Kramer 

Dewhurst Michayluk Smishek 

Link Baker Wooff 

Snyder Broten Larson 

Robbins Brockelbank (Saskatoon City)  Pepper 
 

ADJOURNMENT 
 

Hon. D.G. Steuart: (Prince Albert) Moved: That this house do now adjourn. 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division:  
 

Yeas — 29 
Thatcher MacDougall Bjarnason 

Howes Gardiner Romuld 

McFarlane Coderre Weatherald 

Boldt McIssac MacLennan 

Cameron Trapp Larochelle 

Steuart MacDonald (Milestone Hooker 

Guy Gallagher Radloff 



February 8, 1965 

 

 

58 

 
Merchant (Mrs.)  Breker Coupland 

Loken Leith Asbell 

Heald Cuelenaere  

 

Nays — 25 

Messieurs 
 

Brockelbank (Kelsey)  Cooper (Mrs.) Wood 

Nollet Walker Blakeney 

Davies Thibault Willis 

Whelan Nicholson Kramer 

Dewhurst Michayluk Smishek 

Link Baker Wooff 

Snyder Broten Larson 

Robbins Brockelbank (Saskatoon City)  Pepper 

Pedersen   

 

The assembly adjourned at 5:03 o‟clock. 

 


