



















































Hansard: April 01, 1965


1401 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

40th Day 

 

Thursday, April 1st, 1965 

 

The assembly met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. R. A. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the day are proceeded with, I would like to draw your 

attention to a handsome and bright class of students from the grade seven class of the Sutherland School, Sutherland. 

Of course, Sutherland being my old home town, I have a special affinity for these students. I want to say that I hope 

they have a happy visit to Regina, and that they enjoy the proceedings here, and, I hope my hon. friends across the way 

will try to maintain a proper state of dignity so as to create a suitable impression on these young people. I want to 

welcome their teacher here, who I believe is Mr. Hunt, and I hope that they will have a pleasant and a safe journey 

home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

STATEMENT RE CANADA PENSION PLAN 
 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to acquaint the house with a letter which I have sent 

to the Prime Minister: 

 

It has come to our attention that the Canada Pension Plan, as embodied in Bill C136, today received third and final 

reading before the Senate of Canada. At this time I can inform you that should Bill C136 receive Royal Assent our 

government in Saskatchewan will endorse all of its provisions. I can also inform you that the province of 

Saskatchewan has no intention of establishing its own contributory pension plan, now, nor in the foreseeable future. 

We look, therefore, forward to working with your government in the administration of this new program. 

 

I am informed by the minister, Miss LaMarsh, that in order to participate with the federal plan, this government does 

not require special legislation. 

 

I hadn't understood that previously. I may say that Saskatchewan will be the first province to officially notify the 

federal government of our intention to participate in the plan. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. J. H. Brockelbank (Acting Leader of the Opposition, Kelsey): — Commenting on what the Premier said, I 

think Saskatchewan a year or two ago, informed the federal government of that, that we would certainly be 

co-operating with them. 

 
Mr. Thatcher: — Of course, that government is no longer there, so we want to put the weight of the new government behind 

the plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT OF CONTRACT WITH PRIMROSE FOREST PRODUCTS LTD. 
 

Hon. J. M. Cuelenaere (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day are called, I 
would just like to make a brief announcement. I would like to announce that a 



 

April 1, 1965 

 

 

1402 

contract has been concluded between the government of Saskatchewan and Primrose Forest Products Ltd., an affiliate 

of the Nelson Lumber Company Ltd., of Lloydminster, for development of timber resources in north-western 

Saskatchewan, in a previously inaccessible area, into which we will be constructing a main road this summer. The 

agreement covers the cutting of 75,000,000 board feet of timber in the provincial forest area north of the Primrose air 

weapon range over an initial period of five years, and the commencement date of the contract is April Ist, 1965. The 

timber which includes white and black spruce, jackpine and balsam fir will be cruised by the Department of Natural 

Resources and the company has agreed to meet production standards and conduct all operations in keeping with good 

forest utilization as approved by my department. Under the terms of the contract the company will follow pre-approved 

cutting plans each year. The agreement with Primrose Forest Products Ltd., is a significant step in opening our north 

land for the further development of its abundant natural resources. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, could I ask the minister if he would have copies of the agreement with 

Primrose Forest Products Ltd., made, so that when I move for a return, we will be able to get them without delay. 

 

Hon. J. M. Cuelenaere (Minister of Natural Resources): — In answer to the question, I will wait until the return 

request is made. 

 

INQUIRY RE RETURNS 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to inquire again about this lost car and apparently now the 

lost return No. 102, from the Minister of Labour, (Mr. Coderre). Has he been able to find out anything about it? 

 

Mr. Coderre: — The return is in the mail somewhere. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — What was it the minister said? The return is in the mill or the mail ? 

 

Mr. Coderre: — It is coming. 

 

Mr. D. V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I would be glad to look into the lost return about the lost car. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — I'm afraid it was neither in the mill nor the mail, but down the drain. Mr. Speaker, I 

would also like to ask the Premier now that we are into April for the report in regard to the sale of Saskatchewan 

Savings Bonds if he has it. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well, we haven't the final figure, but I may say that we are $500,000 over the amount which was 

received last year, there was one more day to come in. I hope tomorrow to be able to tell the house, but the sales are 

now about $14,300,000, the highest in the history of the province. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Adjourned debate on the proposed resolution No. 12 standing in the name of Mr. Romuld having been called: 

 

Mr. K. G . Romuld (Canora): — Stand, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. J. H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, I want to take objection to the motion by the member for Canora, 

(Mr. Romuld) that this motion stand again. I think on private members' day, we have a right to proceed with private 

members' motions and I believe that every member should be granted the courtesy of some time, but I think that this is 

either the third or fourth time that the hon. member has asked that this resolution stand, and I will have to oppose the 

motion. 

 

Mr. K. G . Romuld (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, I had sent away to get some . . . 

 

Mr. Fred Dewhurst (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, won't he be closing 



 

April 1, 1965 

 

 

1403 

debate on this motion he speaks of? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — On a point of order, at least if I understand him correctly, that is what he said. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — If he is on a point of order, I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, I didn't hear him say a point of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I concluded that he was speaking to a point of order. Now if he is not speaking to a point of order, 

then he is closing the debate. One or the other. 

 

Mr. E. I. Wood (Swift Current): — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, I do believe the member made a motion that 

this motion stand, I believe the member from Kelsey, (Mr. Brockelbank) was speaking on this motion and I do think 

that if the member spoke now he would be closing the debate on his motion to let the bill stand. I think that I am the 

first one that is raising the point of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Now, let's see, the motion, before the house is whether the motion shall or shall not stand. I guess that 

is it, isn't it? That is his motion. If he speaks to it, he closes the debate on whether or not it shall stand. I'll listen to the 

points of order, anyway, if anyone wishes to raise any further points. 

 

Mr. I. C. Nollet (Cutknife): — Mr. Speaker, just this point, the hon. member has stood this debate four different times, 

and as far as we are concerned over here, for no apparent good reason. He started to say that he sent away for some 

material. He doesn't have to send away for any material at any great distance that would be so time consuming to make 

it possible to speak on this motion. Mr. Speaker, we didn't put this motion on the order paper just for the fun of it, to be 

stood repeatedly by a member, who apparently as far as I can conclude, is an attempt to kill this motion without giving 

anyone an opportunity to speak on it. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member in deference to all members 

of the legislature, go ahead and speak on this motion. 

 

Hon. A. H. McDonald (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, on the point of order, the hon. member has been 

endeavoring to get certain information, and I think this house ought to give him the opportunity to get it. The 

government has every intention of proceeding with this resolution. It wasn't put on the order paper for the fun of it, I 

appreciate that. Neither were the estimates or government business brought into this house for the fun of it, but a 

decision has been made by the government to proceed if we can to get government business before this house and to 

have it dealt with, and I think the government must be given that opportunity. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — May I point out to the Minister of Agriculture, (Mr. McDonald) that this is private members' day, and 

on four successive occasions the hon. member has stood this debate and this, I think, is going a little too far, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Broten (Watrous): — I am surprised at this. We live in an agricultural province and surely with the length of time 

this has been postponed, he could have sent all the way to Russia and back again if he needed to, or to any place in 

order to get this thing . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — China . . . 

 

Mr. Broten: — Yes, China too, or anyplace you want to. You could get this information back, and I think this is just a 

deliberate attempt to put this aside and I strongly object on this. We are in an. agricultural province and in difficulty as 

far as farmers are concerned and we should have, get this thing passed and into the hands of the people that would 

receive it under normal conditions. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If I understand this correctly and if I don’t understand it correctly, somebody can rise on a point of 

order, this debate stands as an 



 

April 1, 1965 

 

 

1404 

adjourned debate having been adjourned by the member for Canora, (Mr. Romuld). Now I don't believe and I think that 

I can back it up with all the necessary citations in the books, though it would take some considerable time, but I don't 

believe the mere fact that a member when an adjourned debate is called, and he says "stands", I don't think this 

qualifies as a motion. He merely indicates that he doesn't wish to continue with the debate at this particular time. 

Therefore, I think that to bring this matter in order, and the house can only discuss that which is out before it by 

question, I think the proper way would be, (if anybody wishes) to move that the debate be no longer adjourned and I 

think this is the only way that we can correctly do this, and I have noticed this before, the member saying "stands" and 

somebody takes exception to it. 

 

Well, if nobody takes exception to it, the debate "stands" and that is the end of the argument, but this I think is the 

correct procedure. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, I would so move: 

 

That the debate be not adjourned, be no longer adjourned. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well, you will have to write it . . . 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — May I suggest with all due respect that we are in a little bit of a puzzle here, probably 

none of us are too sure of where we stand in regard to the rules, and that for today, under these circumstances, I will 

withdraw my objection and if the other members will agree, let the member stand his resolution, and give you time, Sir, 

to look up the procedure. 

 

I would like to have the right procedure to handle this kind of a situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well, I appreciate what the hone Leader of the Opposition, (Mr. Brockelbank) says, and I think that is 

something which the house should regularize, in case it should occur again. It has occurred in the past before, and it has 

occurred again today, and can very well occur in the future, and at the appropriate time, which would have to be 

tomorrow, I will bring in a ruling in regard thereto. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — It may not come up tomorrow; it is not private members' day. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well, the next time it comes up. 

Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, I will be glad to withdraw my proposal. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Has the hon. member leave to withdraw his motion. Well, it wasn’t formally proposed anyway. It is 

dropped. 

 

The assembly adjourned at 9:56 o'clock p.m. 


