



















































Hansard: February 05, 1965


7 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

2nd Day 

 

Friday, February 5, 1965 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day: 

 

URGENCY ADJOURNMENT — FALL IN WHEAT PRICES 

 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Acting Leader of the Opposition, Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day 

are proceeded with, I wish to ask leave to move adjournment of the house under Standing Order 20 for the 

purpose of discussing a definite matter of urgent public importance, namely, the recent drastic reductions in wheat 

prices, their serious effects on the farmers of Saskatchewan and the economy of this province, the need for a 

guaranteed minimum price for wheat of at least $2.00 per bushel to protect the farmers and the economy of this 

province from the serious effects of these prices reductions, and the urgent necessity of this assembly to forthwith 

make a recommendation in respect thereto. 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, before you make a ruling, might I have the opportunity to 

say a word on this motion? 

 

I think it is traditional that when the throne debate is being discussed, any matter can come before the house, and I 

would respectfully suggest that this resolution which has some urgency can be discussed all next week in the 

Throne Speech without a motion of this kind. Therefore, very respectfully, I would suggest that as the hon. 

member for Kelsey well knows, this motion is out of order. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, may I speak on a point of order? First of all I would like to refer you to 

Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, page 90, sub-clause 6, this is in Citation 100: 

 

The Speaker’s duty with regard to a motion to adjourn the house for the purpose of discussing a definite 

matter of urgent public importance, under Standing Order 26, is confined to determining as to whether in 

the first instance the motion as so proposed is in order. There his responsibility ends. There is a further 

question as to the propriety or desirability of discussing a matter of such great importance. That is for the 

house to decide. The Speaker having found the motion in order may submit the question: “Has the hon. 

member leave to proceed?” If objection is taken, the Speaker requests those members who support the 

motion to rise in their places. If more than twenty members support the motion, the Speaker calls upon the 

hon. member to propose his motion. 

 

With this difference that our standing order says fifteen members instead of twenty members. I would also like, 

Sir, to refer you to the Journals of the Legislature of Saskatchewan for the year 1941, on page 28. This was the 

journals for Friday, February 28th, 1941. I might mention for the benefit of the premier, that the Throne Speech 

debate was in progress at that date. It had not been concluded. 



February 5, 1965 

 

8 

 

The Hon. Mr. Patterson asked leave to move adjournment of the assembly for the purpose of discussing a definite 

matter of urgent public importance and stated the subject to be: 

 

A Fixed Price for Wheat with respect to the 1941 crop and its delivery by quota and the necessity for this 

assembly forthwith making a recommendation in respect thereto. 

 

He then handed a written statement of the matter proposed to the Speaker, who having read it to the assembly, put 

the question: 

 

Has the member leave to proceed? 

 

No objection being taken, the Hon. Mr. Patterson moved then: 

 

That the assembly do now adjourn. 

 

Then after debate thereon, the said motion by leave of the assembly was withdraw and then by leave, Mr. 

Patterson introduced a resolution with regard to a minimum price for wheat and other matters. This took place on 

the orders of the day on that date, February 28th, 1941. This was the only matter that was dealt with that day, Sir, 

and the final note in the journals for that date is that at 11 o’clock Mr. Speaker adjourned the assembly without 

question put, pursuant to Standing Order 5A. At that time, our required adjournment time, by virtue of the rules, 

was 11 o’clock, so we were all day on this very important question on the 28th of February, 1941. 

 

I think we could make no better use of our time that to spend at least some time this afternoon on this very urgent 

and important question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must advise the house whether I consider the matter one of urgency or whether it is not one of 

urgency and then see decided that the price of wheat and the economy of western Canada and the price thereof is 

a matter of urgency. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Now I ask the house, does the hon. Member have leave to discuss this matter? I am going to 

read the statement: 

 

The recent drastic reduction in wheat prices, their serious effect on the farmers of Saskatchewan and the 

economy of this province, the need for a guaranteed minimum price for what of at least $2.00 per bushel, to 

protect the farmers and this economy of this province from the serious effects of these price reductions and 

the urgent necessity of this assembly to forthwith make a recommendation in respect thereto. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Do you want the evidence of fifteen members, Mr. Speaker? The school teacher from 

Athabasca can’t count. 

 

Mr. R. A. Walker: (Hanley) — Too bad Hammy isn’t here. 



February 5, 1965 

9 

 

Fifteen members having risen accordingly Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey) moved that the house do now adjourn. 

 

He said: I wish to thank you very much for your very careful consideration of my request. I am going to have the 

privilege of speaking in the debate on the Address-In-Reply and I want to have some more remarks about your 

office at that time so I will do no more than thank you for your attention to this question now. 

 

I would like to briefly review the situation as it has taken place over the last several days. On Tuesday, January 

26th, there was an announcement in the Leader Post: “Wheat Export Prices Cut 2 to 7 ½ cents,” and there is a 

statement in this same article by Mr. Gibbings, the President of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. Mr. Gibbings said: 

 

The Canadian producers will be the only ones adversely affected by the move. In all other countries, 

including Australia, the producer is guaranteed a price irrespective of international price levels. It raises the 

question as to how long the Canadian producer can be expected to compete in the international market 

against the treasuries of other countries. 

 

Then the Durham wheat prices had gone down previously, the top grade being down 15 cents. There was a 

headline in the Leader Post of January 27th: “Cut Price not a Wheat War.” Now I am not particularly interested in 

. . . 

 

Hon. David G. Steuart: (Minister of Health) — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. Is the hon. member speaking 

on the urgency why we should set aside the Throne Speech debate and the regular proceedings and debate this 

question or is he just reviewing the situation relative to the price of wheat? Is he speaking on the urgency? 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, on the point, I am not debating any point of order. There is no point of order 

before the house now, I have had permission according to the rules to move that the house do now adjourn to 

discuss a definite matter of urgent public importance and the rule is that this is the only adjournment motion that 

can be debated and the funny part of it is that you don’t debate the question of adjourning, you debate the subject 

which is to be discussed. That is what I am proceeding to do. 

 

Now, I am not particularly interested as to whether or not this is a price war. I am not too much interested as to 

who is to blame for it, because these price cuts have been going on in the different wheat exporting countries of 

the world. The United States have been blaming Canada, Australia has been blaming Canada, Canada has been 

blaming the United States, but this is all actually beside the point. 

 

An interesting news item came out in the Leader Post of January 28th. The headline is: 

 

Price Decline Said Inevitable. 

 

Trade Minister Sharp said some price reductions from the levels attained last year were inevitable. HE said the 

Wheat Board has acted to stabilize prices as far as possible and has made its recent reductions only in order to 

meet competition. With this, I have no argument. They must take 



February 5, 1965 

 

10 

 

action to sell wheat, but when they ask the Canadian wheat grower, to stand this kind of competition against the 

treasuries of the other wheat producing countries of the world, this is unreasonable. At this time, the Canadian 

Federation of Agriculture was meeting and in the same issue of the Leader Post, J.M. Bentley, President of the 

Canadian Federation of Agriculture, said: 

 

While these figures of give grounds for some encouragement, nevertheless, the income position of some of 

our farmers is far from satisfactory. The fact is that the prices the farmers receive for their products has not 

kept pace with the rise in the cost of things that most modern farmers use in their production programs. 

 

In the Leader Post of January 30th, it was announced that the Canadian Wheat Board had slashed the bulk of its 

export wheat prices of No. 1 northern wheat the prime grade, down from $2.01 1/8 a bushel to $1.91 1/8 a bushel 

at the lakehead. So other grades are in a similar position. Now, another item I have here is from the same meeting 

of the Canadian Federation of Agriculture and it asks Ottawa to subsidize wheat exports. Charles Hunt of Swan 

River moved a resolution from the floor asking for the subsidy to the extent of necessary to prevent the Canadian 

producer being placed in the position of having to compete with the federal treasuries of other wheat exporting 

countries. Mr. Coulter of Campbellville, Ontario, a Director of the Ontario Federation of Agriculture said that: 

 

While the sale of Ontario wheat is based on the prices in the United States, his organization would support 

the resolution. 

 

L.F. Snider of Calgary, United Grain Growers Vice-President said: 

 

Western farmers are not asking for anything unreasonable. We are just asking for what other people are 

getting for their products. We have been told our wheat is of better quality than any other in the world. We 

should get what others receive. 

 

The resolution’s preamble said: 

 

Canadian wheat producers are the only wheat producers in the world without a government price supported 

program. 

 

Then on February 1st a report of a meeting attended by Charles Gibbings, President of the Wheat Pool, was sent 

to Trade Minister Sharp. The telegram said in part: 

 

We understand the subject will be fully reviewed at the meeting in London, England, of the International 

Wheat Council on February 4th. We are concerned, however, that such official discussions are to be 

delayed until then. We feel that unless you are sure there will be no further price reductions there should be 

emergency meetings of the responsible ministers in the major wheat exporting countries immediately. 

 

Then it went on to say that the farmer stands to lose $50 to $70 million during the next year. I heard a statement, I 

think it was made by the President of the Farmer’s Union, to the effect that the loss of the farmers would 

probably be in the neighbourhood of $80 million in the present year because of these reductions. 

 

A man from Australia is quoted as saying that a series of reductions are initiated by Canada and that these were 

followed by increases in subsidies in the United States. It is interesting to note that Mr. Harry Hayes, Canada’s 

Agriculture Minister, is on a tour through New Zeal- 



February 5, 1965 

11 

 

and. Maybe he will go over and find out about some things over there. Another item in the National Farmer’s 

Union: 

 

Price Cuts Dismay Farmers 

 

Mr. Atkinson said Federal Agriculture Minister Hayes should re-examine his views on the matter of a two-price 

system for wheat, which Mr. Hayes said he thinks impractical. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to withdraw the motion that the house do now adjourn, and by consent of the 

house, seconded by Mr. Nollet, submit this motion: 

 

That this assembly request the federal government to establish a guaranteed minimum price for no. 1 

northern wheat in storage at Fort William or Port Arthur, of at least $2.00 per bushel, and that guaranteed 

prices for other grades of wheat be properly related to the guaranteed price of no. 1 northern and that 

guaranteed prices for all grades of wheat at other shipping points, such as Churchill, Manitoba, Vancouver, 

British Columbia, be properly related to the guaranteed prices at Fort William and Port Arthur. 

 

Now this is a matter that has been discussed a great deal and we are fortunate in having a political party in 

Canada that had in its last program, when campaigning for office in the deferral government, a promise of $2.00 

a bushel for no. 1 northern wheat at the head of the lakes. Now is the time for everybody in this house to remind 

these people that this is the time when that is needed. My hon. friends opposite will have a chance. 

 

Hon. A. C. Cameron: (Minister of Mineral Resources) — Are you discussing . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member has been given leave to move the adjournment of the house to discuss a 

matter of urgent public importance. It has been discussed and now he is submitting a motion, which he has 

moved, I take it, a motion which requires notice and is, therefore, out of order, because no notice has been 

received. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — Unless it gets consent, Sir. It was in 1941, Sir, may I point out, the motion was 

introduced without notice but by consent of the legislature by leave and I know that this motion depends on leave 

of the assembly. I tried to impress upon the members the urgency of the matter so that this motion can be 

amended to suit the motions of the members of the legislature and we can proceed with the subject. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The first thing to do is to put the question before the house whether the hon. member has leave 

to withdraw his motion to adjourn. Has the hon. member leave . . . 

 

Mr. W. Ross Thatcher: (Premier) — Mr. Speaker, may I say a word. I would like to speak on this before he 

withdraws it, now, when can I speak if this motion passes. Is that the end of it? May I speak before you make 

your ruling. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You may speak on the motion to adjourn the house, which is before the house now . . . 



February 5, 1965 

 

12 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — No, I want to speak on this motion . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You cannot speak on this motion which I haven’t placed before the house yet. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I’ll wait until you place it then. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Has the hon. member leave to withdraw his motion to adjourn the house? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I heard a few no’s. You can only withdraw the motion by unanimous consent . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — It is agreed. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I shall ask again. I am in an embarrassing position. The rules of the house are explicit on this 

point. That if an hon. member wishes to withdraw a motion he must have the unanimous consent of the house. If 

anybody says no then leave isn’t given, and incidentally, I don’t think it is in order to five second chances either. 

Now, has the hon. gentlemen leave to withdraw his motion to adjourn the house? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Now, I have to deal with this motion and inasmuch as it is a motion which needs notice I rule 

that it is out of order. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you, Sir, that this motion can be introduced again by 

leave of the assembly and it is only on that basis that I submitted it. I know it has to have the unanimous consent 

of the assembly to be introduced without notice. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Now here again, you have to have unanimous consent of the assembly. Is unanimous consent 

given? 

 

Some Hon. Members: —Agreed. 



February 5, 1965 

13 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Leave of the assembly has been given. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) moved: 

 

That his assembly requests the federal government to establish a guaranteed minimum price for no. 1 

northern wheat in storage at Fort William or Port Arthur of at least $2.00 per bushel and that guaranteed 

prices for other grades of wheat be properly related to the guaranteed price of no. 1 northern and that 

guaranteed priced for all grade of wheat at other shipping points such as Churchill, Manitoba and 

Vancouver, British Columbia be properly related to the guaranteed prices at Fort William and Port Arthur. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, could I just finish my remarks on the motion I was speaking on. There isn’t very much 

more I want to say on it, except that I do want to emphasize the importance of this matter, and I think that 

Saskatchewan is the greatest grain growing province of Canada, and can have a great influence on this question if 

we can take action on it now. I would appeal to all members of this house for the sake of the economy of the 

province of Saskatchewan and of our farmers in this province to support this motion. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, like the older Bourbon kings, the socialists never seem to learn anything. When 

they were in opposition, year after year, whenever agricultural subjects came up, all they would do is cry to 

Ottawa, instead of doing something themselves. I listened to the crocodile tears shed for the farmers today by the 

hon. member for Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank). All I would say is, if he is so anxious to do something for the farmer, 

why doesn’t he get on with his Throne Speech. The legislature can do something for the farmer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — When our socialist friends were on this side of the house, they taxed the living daylights out of 

the farmer. They made him pay for purple gas, they put a 5 per cent sales tax on, while the farmers of Alberta and 

Manitoba had none. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. May I raise a point of order. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — They . . . 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — May I raise a point of 



February 5, 1965 

 

14 

 

order. A point of order, Mr. Speaker. Will the premier sit down so I can raise my point of order. I would suggest 

to you, Mr. Speaker, the premier is straying pretty far afield when he starts a debate on the Address-In-Reply, and 

the motion is very concise and quite narrow in its implications, and I suggest that he should be kept to order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I don’t blame the Socialists for being sensitive on this subject. For many long years they did 

very little for the farmer, I can tell you, passing resolutions like they are suggesting now is not going to be 

particularly helpful either. I may tell the hon. member for Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank) and the people of 

Saskatchewan that they provincial government has long since been in touch with the hon. Prime Minister, and 

with the hon. Minister of Trade and Commerce, to express our concern over this wheat matter. I have a sneaking 

hunch that they Prime Minister may be a little more inclined to listen to us, than to any nonsense which Socialists 

have. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — The Liberal party of this country and province believes in the Canadian Wheat Board. We 

believe that the Canadian Wheat Board, together with the government, has done the best job in all history in 

selling wheat for the Canadian farmer in the last several years. A year ago they sold more wheat, I think, that at 

any time in history and they obtained a price that was well over the $2.00 price F.O.B. Fort William until a few 

days ago. At that time, the Governments of Australia, and the Governments of United States, suddenly cut prices; 

world markets became soft. What could the government do? Are we going to meet competition, or are we going 

to let our wheat remain in the bin? My hon. friends know so little about business, I suppose they can snicker. If 

we listened to my hon. friends, I suppose we would run the Wheat Board like they run the Wisewood plant in the 

constituency of my hon. friend for Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank). 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — This party believes in $2.00 wheat. We favor the two price system if it is necessary to achieve 

$2.00 wheat, and we favor export subsidies is they are necessary to achieve $2.00 wheat. I have every reason to 

believe that the Liberal party at Ottawa will continue to do the fine job for the farmer that they have done for the 

last few years, far better than any Socialist government has done for the farmer here. So I suggest, Mr. Speaker, 

that this party will support the motion. We have already taken the action that is required. Then let’s get on with 

the business of this legislature doing something for the farmer. Let us get on with the business of reducing taxes 

for the farmer and of expanding services for the farmer. 

 

It is a small wonder that the great majority of the rural seats in Saskatchewan returned Liberals, when all my 

Socialist friends can do, is to talk in the manner we have seen here this afternoon. Mr. Speaker, we will support 

the motion. 

 

Mr. I. C. Nollet: (Cutknife) — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words on this motion, and I can assure the 

hon. premier I will not drift away from the 



February 5, 1965 

15 

 

subject. The hon. premier says: 

 

All we can do is cry to Ottawa. 

 

Well, I ask this house and the people of this province why he hasn’t said anything to Ottawa before now . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We have . . . 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Oh no, he has been very quiet, stony silence has been the order of the day. He has had many 

opportunities to make his voice heard at a time when it would have done a great deal of good. May I suggest to 

him, Mr. Speaker, that actually the throne Speech could have been re-drafted to have made some reference to this 

drastic drop in wheat prices. As a matter of fact, the hon. premier might have done what hon. Premier Patterson 

did in 1941, that is, to himself introduce a motion in this house, but he failed to do so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Nollet: — But he failed to do so which indicates, Mr. Speaker, very clearly, that this concern for farmers is 

not as genuine as it sounds. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — On a point of order. The hon. minister as usually doesn’t know what he is talking about. Right 

on the clerk’s desk there is a resolution which would have been going the same thing but done it properly and in 

order. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, this is no point of order. I feel for the hon. member that he is so inadvertently on the 

defensive all at once but he is going to be on the defensive a bit more. I want to assure the hon. member that this 

glorious Liberal record in Ottawa of guaranteeing the farmers of western Canada a price of $2.00 a bushel didn’t 

get any of their members elected to the federal house in Ottawa because the people of Saskatchewan knew their 

previous record. They knew it wouldn’t happen. Now, Mr. Speaker, before I proceed I would like to give some 

background on this situation, and on this entire matter of a guaranteed $2.00 price to prairie wheat farmers. This 

pledge, Mr. Speaker was made as early as June, 1962 when at that time, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal party pledged 

that it would not only guarantee the prairie farmers a $2.00 price for their wheat, and I emphasize this point, 

guarantee them $2.00 a bushel, but that they would also introduce a two price system that for wheat sold and 

consumed on the domestic market for which the farmers would receive a parity price. This would be the 

equivalent of some $30,000.000. This pledge has been repudiated by the present federal minister of agriculture on 

behalf of the federal government very recently. It must be remembered, that this pledge was made with this 

background, provided that the farmers would give up or rather this was done in lieu of acreage or deficiency 

payments. They have received neither since this pledge was made and since the Liberal party took office in 

Ottawa. 

 

This is also tied in, Mr. Speaker, with the life of the present international wheat agreement which was entered into 

in August, 1962. It was during this period of time, we must remember, that the farmers were promised a 

guaranteed price of $2.00 a bushel. Now, let’s examine the records, to see if in fact as the hon. leader of the 

opposition says, that they have received this guaranteed price of $2.00. When this pledge was made in June 1962, 

the devaluation of the Canadian dollar at that time resulted in a wheat price of $1.98 per bushel Fort William, Port 

Arthur, and $2.05 per bushel at Vancouver. In the previous month of May 



February 5, 1965 

 

16 

 

the price was $1.90. The devaluation of our currency by the previous administration in Ottawa had the effect of 

raising the price of wheat and the Liberals thought subsequent to this, that they could make these promises and 

make them stick without any great difficultly. Things looked sufficiently optimistic at that time to permit the 

federal Liberal party to make the pledge. It is interest to note that the Leader Post has never been very favourably 

inclined towards pleading the cause of the farmer and tried to get them off the hook. They thought it wasn’t a very 

good idea to proceed with the implementation of that pledge of guaranteed price of $2.00 per bushel. 

 

Even with the present low prices, our Liberal friends are backing away from this pledge. I would have thought 

that the minister of agriculture for this province and the former wheat expert of the NDP who has now converted 

himself into a Liberal would have had something to say about the federal government providing subsidies 

immediately to prevent wheat from dropping below $2.00 per bushel. He says instead, from now on it ought to be 

a price peg much below the $2.00 a bushel basis Fort William. May I suggest, too, to this house, that the 

prospective loss of from $50,000,000 to $80,000,000 which faces the farmers of this province, is of much more 

significance and importance than a mere tax concession of $3,000,000 for purple gas. If the hon. premier is 

concerned about a loss to the farmers of Saskatchewan and to it economy of an income loss that ranges from 

$50,000,000 to $80,000,000 in the years ahead to say motion, Mr. Speaker, about the reduced inventory value of 

grain that will not be marketed in the next year, all of which is going to affect the farmer’s credit and purchasing 

position. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to September, 1963, when the price of no. 1 Northern fell to $1.95 a bushel. 

For nine months of 7.963 the price was $1.95 a bushel. This was when the Liberals were in power — five cents 

below the promised two dollars. In November, 1963, it is true, it went up to $2.04 a bushel and the prices were up 

but previous to these price increases that began in the late fall of 1963 and continued in 1964, two great wheat 

deals were made — one with communist China and the other one with the U.S.S.R. In the case of the Chinese 

deal, the amount of wheat ranged between a minimum of 112,000,000 bushels up to a maximum of 197,000,000 

bushels, at the then prevailing price, which at that time was $1.94 a bushel — six cents below the guaranteed 

$2,00 price which the Liberals promised, prior to and during the federal election campaign. 

 

On January 25, 1965 it was announced that China placed another big order for wheat, under the agreement, 

totalling 27,000,000 bushels. Again, not at the prevailing price that existed on January 22nd but at a reduced 

price —12 cents a bushel on 27,000,000 bushels of wheat. This brought the price of wheat down drastically for 

these grades. On the 22nd of January, the price of five, six and feed was $1.89, $1.87, $1.84 and a fraction, 

respectively. When it was sold to the Chinese, they bought it for twelve cents less; $1.77, $1.75, and $1.72 per 

bushel. Is this fulfillment of Liberal promises? It is in keeping with their usual record Mr. Speaker, I submit. 

May I say then, that if anyone questions any of these figures I have them here, they are authentic figures. Now, 

what about the U.S.S.R. deal which was made shortly after a Chinese wheat deal in 1963? This deal came as a 

complete surprise to the Liberal government at Ottawa. It really rocked them! I would have thought that they 

would have kept conversant with the situation in the U.S.S.R. — lots of people knew that they were going to be 

short of wheat. When the Russians came and asked them if they could deliver 400,000,000 bushels of wheat, 

they very nearly fainted. This is what saved the Liberals. This is what made it possible for them to go on. But, 

did they make a deal for $2.00 a bushel? Far from it. They sold the wheat to the Russians at $1.95 a bushel — 

and a huge quantity was sold to both of these countries. In the case of Russia, plus the equivalent of flour and 

plus 11,000,000 bushels of wheat which they purchased previous to the big agreement, the amount sold totalled 

240,000,000 bushels of wheat for a grand total, to these two countries of 437,000,000 bushels of wheat, all sold 

well below the $2.00 level. I haven’t the figures, Mr. Speaker, but it would be interesting to compare the price 

received in these huge deals with these two countries as against the amount of wheat sold and the price received 

in 1964 for wheat sold outside these agreements, which was a good price year, when wheat prices were 

somewhat above the $2.00 a bushel. But I suggest to this house, that the bulk of the wheat was sold below the 

$2.00 price. 

 

The hon. premier mentioned, and he announced to all and sundry, that he is highly in favor of the wheat board. So 

are we, we worked for it for years — long before he even had his ranch, long before then, we 



February 5, 1965 

17 

 

have been working for the wheat board. There is no criticism of the wheat board whatever. The wheat board is 

doing a fine job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Nollet: — But it is not being properly supported by the federal government policies. This is what I’m saying. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Let’s compare what is being done in the United States regarding the price of wheat which they 

sold to the U.S.S.R. When the Russians couldn’t get anymore from us they went south of the border where finally 

they laid aside some of their prejudices and a deal was made. The price was $2.50 a bushel, which the federal 

treasury subsidized to the extent of 72 cents a bushel, as they have been doing with other sales abroad. In other 

words, the Americans had and have a two price system. Canada has not got one because Canada is reluctant to 

provide any subsidies to its producers for grain that goes into the export markets of the world, and has certainly 

been more than modest in this respect when huge sales have been made abroad. I’m suggesting here that some of 

these long term contracts should have been indeed long term contracts, they should have indeed involved real 

long term credit, and I don’t mean eighteen months — or a similar short period of time or that they ought to pay 

up in cash in nine months, or eighteen months. This is short term credit. I’m talking about long term deals at a 

guaranteed price, and these countries would be willing to pay it too, if they had the credit. This is what we must 

do to solve the wheat problem. Certainly we’re not going to sell more wheat, as the Leader-Post suggests, by 

reducing prices. We’ve gone through that experience in the 1930’s when wheat fell as low as 34 cents a bushel. 

We didn’t sell any more wheat under that circumstance, so we’ve got to look for better and more constructive 

policies based on the long term needs of hungry people all over the world. The markets are there but we are not 

providing the material facilities in terms of credit and otherwise to make such sales effective. 

 

So, the bulk of our Canadian wheat sales were made under $2.00 a bushel. Farmers now are being asked once 

again, as they have in the past, to compete with United States policies, United States treasury, and the treasuries of 

other countries. Other countries are doing these things, and why a country as rich, as prosperous, and with the 

resources of Canada, can’t do as much for its farmers, is beyond me. Our farmers want sufficient income to meet 

their obligations. They want better services, better roads, and all that goes with it, including better educational 

facilities, and they want the income to enable them to pay for them. They don’t want to be treated as second class 

citizens, being given a little crumb - $3,000,000. Purple gas concession — something like that. They want justice, 

and I would expect that the government in this province would see to it to call on their counterparts in Ottawa, 

and see that they get that justice, because it must be remembered hon. members opposite made a great deal of to 

do about tying themselves in with this guaranteed $2.00 price for wheat. They have an obligation on their 

shoulders, not just a political one, but a solemn obligation in the public interest to see to it that our national 

government fulfils its election pledges to the prairie wheat producers. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, some people may say that, and I know the Leader-Post will, they’ll say, “Oh, holy horrors, 

subsidies for farmers. This would be terrible!” But, may I remind the house, that this same federal liberal 

government, has provided a handsome $50,000,000 tariff subsidy to the giant automobile industry, without any 

price reduction in prospect to the consumer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



February 5, 1965 

 

18 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Now that’s a two price system for our private enterprising friends, the kind of big business that the 

hon. premier likes to do things for — the big boys that don’t need the help. But will he support a subsidy in behalf 

of our farmers to enable them to pay their obligations, so that he is not required, in humility, to take care of their 

adverse economic position by a tax concession? This is my contention, and has been, Mr. Speaker, throughout the 

years — that our farm people are entitled to fair treatment as citizens of a democratic society. 

 

Not only has the price of wheat gone down but the price of other farm commodities has gone down too. I’ll not 

mention them for fear, Mr. Speaker, you might call me out of order. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of the house to another important matter — the effect on the 

industry of agriculture of the cost price squeeze because, not because of improved farm prices but because of 

lowering farm prices. This is the basic problem facing the agricultural industry, and it’s this fact that hurts me 

more than anything else, because now on top of it we have to face this drastic drop in wheat prices. From 1951 to 

1964 the index of farm prices went down by 44.7 points, and the cost of goods and services required by farmers 

went up 66 points — that’s from 1951 to 1964. This is the basic problem. May I remind the house, and the hon. 

leader of the conservative party in this house, this occurred during that time alternative Liberal and conservative 

governments were in power in Ottawa when the cost price squeeze was gradually tightening and strangling the 

agricultural industry. Now I give the house some figures. Again they are authentic. I take them from the research 

division of the Canadian Federation of Agriculture. These are interesting figures. I hope some of the hon. 

members will take them down because it’s being said over and over that we must reconcile ourselves to larger 

farms and more efficient farms — that this is the answer to the farm income problem. I want, now, Mr. Speaker, 

to repudiate this false premise at once. In 1949, and I’m talking about Canada, net income for Canadian farmers, 

just farmers, not part time farmers like the hon. premier, but people who receive their income in total from the 

farm — the realized net farm income, that’s the take-home pay, in 1949 for Canadian farmers in current dollars 

was $1,513,000,000. In 1963 it was $1,410,000,000 — in other words realized net farm income was less in 1963 

than it was in 1949. 

 

When we transform this to 1949 dollars the picture is much worse. In 1949 the net realized income in current 

1949 dollars was $1,415,000,000. In 1963, in 1949 dollars, which represents the purchasing value of the dollar, it 

dropped to $986,000,000. In addition, Mr. Speaker, in 1949 there were 663,000 farmers in Canada. In 1963 this 

figure dropped to some 400,000. So, we had 263,000 farmers less, receiving less realized net income. So where is 

the answer, Mr. Speaker, is it in growing farm size? Bigger farms are no answer to the farmer’s economic 

problems — it’s little benefit to say it doesn’t exist. May I say to the premier, this is the reason why people left 

Saskatchewan. This is the reason they were liquidated by economic neglect, economic manipulation on both the 

public and private sectors of the economy, we lost around 40,000 farmers your Minister of Agriculture says . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Under your . . . 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Not under my government, under Liberal and Tory governments in Ottawa. Not only in 

Saskatchewan but 262,000 of them disappeared throughout Canada and more will disappear if we permit these 

adverse price relationships to continue. The matter is urgent, Mr. Speaker, therefore, I sincerely trust that the 

house will deal favorably with the motion before it. Thank you. 

 

Martin P. Pederson: (Arm River) — Mr. Speaker, I had intended at the outset of this motion to sit quietly by and 

listen to the words of praise that seemed to flow for the party that I represent, from both sides of the house. I was 



February 5, 1965 

19 

 

doing very well until the hon. member from Cutknife (Mr. Nollet) got on his feet and started bringing up some 

matters that in my opinion are not related either to the motion or necessarily to the situation at hand. 

 

I want to bring some facts before this chamber; because I believe that I have the good fortune to represent a group 

of people, whose policies in the House of Commons, did in fact tackle some of the problems, that had these 

policies been followed by the new administration, would perhaps not have existed at the present time. I note that 

there is some talk emanating from Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, that suggests that Canada and the Canadian wheat board 

have had to cut prices in order to follow the lead of other nations. Now the record shows that this is not so. The 

Canadian wheat board under the jurisdiction of the Minister of Trade and Commerce, has set the lead in this 

move. This, of course, brings me to the crux of what I want to point out to the legislature this afternoon. 

 

The hon. Minister of Trade and Commerce has adopted an attitude which is very reminiscent of a former Minister 

of Trade and Commerce in the liberal administration prior to 1957 that said that the Canadian wheat board should 

stand on its own, without any interference from the Minister, without any guidance or any help, and we have seen 

in the last few weeks the disastrous results of such action. 

 

I believe that the fact that the present Minister has gone back or reverted to the old type of policies has had a 

direct bearing on the reduction of prices in wheat in the world markets in the last few weeks. Under the 

conservative administration which was in office from 1957 to 1963 many of you, I am sure, were aware of the 

fact that the minister in the recent part of that administration, a Minister of Agriculture, under whose jurisdiction 

the Canadian wheat board operated, took very concrete steps to guide, and in a political sense to protect the 

Canadian wheat board. It was on his onus, and he felt that this was correct, to intervene in the matter of credits so 

the Canadian wheat board could make large sales. He intervened whenever he saw that there was a threat from 

other countries, notably the United States, to lower the prices, and he intervened on a ministerial and presidential 

level. That is what prevented the drop in prices in Canadian wheat in world markets in 1958, again in 1960 and 

1961. The Canadian government and the leaders of that government took very strong steps to let the Americans in 

particular know that we would frown very heavily on any move in that direction. The present Minister feels that 

this is not correct — that he shouldn’t be doing this. This, I believe, is the crux of the entire problem that we face 

today. 

 

We had, as a government or as a party in power in Ottawa, worked on the theory that one of the methods of 

alleviating this cost price squeeze that was referred to by the hon. member for Cutknife (Mr. Nollet) was to 

steadily push the price of grain up in the world market, setting the pace for the other grain selling nations of the 

world and thereby giving the farmer a greater net return. We followed aggressive sales programs and did, in fact, 

dispose of huge surpluses of wheat. 

 

I want to direct the attention of this legislature to the type of policy that was followed back in the thirties when 

prices were slashed first by one country and then another but no more grain was sold simply because the price 

was dropped. They all went down together. Unless this legislature is prepared to support a motion that does more 

than suggest to the minister that he must change his attitude and his course of action, then I believe that we will 

find that the present government in Ottawa will take it for granted that the people of this province are satisfied 

with matters as they now stand. This is why I intend to support this motion, because I believe that unless they are 

warned sharply that their actions or their lack of actions are hurting the people of this province, very little 

attention will be paid. I thought that the hon. member opposite, as well as those who sit to my right, Mr. Speaker, 

would be reminded of the fact that a vast majority of people in this province sent 17 members to the House of 

Commons representing the party that I represent, largely based on the fact that we were following policies that 

appealed to them and that they felt were right for this province. 

 

When I listen to the debate on both sides I am reminded of two little boys floundering in the brush, one on each 

side of the road while they are busy extolling the virtues of walking up the paved path in the middle. I would 

advise both sides to get on to that path and I think that this motion should be supported by all members in the 

house. 

Bernard D. Gallagher: (Yorkton) — Mr. Speaker, it sounded 



February 5, 1965 

 

20 

 

like the Minister of Agriculture of old when the member for Cutknife (Mr. Nollet) got up on the motion that is 

before the house. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, all members of this house should be sympathetic to the motion of a 

guaranteed price of $2.00 a bushel for wheat. I was interested in some of the statistics that he gave us. 

Unfortunately I haven’t got the statistics in front of me to quote, but I would like to ask him, Mr. Speaker, what he 

thinks he is trying to prove. He suggested that a two price system and a guaranteed price for wheat and all these 

other things were the things that the NDP party stood for, has always stood for, but why then, Mr. Speaker, didn’t 

his party elect some members to the House of Commons for the province of Saskatchewan. If he is so sure their 
farm policy is right why are there three to four times as many farmers sitting to your right, Sir, as there are to your 

left. 

 

Now . . . 

 

Mr. Nollet: — They wouldn’t be now . . . 
 
Mr. Walker: — Try it again . . . 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — We are going to support the motion, I believe, I am certainly going to support the motion for 

$2.00 wheat, but as the premier mentioned, the resolution that was placed on the clerk’s desk asked for more than 

$2.00 wheat. We, of the Liberal Party, had considered placing a resolution like this on the clerk’s desk this 

afternoon, but then we thought this over and we thought this wasn’t good enough, and so we presented a motion 

that was something better, we thought. It is typical, Mr. Speaker, of the attitude of the people to your left, and, of 

course, they are more bitter now than they were before because now they haven’t got the reins of government in 

their hands. I would like to say more about this at a future date, Mr. Speaker, so I ask for leave to adjourn the 

debate on the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

Yeas 

Thatcher MacDougall Leith 

McFarlane Gardiner Bjarnason 

Howes Coderre Romuld 

Boldt McIsaac Weatherald 

Cameron Trapp MacLennan 

Steuart Grant Larochelle 

Heald Cuelenaere Asbell 

Guy MacDonald (Milestone) Hooker 

Merchant (Mrs.) Gallagher Radloff 

Loken Breker Coupland 

 

Nays 

Brockelbank (Kelsey) Whelan Snyder 

Cooper (Mrs.) Nicholson Broten 

Wood Kramer Larson 

Nollet Dewhurst Robbins 

Walker Berezowsky Brockelbank (Sktn.City) 

Blakeney Smishek Pepper 

Davies Link Pederson 

Thibault Baker Willis 

Wooff   

 

Debate is adjourned. 



February 5, 1965 

21 

 

Hours Re Liquor Sales 
 

Mr. W. R. Thatcher: (Premier) — Before the Orders of the Day are called I have two brief announcements to 

make on behalf of the government. The administration has received numerous requests from various groups of 

individuals to extend the hours of liquor sales in Saskatoon and Regina. Most of the requests have been based on 

two major reasons, first — that better service to the public is required, second — that the proposal would help 

curb bootlegging. The government has decided to instruct the Liquor Commission to keep one store in Saskatoon 

and one store in Regina open on a trial basis until 10 p.m. The new regulations will come into effect on or before 

March 1st. 

 

Group Life Insurance Contracts 
 

Mr. W. R. Thatcher: (Premier) — One other brief announcement, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the group life 

insurance contracts covering some 14,000 employees of the government, its agencies and corporations. The 

government has decided to seek competitive bids from interested companies to determine if a reduction in the 

cost of the present benefits can be achieved. These companies presently carrying the insurance will be asked to 

review their current rates in the light of the experience in the plan to date. There is every possibility that this 

competitive process will produce savings, not only to the government but to its employees. With the consent of 

the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, the same procedures will be followed respecting the group life plan 

covering some 9,300 Saskatchewan teachers, to which the government contributes approximately one third of the 

premium, I emphasize that the government’s purpose is to ensure that the rates are determined by competitive 

bidding. There is no intention of reducing benefits or removing the business from the hands of the present 

carriers, so long as they meet whatever rate may be struck by this process. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — Mr. Speaker, I would like to rise on a point of order, Sir, I would suggest that 

what the premier has said under the title of announcements is a rather long stretch of that, and he was really 

making a couple of little speeches about a couple of items on government policy. Now . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I wasn’t . . . 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — Now, this is right and there is a proper place for making speeches on government 

policy. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — This is it . . . 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — That is right, this is the place but this isn’t the proper time. There is a place and 

there is a time and that time is when they can be replied to. But you cannot allow, Sir, a debate to arise on the 

orders of the day is out of order. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, on the point of order, may I point out to you, Sir, that the socialists are no longer 

running the government of Saskatchewan, and that it is our intention to run the proceedings of this house. 



February 5, 1965 

 

22 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that you are in charge of the house. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I also suggest, that you are out of order by interrupting. 

 

Condolences 
 

Mr. W. R. Thatcher: (Premier) — At the beginning of each session it is customary for this assembly to pause 

and pay tribute to former members of this house who have passed away since the last meeting of the legislature. 

Some here have known these former members intimately, all of us have, or will have a share in the experience 

which was theirs as members of this house. We remember with gratitude the valuable services they rendered to 

the people of this province. Therefore, I should like to move, seconded by the hon. member for Kelsey, (Mr. 

Brockelbank): 

 

That this assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing during the last year of seven former members 

of this assembly and expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution each made to his community, his 

constituency, and to this province. 

 

GEORGE ERNEST DRAGAN died on January 29, 1965. He was a member of this legislature for 

Kelvington from 1934 to 1938. He was born in Manitoba in 1898 and was educated at the Manitoba 

Agricultural College, the University of Manitoba and McGill University graduating in 1926 with the degree 

of Doctor of Medicine. Dr. Dragan practised in Saskatoon. He was on the medical staff of St. Paul’s 

Hospital; he was past President of the Saskatoon and District Medical Association; he was a member of the 

Masonic Order, and of the Ukrainian Greek Orthodox Church. 

 

JAMES WILLIAM GIBSON who was a member of this assembly for the constituency of Morse from 1946 

to 1960, died on January 27, 1965. He was born in Scotland in 1888. He came to Canada in 1904 and 

farmed in the Grayburn and Caron districts. Mr. Gibson served for many years as councillor of the Rural 

Municipality of Caron, and he was chairman of the Board of Moose Jaw School Unit number 22. He 

attended Caron United Church and he was a member of a number of fraternal organizations. 

 

GUY HARTSEL HUMMEL who was a member of this assembly for the constituency of Last Mountain 

from 1934 to 1938, died on October 23, 1964. He was born in Nebraska in 1883, and moved to Canada in 

1905, settling in the Nokomis district. He was an active participant in the affairs of his community; he 

served for seven years as President of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities; he was a 

director and president of the Saskatchewan Municipal Hail Insurance 



February 5, 1965 

23 

 

Association from its inception in 1912; he was for a long period reeve of the Rural Municipality of 

Wreford; he was Past Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of Saskatchewan AF and AM; and as a member of 

the Nokomis United Church, he served as steward, elder, and clerk of the board. 

 

HERMAN HENRY KEMPER who sat in this assembly for the constituency of Gull Lake from 1934 to 

1938, died on August 2, 1964. Born in Nebraska in 1882, Mr. Kemper settled in the Stone district near 

Shaunavon in 1906. He was a member of the council of the Rural Municipality of Arlington for several 

years, and a member of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and other agricultural and co-operative 

organizations. 

 

JOHN MEIKLE, who died on April 15, 1964, represented Biggar constituency in this assembly from 1921 

to 1925. He was born in Scotland in 1870, and having completed his education there, he came to Canada in 

1906 and settled near Naseby. He was active in the educational, business and social organizations of his 

community, serving as Director of the Naseby Co-operative Association, as Chairman of the Agricultural 

Society and Rural Telephone Company, as member of the School Board, and as reeve of the Rural 

Municipality of Rosemount. 

 

ARTHUR THOMAS PROCTER, a member of this legislature for Moosomin constituency from 1934 to 

1948, died on July 12, 1964. He was born in Manitoba in 1886, and was educated at St. John’s College, 

Winnipeg, and the University of Manitoba, graduating in 1910 with a Bachelor of Laws degree. He was 

admitted to the Saskatchewan Bar in 1911, and served as Crown Prosecutor in the Moosomin Judicial 

District in 1914-15. After overseas service with the Canadian Army from 1915 to 1918, Mr. Procter 

returned to his law practice in Moosomin. He was created a King’s Counsel in 1926, and he served as 

assistant counsel on the Royal Grain Commission in 1928-29. He served as Minister of Highways from 

1938 to 1944, and in 1948 was appointed Judge o£ the Court of Appeal from which position he retired in 

1961. 

 

MRS. SARAH KATHERINE SCYTHES (Formerly Mrs. Ramsland) represented the constituency of Pelly 

from 1919 to 1925. She was the first woman member of this legislature. Born in Minnesota in 1882, she 

moved to Canada with her husband in 1907 and settled at Buchanan, moving in 1913 to Kamsack. She 

entered the legislature in a by-election held to fill a vacancy caused by the death of her husband who had 

represented Pelly from 1917 until his death in 1919. Mrs. Scythes was Past Grand Matron of the Eastern 

Star, Past President of the Saskatchewan Canadian Club, and one of the early presidents of the Regina 

Business and Professional Women’s Club. She died April 4, 1964. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere 

sympathies with members of the bereaved families. 



February 5, 1965 

 

24 

 

Mr. Bryan H. Bjarnason: (Kelvington) — Mr. Speaker, being the member for the Kelvington constituency, I 

would like to pay a little further tribute to the late Dr. Dragan, who was a member of the legislature for the 

Kelvington constituency from 1934 to 1939. I, myself, was not personally acquainted with Dr. Dragan, but in my 

travels around the constituency, his name was brought up on many occasions, and I became increasingly aware of 

the high esteem with which he was held by the people with whom he has been associated. 

 

Dr. Dragan all through his life was very active in public affairs, both in his own community and in a larger area of 

influence and I will not elaborate further on these activities at this time as they have already been mentioned by 

the premier. However, I would like to say that Dr. Dragan gained considerable prominence in the St. John’s 

Ambulance Association and it may interest this house to know that very recently he was honored for his terrific 

contribution to this organization by being made a Commander Brother of St. John’s. His presentation was made 

by the Hon, R.L. Hanbidge, Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan, at a recent; investiture in Saskatoon, Dr. 

Dragan being unable to attend Ottawa ceremonies due to his illness. 

 

Personally I feel that Dr. Dragan’s greatest contribution was in the field of Canadian Ukrainian relations. He was 

born of Ukrainian parents and worked diligently emphasizing that the Ukrainian people retain their culture but 

that they become true Canadians and that their loyalty was to Canada. He is survived by his wife and three 

children. On your behalf and on behalf of my constituents I would like to extend sympathies to them at this time. 

 

Mr. J. H. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — Mr. Speaker, I would like to rise in seconding the motion of the Premier, to 

express sympathy to the families of these members and in appreciation for the services they gave to this province 

in the years gone by. I had the privilege of sitting in the legislature with two of the members that are mentioned, 

Mr. Proctor and Mr. Gibson. I sat on this side of the house for six years while Mr. Proctor was on the other side in 

the government as Minister of Highways, and, of course, some others have sat in the house too with Mr. Gibson. 

Some of the others I know very well, all of them that I know are certainly people who had a real idea of giving 

public service in accordance with the principles they believed. To these people our province owes a debt of 

gratitude for the kind of service which they have given. Those of us who knew them certainly enjoyed their 

company, whether or not we always agreed with them, 

 

Mr. Pederson: (Arm River) — It is not my intent to add too much to what has already been said in this house this 

afternoon by way of tribute to these members who have passed on. But I would like to say this and I think that I 

speak perhaps for many members like myself who are new in this chamber and who feel very strongly in thinking 

back to these members, who sat here before us, of the contribution which they made which ultimately led to it 

being possible for each and many of us to be here today, When I heard the mention of Dr. Dragan in particular, 

and coming of an ethnic group that is other than Anglo-Saxon or French, I feel a particular kinship to people like 

that for having, as it were, blazed the way for people like ourselves, a minority group in this country to participate 

in matters of our province and of our nation, and I feel that I should like to express, through this assembly, the 

feelings of those people that I represent of gratitude and thanks for the work they carried on in the years that they 

were members. I hope that they will be granted eternal rest and peace. 

 

Hon. Gordon B. Grant: (Minister of Highways) — I rise to speak to this motion of sympathy to pay tribute to 

the memory of the late Mr. Justice A.T. Procter, As one of my predecessors in the highways portfolio it will be 

recalled that Mr. Procter served during the war years at a time when personnel and materials were being diverted 

to the war effort, and at a time when exacting and 



February 5, 1965 

25 

 

oft-times unpopular stringency had to be exercised on the home front. Mr. Procter did not flinch from the duties 

this time imposed, or when the added duties were imposed by the absence due to war service of the then Attorney 

General, Mr. Estey, and the Provincial Secretary, Mr. Culliton. In charge of these departments he brought to bear 

a selfless capacity for work, together with the judicious talents, the legally trained mind, which qualified him for 

appointment later to the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are served by a department, which I have inherited, on which the ideal 

of service, the high principles and integrity of Arthur T. Procter have left their mark. 

 

Mr. Leonard M. Larson: (Pelly) — I would associate myself with the motion, the mover and the seconder on 

behalf of Mrs. Katherine Scythes, a former member for the Pelly constituency. Not having had the privilege of 

knowing Mrs. Scythes, I can only say that we, in Kamsack, particularly, and in the Pelly constituency as a whole 

are richer for some of the things that she stood for. Pioneer lady, educated in Minnesota, teaching school, moving 

to the Buchanan district as a pioneer. Serving out the term of her husband in this legislature, taking an active part 

in Red Cross Work during the First World War, certainly the kind of lady that has made this province very much 

what it is. She was the first lady member to sit in this assembly, a real tribute to the fair sex. 

 

It is my pleasure and my privilege to associate myself with the mover and the seconder. I think it is fitting that a 

lake in northern Saskatchewan, some 30 miles north of LaRonge has been named Scythes Lake. I am privileged to 

associate myself with the late Mrs. Scythes. 

 

Mrs. Sally Merchant: (Saskatoon City) — Mr. Speaker, I would like to associate myself with the motion in 

general, but in particular with the member from Kelvington (Mr. Bjarnason) and the member from Pelly (Mr. 

Larson) who have expressed their tributes to the deceased members from these constituencies. 

 

On this side of the house I think I am one of the very few who knew Dr. Dragan. He was a member in another 

generation. I met him in my father’s home and later knew him in Saskatoon. This is a man I think everybody in 

Saskatoon has enjoyed very much and respected very much, but I think one of the things Dr. Dragan has done, 

that perhaps people are not conscious of, was to make history when he came into this house. He came in as the 

first member of Ukrainian origin in this assembly, and in this way he made history and paved the way for a great 

many people of minority origins, as Mr. Pederson has pointed out. He left politics but he certainly didn’t leave 

those things with which he has associated himself in terms of the activities within the Ukrainian Ethnic group. 

This is something that will be very missed I know in the city of Saskatoon. 

 

In connection with Mrs. Scythes (Mrs. Ramsland) I would like to associate myself very closely and I think 

perhaps my very sex does this, with Mrs. Ramsland, who is called here Mrs. Scythes. She sat in this desk as Mrs. 

Ramsland, as the first lady member and I feel that I have a very close bond with her, in that had she not run and 

been elected in a very courageous way, I and the member from Regina, perhaps would not be here. 

 

I want to associate myself in these expressions of tribute and condolence to the members of both families. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky: (Cumberland) — Mr. Speaker, I would like to associate myself with the mover and 

seconder, and all those who preceded me, particularly in the memory of Dr. George Dragan, or as we called him 

“Uriy” in Ukrainian. He was a personal friend of mine and my family, we met first in 1924 when he was a young 

student in medicine and he was serving, I think, his province in the capacity of preventive medicine. I think I 

would be remiss in my duties if I failed to say some things I know about this beloved humanitarian. First of all I 

might mention he was one of the sons of the first pioneers of Ukrainian origin in Canada. He was born in a 

“Peasant 



February 5, 1965 

 

26 

 

Home” in Manitoba but made Saskatchewan his real home after graduating from the University of McGill. 

 

I always knew Dr. Dragan to do things very well and that is why he became renowned throughout the province, 

particularly among the Slavonic people as a first rate physician. But I would say this, he was not only a dedicated 

doctor, but he has been mentioned by others as being very active in the public activities among Ukrainian People. 

He was one of the founders of the Ukrainian Greek Orthodox church here in Canada. He was very active in the 

Peter Mohyla Ukrainian Institute which many students from the farms and numerous homesteads of this province 

were domiciled in order to get an education. I remember when I was in this institute, and then and later I 

associated with Dr. Dragan and discussed many matters of importance to all of us over the years. 

 

It has been mentioned I think that upon semi-retirement some years ago Dr. Dragan had been compiling a history 

of the Ukrainians of this great west of ours, particularly Saskatchewan, and I hope to see this valuable work of his 

retained in the archives of our province or in our university. 

 

He never forgot the struggles of our pioneers of this great west because he had grown up on a homestead and he 

knew what these problems of the pioneers were. We remember too the contribution he made, to the province of 

Saskatchewan. Dr. Dragan was one of the progressive people that I knew who, irrespective of political affiliation, 

acted according to his morality. He was, as a matter fact, dubbed by the Leader-Post in 1935, as a “State 

Medicine” proponent. He was very much concerned with the welfare of people and proposed free cancer clinics 

and a cancer holiday each year to bring to the attention of the people the dangers. He was conscious of the 

insecurity of farmers, having been a farmer himself, raised on a farm, and he also proposed while he was a 

member of the legislature that farmers receive the benefits of Workmens’ Compensation. Indeed, he was a great 

man. Dedicated to humanity and particularly to his beloved Ukrainian people. Dr. George Dragan, Mr. Speaker, 

will long be remembered as a great son of this nation and an adopted son of Saskatchewan. 

 

Personally, I, and my immediate family grieve at his demise and no less grieved are those who knew him and 

knew of him because he was well known across the country, and so I would conclude, Sir, if I may have your 

permission, to say in the mother tongue of this man, that we must remember him with kind and gentle praises or 

in the words of Shevchenko: 

 

Ne zabudte pamionooty ne zlim tychym slowom! 

Remember me not with evil but with gentle phrase! 

 

Mr. Donald G. MacLennan: (Last Mountain) — As member for Last Mountain Mr. Speaker, I, too, would like 

to add words of tribute to those of the hon. premier in regards to a former member from Last Mountain, Mr. Guy 

Hummel. 

 

Mr. Hummel upon arriving in the Nokomis district in 1905 became active in community service and community 

affairs. He served on the municipal council of Wreford for 45 years, 43 as reeve. He was a director, vice-president 

and for seven years president of the S.A.R.M. He spent 40 consecutive years as an elected director of the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Hail Association and in 1958 became its president and held that position until the time 

of his death. 

 

In 1935, for his outstanding achievement in public service he was awarded the King George V Silver Jubilee 

Medal. For me it was a personal honor and privilege to have known and to have worked with Guy Hummel. On 

behalf of all the people of the constituency of Last Mountain, I want to once again offer my deepest sympathy to 

his wife, his one daughter and his two surviving sons. 

 

Mr. W. G. Davies: (Moose Jaw City) — I too would like to join with others who have expressed their tributes 

and recognition of all of the departed members that are mentioned in the motion, particularly, however, respecting 

two of them whom I knew quite well. Some of the others I knew only casually 



February 5, 1965 

27 

 

but I would like to express a reference to the name of James William McAra Gibson more generally known 

among members of the Legislative Assembly and certainly members of the public in his own constituency and in 

Moose Jaw City as Jimmy Gibson. His ways were most simple and most unassuming. He was a very well liked 

person, I think, by everyone and as perhaps those who know him best would realize, he always did like to say’ 

things in the most direct kind of way. There was never an inquiry and there was never a request made of Mr. 

Gibson so far as I know that he did not act on very quickly, with all the capacity that he could bring to bear. Mr. 

Gibson was an immigrant from Scotland in 1904, He may of course be regarded as one of the province’s pioneers, 

farming at Grayburn and farming in the Caron district during the 1930’s tells I think a story to all those who know 

this district during the 1930’s. It wasn’t an easy place to live in and in which to make a living. People like Jim 

Gibson who went through those difficult conditions know what it means to endure hardships and despair and still 

come up smiling. He was always a very cheerful person; and this was regardless of the conditions he had to cope 

with at the time. 

 

Jimmy Gibson’s contribution to the political organization, Mr. Speaker, was substantial, even although he never 

advertised himself as a politician that knew it all. He always had good common sense to impart and many of us 

who knew him came to depend upon his advice and to rely very much on what he had to say. His contribution as a 

school trustee and councillor has been briefly described. Equally well know is his contribution during the time 

that he served as a member of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

He served a long apprenticeship before he came into the legislature and I think his example generally is one that 

will shine before everyone who aspires to a political career. His every-day service and integrity have given many 

citizens a better appreciation of political institutions and democratic processes. 

 

Jimmy was a product of Saskatchewan. He was one of many that built a community and a province, by day-to-day 

co-operation and service. He will be long remembered. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a brief reference to Mr. Kemper whom I knew somewhat less well than I 

knew Mr. Gibson. Here again, was one of the older members of Saskatchewan, one of our pioneers, who took a 

keen and active interest in everything that went on in the community and long after he left the legislature. He had 

an extremely inquiring mind and even in his more advanced years had this same penetrating intelligence. Again, 

like Mr. Gibson, he was a co-operator in the real sense, learned the hard way during the 1930’s the conditions in 

rural areas of this province. He believed in the ability of people to work out their own problems and to do this 

within the democratic processes of the community. He was a great servant and a great fighter for the people of his 

community and province. 

 

Mr. Fern Larochelle: (Shaunavon) — As member for Shaunavon, I would like to add my regrets along with the 

motion from the premier and the member for Kelsey, (Mr. Brockelbank) in the passing away of Mr. Herman 

Kemper. 

 

It was a privilege for me to have known Mr. Kemper for quite a number of years. I have had the pleasure of sitting 

with him at different meetings and I will not elaborate any further. I think that the honorable member from across 

the room has well expressed our feelings. I have also known the members of his family and I would like to join 

this assembly in expressing my condolences to the Kemper family. 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst: (Wadena) — I would like to add my sentiments to those expressed by the mover of the 

motion and the seconder and others who have spoken. It has been my pleasure to have been acquainted with two 

of these people personally as members of this house. I knew Mr. Procter when he sat in the house before he was 

appointed Judge and I also knew Mr. Gibson quite well. It was also my pleasure to room with Mr. Gibson for the 

first few years after he came into this legislature as a member. But the main reason why I rose, Mr. Speaker, is to 

point out that Mr. Gibson was a member from 1946 to 1960, not from 1946 to 1959, as reported in the press. 



February 5, 1965 

 

28 

 

It was my privilege last Saturday along with the member for Turtleford (Mr. Wooff) and the ex-member for 

Lumsden, (Mr. Thurston) to attend the funeral of Mr. Gibson. I can assure you he was well thought of by his 

friends and it was well shown by the attendance of his funeral last Saturday. 

 

Hon. David G. Steuart: (Minister of Public Health) — I would like to join with the mover and the seconder and 

with all those who have spoken, paying a tribute to former members of this house. I only had the privilege of 

knowing one of those members, and that was Mrs. Ramsland Scythes. As it has been stated here, Mrs. Scythes 

created for herself a tremendous record of public service over the years. I know that she maintained that interest in 

the public welfare throughout her entire life. I know that she passed it on to her family. Mrs. Scythes won for 

herself a place in Saskatchewan’s history by being the first woman member of this assembly. I think that she won 

herself a host of friends by the kind of person that she was and it is my privilege to join with other members who 

have spoken in paying a tribute to the memory of Mrs. Scythes and passing our condolences on to her family. 

 

Mr. A.M. Nicholson: (Saskatoon City) — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to add a few very brief words. I didn’t 

know Mrs. Ramsland Scythes, but I did represent the Pelly area which she represented after the death of her 

husband, and I heard a great deal about the outstanding work they did during the pioneer days. 

 

I did want to pay tribute to the late Dr. Dragan. It will be 35 years since he and I first met, when we travelled on 

the first passenger train to Churchill and Flin Flon. Later we knew each other when we were both more active in 

politics. As a matter of fact I appreciated very much receiving a copy of a speech from him which he delivered in 

this chamber an March 24th, 1936, some 25 years later. I naturally prize very highly the contribution which he 

made to public life. As the lady member from Saskatoon mentioned, he was the first member of Ukrainian origin 

to sit in this chamber and naturally his people made demands of him that made it possible for him to be involved 

in a great many activities. 

 

I, too, want to join with all the members in this house in expressing our sympathy to Mrs. Dragan and the family. 

 

Hon. J.W. Gardiner: (Minister of Public Works) — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with other members of the 

legislature at this time in adding my sympathies to the members of the families of the deceased former members 

o£ the legislature. I had the opportunity of knowing personally most of those that are on the list of former 

members that we are paying our respects to this afternoon. Many of them I knew on a very personal basis, so that 

I would feel remiss if I did not add a few words at this time to the tributes that have been paid to them. 

 

I would first like to join in the tributes to Mrs. Ramsland-Scythes, the first lady member of the legislature in this 

province. I think possibly today, as we are remembering former members, it is not strange that we find many of 

those that are on this list were engaged in the pioneering life of our province. As we are today, in the year 1965, 

celebrating the 60th jubilee of our province it is not strange that we find in the list many of those who took an 

active part in the early history of our province. Of course, as has been indicated here, Mrs. Scythes was one of 

those that did play her full part in the pioneering efforts in the province of Saskatchewan. As the member for 

Prince Albert has pointed out, she kept up to the very end her very close interest in public affairs in this province. 

 

With the late Justice Procter also I had had very close dealings. Although much younger than he was, I did have 

the opportunity of some years in working within the party that we represent on this side of the house, in an active 

way in the promotion of the ideals that on this side of the house we have believed in down through the years. Mr. 

Procter was a very zealous fighter for any cause that he believed in and I am quite certain that I could say today 

that he also played his part in the 



February 5, 1965 

29 

 

life and history of our province. 

 

I think the only member on the list with whom I was not acquainted personally was Mr. John Meikle, who was 

again one of the earlier members of the legislature of this province. 

 

Mr. Kemper I can remember as a small boy when the quintuplets, as they were called at that time, as hon. 

members opposite will remember, were first sitting in this legislature. I can remember the night that the five 

members came to our home and I had the opportunity of being introduced to the five, who at that time sat on the 

opposition side of the legislature in this chamber. I had had opportunities since that time of meeting Mr. Kemper. 

I know that he, as Mr. Procter and the others on this list, believed in the principles for which he worked and 

fought during the days that he was in public service in this province. 

 

Mr. Guy Hummel was again, as Mrs. Ramsland-Scythes, one that was very closely associated with myself and I 

had the opportunity on two occasions of being the candidate for our party in the Last Mountain constituency in 

which Mr. Hummel lived. On many occasions I had the opportunity of sitting down at meals with Mr. and Mrs. 

Hummel in their home in Nokomis, and I know that it was a sad day for all of those who had been associated with 

him when they heard of his passing this past fall. The active part that he had taken in the history of the municipal 

part of government in this province was one which probably could not be surpassed by any other individual. 

 

Mr. Gibson, many of us that are now in the legislature had the opportunity of sitting with, as I did from 1956 to 

1960. I well remember him as being a friendly person, and perhaps one of the quieter members in the legislature. 

He wasn’t quite as vociferous as possibly some others were, probably including myself. I can remember many 

occasions on which I met Mr. Gibson and the friendly way in which he always treated, particularly the younger 

members, of the house. 

 

Dr. Dragan, the last one that I wish to mention, was a man whom I first met over 20 years ago. I had the 

opportunity of speaking on the same platform in one of the first election campaigns I took part in. I had often 

heard a great deal about the musical speech of the Ukrainian people. I can well say here today that on the first 

occasion I spoke with Dr. Dragan and listened to him speak in his native tongue, although I could not understand 

a word of it, I could enjoy every minute of his address. I think he was one of the finest speakers in either English 

or Ukrainian that the province of Saskatchewan has ever had and I would like to say that he was one of the finest 

gentlemen that I have ever had the privilege of knowing. 

 

So I would just like to add now, my sympathies to those of other members to the families of those who have 

passed away during the past year. 

 

Mr. E. I. Wood: (Swift Current) — Mr. Speaker, I also would like at this time to associate myself with the mover 

and the seconder of this motion in offering condolences to the people who have felt the loss of the members that 

have served in this house. 

 

I would especially like to refer to Mr. Kemper, who was a member for the legislature for the Gull Lake 

constituency, which I have the honor to share with the hon. member from Shaunavon and possibly the hon. 

member from Maple Creek, that of having a portion of this earlier constituency in my constituency at the present 

time. Mr. Kemper was a man who was in the forefront of progressive thinking and action in the south-west part of 

the province during his life time. He was one of the first directors of the Saskatchewan Farmers Union and his 

years on the municipal council showed him to have been a man of real interest in civic affairs. I personally met 

Mr. Kemper at many meetings. Mr. Kemper was a man who was always willing to stand up and be counted for 

what he thought and for his views on different matters and he expressed himself very well, especially so for one 

who was so well advanced in years. We always thought a great deal of Mr. Kemper and he was a man who had 

the courage of his convictions at all times. 

 

I was able, Mr. Speaker, to attend Mr. Kemper’s funeral. It was held in the town of Shaunavon. He was buried in 

Arlington cemetery. 



February 5, 1965 

 

30 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this was not the cemetery in which President Kennedy, or the American unknown Soldier are 

buried, but as we laid him in his grave that day, on that sun-lit, wind-swept hill overlooking the Cypress Hills, I 

thought that no more appropriate place could have been found for this old warrior, among the field and the people 

he loved so well. 

 

I would like sincerely to join those who are today expressing condolences, especially to his people, to his folks 

who are left, because as I said earlier, Mr. Kemper was a lovable old man who definitely had the courage of his 

convictions. 

 

For a minute, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to refer to Mr. Hummel. Mr. Hummel, as you know, is one of those 

people who spent a good deal of this life in the service of his community as a member for municipal council. It 

was my privilege during, that time when I was the Minister of Municipal Affairs to have several meetings with 

Mr. Hummel in regard to matters concerning the municipal hail organizations. I found him a very competent 

person and very sincere in his approach to the affairs of the public. Again, as in his position as the president of 

The Municipal Hail Association, he travelled with as to the S.A.R.M. district meetings throughout the province 

and again I found him one who was prepared to do his utmost of service to the people in municipal matters. 

 

I might also say in regard to Jimmy Gibson, a man whom we all knew so well here, a man who was most sincere, 

and most dedicated to his work. I don’t think that any member or any constituents of his ever approached Jimmy 

without having the matter dealt with to the best of his ability. I know that many, many friends of Jimmy Gibson 

are going to be very saddened by his loss. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney: (Regina West) — Mr. Speaker, may I associate myself with the mover and seconder of the 

motion in paying tribute to those who have gone before us. I would like to refer to two members, Mr. Gibson, 

who served in this house, as the motion suggested, from 1946 until 1960. It was my pleasure to know him over a 

goodly number of those years and I am sure that he impressed others as he did me with his unfailing good humor 

and his sincere interest in the problems of his constituency. Many who knew him will have felt, I am sure, 

surprised that Jimmy Gibson was 76, and that he has passed beyond. 

 

Mr. A.T. Procter had a distinguished career as a lawyer, a parliamentarian, and a judge. He was an ornament to 

the bar and the bench, and to this legislature. I would like to join in expressing the sentiments of loss which was 

widely felt in Saskatchewan at the death of the hon. Mr. Justice Procter. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — Just a very brief privilege, Mr. Speaker, I thought I heard the premier say in 

regard to Dr. Dragan, that he served in the legislature from 1934 to 1948 - 1938 is the correct time, but I didn’t 

want a wrong figure to get in there and make sure it is corrected. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: (Premier) — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the hon. member for Kelsey, (Mr. Brockelbank): 

 

That the resolution just passed, together with transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of deceased former 

members, be communicated to the bereaved families, on behalf of this assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The assembly adjourned at 4:39 o’clock p.m. 

 


