



















































Hansard: April 02, 1965


1405 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

41st Day 

Friday, April 2nd, 1965 
 

The assembly met at 2:20 o'clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

QUESTION RE LOST CAR, RETURN NO. 102 
 

Mr. J. H. Brockelbank (Acting Leader of the Opposition, Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I 

regret to see that the Minister of Labour, (Mr. Coderre) is not in his place, because I wanted to ask about the return no. 

102, if he had found anything out about that car. 

 

Mr. D. V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, the return is in the process of being prepared. It is out of the 

Minister of Labour's hands, and it is in the hands of my department. The return about the lost car is not lost; it will be 

filed very shortly. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They are really worried about it. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Good old Perry Mason. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

The assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Hon. A. H. McDonald,(Minister of Agriculture) 

for second reading of Bill No. 54, An Act to Amend The Liquor Act, 1960. 

 

Mr. R. A. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, there are some principles contained in this bill which no one can object 

to, but I would like to refer to some features of the bill which I believe are objectionable. This is the bill to provide for 

additional forms of liquor outlets, for the sale of liquor in bottles to the public. The government says that it is proposing 

to license drug stores and other responsible people for the sale of liquor, because they say that particularly in smaller 

communities, they wish to provide better service. 

 

Well, the government says that it is economically unsound from the point of view of the Liquor Board to serve these 

small communities and government stores. I am quoting from the Deputy Premier,(Mr. McDonald). The government 

seems to believe that the policy of determining whether or not a liquor store should be established in a given 

community should be governed by whether or not it is economically sound from the point of view of the Liquor Board, 

and I question whether that is the proper criterion to apply. 

 

The question which I raise, and I raise it at this time, whether the point of view of the Liquor Board should be the 

governing point of view whether or not a store should be opened in a particular small community. Perhaps the 

government has become too dependent upon liquor profits, and too concerned about making a profit out of every store. 

Government liquor board stores were introduced into this province, not as a source of government revenue, Mr. 

Speaker, but as an alternative to the uncontrolled free enterprise system of selling alcoholic liquor. The primary 

objective of introducing these stores had nothing to do with revenue, but had only to do with the problem of 

enforcement and the controlled sale of liquor. 

 

Ordinarily the government doesn't expect to make a profit or revenue out of law enforcement. It goes without saying, 

then, Mr. Speaker, that we should try to put aside commercial considerations, try to put them out of mind in deciding 

whether or not to maintain a government liquor board store in a particular community. If a high standard of law 

enforcement requires that a store be established in a particular community, then that should be the criterion which 

governs, regardless of whether a profit is expected from the operation of the store. 

 

Now, how does it assist the interests of law enforcement, to allow private enterprise to re-enter the liquor retail trade. 

For it is now 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1406 

proposed by this government to set up a new class, a new group of people, selected by the Liberal government and give 

them the right to make a business out of pushing the retail sale of hard liquor in this province. This represents a new 

and radical departure from the principles which governed the setting up of liquor control board stores when prohibition 

came to an end in the early twenties. 

 

This class of people is being set up by this government, with government blessing, having a pecuniary interest which 

conflicts with the traditional aim of taking the profit out of the liquor trade and thereby curtailing consumption. I 

wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the government expects that the private commercial interests that are to be licensed to sell 

liquor at retail, will, because they are private stores, because they are privately owned and because they are in business 

to make a profit — whether the government believes that this will result in an increase in the number of juveniles, the 

number of minors purchasing liquor. Because, Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendment proposes to change section 80 

and make it more difficult to convict a vendor of selling liquor to minors. 

 

This seems to suggest that the government expects and is anxious to protect these new commercial ventures from 

prosecution for selling to minors. At present in order to secure a conviction for selling liquor to minors, it is only 

necessary to prove one thing, that is that the vendor sold to a person who is, in fact, under twenty-one years of age, but 

with this change, this proposed change in the law, the issue then becomes whether the purchaser was apparently under 

the age of twenty-one. This introduces a purely subjective test. I predict that with the introduction of these words, it 

will be more difficult to secure convictions against vendors, who do, in fact, sell to minors. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, many of us are concerned, and more concerned about the larger issue of allowing private interests 

to stake out a claim on a part of the retail liquor trade. Undoubtedly, the government will put forward, will be able to 

put forward the economic argument with respect to every community in Saskatchewan, for enlarging the private 

enterprise sector. The bill provides for only twenty more of these outlets, but I predict that the pressure will be on 

within a year or two. Communities that haven't a liquor store will say that they are just as much entitled to one as any 

other community, they have a drug store, or they have some other reliable person, according to the words of the act, 

who would be interested in securing a license and a franchise to sell. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that there are private interests not only in drug stores, but elsewhere, right in this city, who 

would be interested in handling the retail sale of liquor by the bottle. It is only a smaller step to extend the act to permit 

this, in say the city of Regina, or Saskatoon. 

 

These private interests will be very glad to say, to assure the Treasurer that they will make a bigger revenue for the 

province of Saskatchewan, if they are allowed to sell, than if sales were restricted to government stores. If a question of 

the revenue of the province is the determining factor in these decisions, then there is no reason why the government 

should not then acquiesce to the request by all of the drug stores in Saskatchewan, not just in those twenty towns that 

are originally provided for. There is no reason why the government shouldn't acquiesce in the sale by all of the drug 

stores in Saskatchewan. That will be a less significant extension of the principle than the one we are being asked to 

approve of today. They will make more money for the government, by making up in volume the sale of liquor. That the 

government has in mind allowing the introduction of high pressure methods and high pressure techniques for the sale of 

liquor, is made clear from this amendment that is before us today. 

 

The government says, and I quote from the minister who introduced the legislation; 

 

Under our present legislation, a brewer _r other manufacturer is not permitted to employ representatives to act in any 

capacity in connection with the marketing of a company's product in Saskatchewan. 

 

And so the government proposes to remove this prohibition. The implication in the argument which the government 

makes is that it hasn't been possible to enforce the rule, they say . . . 

 

Hon. A. H. McDonald (Minister of Agriculture): — You didn't . . . 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1407 

Mr. Walker: — The minister suggests that we have them in spite of the prohibition, and so it is proposed now to yield, 

to remove the prohibition and to allow salesmen into the field, and instead to try to control or restrain their 

aggressiveness by regulations passed by Order-in-Council. This retreat, I submit, does not offer any real hope of 

curbing the appetite of the liquor interests or restraining the activities of the salesmen. If, as the minister says, they are 

in the province, something should be done about it, and it is no answer to say that he knows that they were in the 

province a year ago, or ten years ago. I can say that if we had known they had been there, we wouldn't have repealed 

the legislation in order to make it lawful, we would have tried to enforce the legislation as it stands. Indeed, it will be 

more difficult now to prevent the hustlers, the pushers, the promoters, from increasing the sale of liquor because these 

people will be in +he province lawfully. They will be engaged lawfully in the work of sales, and what kind of 

restrictions are you going to put on to slow down their activities, when they can operate above board and in the 

province without let or hindrance. 

 

I suggest it will be more difficult in the future to curb or curtail the activities of these people, that the minister says are 

here, because they, the liquor interests, can look forward to an easier compliance by the licensed business friends of the 

Liberal party. 

 

These people at the present time have to, if they want to promote the sales, have to encourage, and aid and abet the 

government employees, the operators of the government Liquor Board stores, who have no personal interest in 

encouraging the sales. how much easier and more compliant will they find the private enterprise sellers of liquor to 

their sales devices, and to their advertising and promotional techniques. These people in the private enterprise sale of 

liquor will be more vulnerable to the encouragement of the salesmen than the government liquor store proprietors were, 

because they have a personal interest in it, and furthermore, these people will be selected by the Liberal government. 

They will be selected by the agencies of the government opposite, and this may give further encouragement to these 

salesmen and promoters to think that these people can get away with a little bit of hanky-panky in the promotion of 

liquor sales. 

 

The hon. minister says they are doing it now, he says they are doing it now . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — They were doing it when you were Attorney General . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — . . . and if they are doing it now, how much more easily they can do it, when they can do it lawfully. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I view those two amendments with great misgiving; the introduction of the Gale of bottled spirits by 

the commercial trade, and the legislation of the sales representatives and distillers agents who will be going about the 

province. The introduction of the profit incentives at the retail level, aided and abetted by these distillers' agents, 

conflicts with our traditional system of liquor control in Saskatchewan. This private system of retailing liquor builds in 

a pressure, in my view, which will seek to expand its areas of profit, and this pressure will, I fear, not be resisted by the 

government judging by its present policy in this regard. 

 

This government admits that it weighs the various alternative —the various alternative methods of selling liquor, on the 

basis of the profit to be made out of the sales in any particular store, on the basis of maximizing the revenue to the 

crown. We are taking, I believe, the first step here today upon the road taken by our southern neighbors, of virtually 

unrestricted promotion and sale of liquor. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will feel constrained to vote against the bill. 

 

Mr. A. H. Nicholson (Saskatoon): — Mr. Speaker, the member for Hanley, (Mr. Walker) has made an excellent case 

and I want to add my word in support of his views. I think many Saskatchewan people will feel that this is a backward 

step, I just secured from the library, the Royal Commission on Customs and Excise, I realize this goes back quite a 

number of years, but we had a CCF government in office for twenty years, and our immediate predecessors were pretty 

sensitive of this area, but I would like to draw the attention of the house, that when the legislation of this sort was in 

effect, you had the Prairie Drug Company, for example, which obtained a permit from the Saskatchewan 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1408 

government under the Saskatchewan liquor law to store liquor for the sale for medicinal, scientific, and other 

non-beverage purposes, but it appears they had the intent of using the bond for the storage of liquor to be sold for 

beverage purposes. Then there was the Regina Wine and Spirit Company. Canada Drugs was organized at Yorkton. 

This company was never engaged in the drug business, but confined its activities to the sale of alcohol in the western 

provinces, and to purchasers from the United States. 

 

Also, the Yorkton Distributors, the Gainsborough Liquors Limited and the Gainsborough Liquor Company were all 

organized to benefit from tax liquor legislation. Most people living here at that time, felt this was a very unfortunate 

chapter in our history. Therefore it is very disturbing to have legislation brought before this chamber, to again move the 

sale of liquor to private individuals and private firms who might be able to make the sort of profits that Canada Drug 

and Gainsborough Liquors and the Prairie Drug Company and the Regina Wine and Spirit Company, have been able to 

accumulate, as revealed in this evidence given before this commission. 

 

Mr. I. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — That was before prohibition. 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — No, this was a period when there were fabulous profits made by establishing this sort of 

corporation, and I hope that some of the members on the side opposite, with strong views on this particular question 

will join us in voting against this particular measure. 

 

Mr. G.G. Leith (Elrose): — I am rising to speak in particular on the matter of the principle of enlarging the number of 

outlets for sale of liquor in the province, and particularly of allowing druggists or other reputable people in business to 

sell these liquors in rural areas, some distance from an established government liquor store. 

 

I think you are aware, Mr. Speaker, that the number of liquor stores is governed by the act of this assembly and this 

number has gone up consistently in the last ten years, from about forty, I believe, to ninety at the present time. 

 

Now, I have before me, 1959 special report on the Practices and Principles of Liquor Control in some Canadian 

provinces. I want to take the liberty of reading part of the recommendations that were made by the Bracken 

Commission in Manitoba, in 1955. Here they are in part: 

 

These are recommendations for the method of sale: 

 

We recommend: 

 

That the basic policy of government monopoly over the sale of all packaged liquors through government controlled 

and operated liquor stores for consumption off the premises be maintained. 

 

and here is the fourth recommendation: 

 

That in the interests of more equitable service to all parts of the province, the G.L.C. commission survey the present 

liquor store outlets with a view to determining the need for stores in these areas now inadequately served. 

 

And the fifth recommendation: 

 

That in any small rural centre which is a considerable distance from larger centres having government liquor stores, 

and in which it would not be economic or advisable to expend public monies on new liquor store outlets, the G.L.C. 

commission be given authority to designate one agent, preferably a drug store, as its representative for the off sale of 

packaged spirits and wines. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the Liquor Control Commission Annual Report of Manitoba, year ending March 31st, 

1958, had this to say in part: 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1409 

That the system of selling liquor in smaller communities through liquor agencies, usually the local druggist was 

proving successful. 

 

And I think that Manitoba's experience may be used as a useful model for the experience that we expect in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The act clearly states the prohibitions on the number of proposed outlets. It prohibits them within quite a distance of 

any other liquor store. The people in that area will be protected from what my friend from Hanley, (Mr. Walker) likes 

to call the liquor interests by the use of the local option vote. The vendor will' be governed by the same hours of sale 

and the same conditions that any other government vendor would be. I think that it is clearly in the interests of these 

smaller areas and the people of Saskatchewan to introduce this measure. 

 

I also have a report from the Liquor Sales Outlet Inquiry Committee, 1958, a Saskatchewan Legislative Committee, on 

page 34, the recommendation no 18 says; 

 

That the committee unanimously recommends that the present ceiling on the number of government liquor stores in 

the province be eliminated. 

 

Now this report was presented to the previous government and it is true that they raised the number of outlets; but it is 

not true that they eliminated the ceiling on their number. Our feeling in this matter is that we are not going to control 

alcoholism, and we are not going to control crimes that are aggravated by alcohol by restricting the number of outlets. I 

believe that the more healthy position is to make liquor available to people over 21 so that they don't have to drive forty 

or fifty miles for it. 

 

I remember years ago, when our only liquor store was at Biggar, which is fifty miles from our community, and several 

had accidents and several breakings of the law happened because these people were travelling up there to buy a little bit 

of liquor. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Sampling on the way home. 

 

Mr. Leith: — Sampling on the way home too. 

 

Mr. E. I. Wood (Swift Current): — May I ask the member a question? When you had these accidents was it only the 

law that was broken: 

 

Mr. Leith: — Well, probably at that time several laws were broken. Speeding and also opening this bottle before they 

got home. But these were the dangers, Mr. Speaker, and I think we should recognize that when we make a commodity 

like liquor hard to get, then we accentuate the problems of abuse that we are likely to face. 

 

The hours of sale are important. I believe that the bootlegging problem is the one that we are really trying to eliminate; 

by making liquor available, in drug stores, and from qualified people by keeping the hours of sale, the same as ordinary 

liquor stores, we are going to attack the bootlegging problem right where it hurts us the worst. People don't have to 

drive fifty miles, or a hundred miles for a bottle of liquor. I was very pleased to see the cities of Regina and Saskatoon 

had extended store hours for buying liquor. I, personally, don't want to see the consumption of liquor go up any more 

and I don't think that this will cause the consumption of liquor to go up any more. I think that it is a good measure for 

our rural areas, and for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. G. T. Snyder (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, my only purpose in rising briefly is to place on record my 

opposition to the proposal of extending liquor outlets in the manner that is suggested in this legislation which is before 

us today. 

 

Like other members, I have received countless letters from both individuals and organizations, petitions, which indicate 

the protest to the suggestion which is made in the legislation to extend the sale of spirits through the retail drug 

merchants and their establishments. The letters and petitions which I received come from all parts of the province, and I 

believe the biggest problem which is indicated by the letters which I 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1410 

received is the fact that people consider that this is a move towards increased consumption, but I think even more 

important yet, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that there is a definite danger of the indiscriminate sale of this commodity to 

under-age groups, in the event that liquor outlets are extended in the manner which is set forth in the legislation. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, this kind of legislation which permits the sale of spirits from outlets other than government 

owned and operated liquor stores, is less necessary than it has been in years gone by. Some time ago, the amount of 

liquor which an individual could purchase at any one time was somewhat more restricted than it is today. Today, Mr. 

Speaker, an individual can lay in a stock of liquor if he so desires. I know the suggestion has been made that this stuff 

has a tendency to evaporate, but nevertheless, a person can lay in a stock of liquor if they so desire. They can also travel 

on good roads at almost any place in the province in order to reach a point where a government liquor store is in 

operation. 

 

I personally, Mr. Speaker, am rather dismayed; I am unable to comprehend the reason why drug stores were singled out 

for this rather dubious honor. Ideally, Mr. Speaker, I suggest then that the sale of spirits should be retained by 

government-owned and government-operated liquor stores. By this process and by this process only, can the sale of this 

commodity be properly administered and properly policed. 

 

I suggest, to you that the government has a real and a very distinct responsibility in this respect. 

 

The Premier and the Provincial Treasurer, during his budget address had something to say about the amount of revenue 

expected out of liquor sales in the coming year, which we are involved in at the present moment. He indicated that the 

profit from the sale of liquor would approach $16,800,000 - I believe that was the figure that was given. Surely, Mr. 

Speaker, this indicates to us that there is a real area of responsibility here on the part of government to provide 

sufficient outlets under the auspices of government 

 

I just suggest that the move towards outlets in the hands of retail merchants, to me, smacks of the Babcock influence. I 

understand, Mr. Speaker, that gentleman has gone on record as being in favor of the sale of alcohol through free 

enterprise outlets. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, generally that Canadian provinces have agreed to assume the responsibility for some of the 

inherent problems that are connected with the consumption of alcohol. Saskatchewan's Bureau on Alcoholism has 

recognized a very real problem here. An international school on alcoholic studies was also begun recently with 

Saskatchewan and North Dakota co-operating in this venture. 

 

Recently, Mr. Speaker, if I may be out of order for a moment, I would like to refer to remarks made by the Attorney 

General (Mr. Heald) speaking in a debate which was before this house in connection with highway safety and at that 

time he expressed concern for the increasing part that alcohol was playing in respect to the fatality figures which are 

experienced on our highways. 

 

So this indicates to me simply, Mr. Speaker, that government, if it is to properly discharge its responsibilities to the 

travelling public and to Saskatchewan people generally, must retain complete and absolute control over the sale of 

alcohol. 

 

I suggest to do anything less than this, Mr. Speaker, is to abrogate a responsibility which properly belongs within the 

sphere of government activity. I feel that I am duty bound, Mr. Speaker, to vote against the legislation. 

 

Mr. Eiling Kramer (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, I too have a rather brief contribution to make to this debate. 

 

I think that under other circumstances, one might say the text today should be "Lead us not into temptation.” This is the 

very thing that this proposal is doing, leading more people into greater temptations, and the very fact that they are 

putting Liquor in the way of businessmen who already, quite often, have difficulties in making ends meet. People who 

are in a precarious position usually from a business stand point. This is not going to be in the public interest. The fact 

that these people are marginal businessmen is going to be bad business we know that certain things will happen. We 

know that they are already happening when pressures are 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1411 

being placed on local vendors who have licensed premises in the small country hotels, where customers will come 

along after hours and browbeat them into trying to get after hour sales . . . These people, these businessmen who are 

going to be given this questionable privilege, will be faced from time to time with customers who probably do $50 or 

$60 worth of business in drug prescriptions and one thing and another during anyone particular month or longer period, 

and they will be faced with the decision as to whether or not they are going to deny their customer's wishes or become a 

bit illegal when someone comes along and says, "I want a crock" when its after hours. 

 

Now, this is the position that this kind of legislation places these people in and I suggest that it is the wrong kind of a 

position to have citizens in business placed in. It's just creating more difficulties. Quite often these people have their 

residence right in the drug store or the drug store is part of the building they live in and they are going to be subjected 

to disturbances at all hours of the night. I think that there is another factor here too. They are going to further increase 

the temptation to some of the younger people who are always adventurous to further engage in break-ins when the 

spirit moves them, or when they are moved to spirits. 

 

The profit motive here is far too obvious and what the former Attorney General, (Mr. Walker) has said and that other 

speakers have said about this legislation, is all too obvious. It is bad legislation, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that if you must 

do this, for heaven's sake be practical. For heaven's sake be practical about it. The hotels are already licensed. You have 

to send inspectors around to the hotels. They already have the storage facilities an_ the vaults for storing liquor. Why 

don't you do as the Hotelkeepers Association have suggested, if you have new outlets, and at least leave it in one place 

instead of creating further outlets and further new temptations for bait. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that this is one of the worst bills that has come before this house during this session and there 

have been a good many of them that were pretty bad. I certainly am opposed to this and I want to at this time, register 

my disapproval. 

 

Mrs. Marjorie Cooper (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, I think very few people in the assembly will be surprised that 

I am opposing this bill. 

 

I think that every action of this government since it has taken office, has or will have, the effect of increasing liquor 

consumption. Perhaps increasing what you call liquor profits rather than decreasing them. I think no government should 

want to increase the sale of liquor and increase liquor consumption, because I think we have plenty of evidence and I 

know everyone will agree with me, that there is too much liquor consumption in the province now. As the Attorney 

General pointed out, in eighty per cent of the car accidents, liquor is involved. And when it comes to poverty and 

dependency and family breakup in all of these things, liquor plays a major part. 

 

Now, what has been the record of this government in connection with liquor since it came into office? First of all, it 

permits advertising. Now, I agree it is institutional advertising but nevertheless, it's advertising and there is only one' 

purpose that I know of for advertising and that is to sell more of the product. People don't advertise unless they expect 

to gain from the advertising. If the government had felt that the weekly newspapers needed this extra revenue and 

consequently they permitted advertising there ",ere much more constructive ways they could have done it than that. 

They could have put ads in the paper giving education about alcoholism, the same types of advertisements that were put 

in Manitoba, warning against excessive drinking. Instead of that, they allow liquor advertising. 

 

Then the next thing they do, they cut the appropriation for the Alcohol Education Committee. I have a letter on my 

desk. I happen to be a member of the Alcohol Education Council. These people have teachers in the schools and they 

do a wonderful job. They are well trained. They are mostly graduates of the Yale Alcohol Studies and certainly if there 

is any place where you need alcohol education if it is going to do any good, it is in the schools. And here I have this 

letter saying that on the so-called economy drive the Department of Education, I believe is, have cut their grants by 

$8,000. And I think that is a real shame. They are going to have one less on their staff in the schools. Anyone who has 

watched the work of these people in the schools knows that they are doing a tremendously good job. So at the same 

time, they allow advertising then they cut down on temperance education for our children in the schools. This is a 

disgrace to my way of thinking. 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1412 

The next thing they do is lengthen hours. Now, I know it is only in two stores but certainly this is an encouragement to 

compulsive drinkers. People can get their liquor if they need it before six o'clock and I would imagine that after ten 

o'clock, if they are partying and want liquor, they are just as apt to go to a bootleggers if they are around after ten 

o'clock, but you have increased the length of the hours. 

 

Now, you are going to open liquor outlets in drug stores. There was a time when liquor was handled by drug stores and 

it wasn't a very satisfactory experience, was it? And the members on the other side of the house know that. You are 

only saying twenty now but there will be more asked for. If one town has it, the next town will ask for it, and I am quite 

sure that the government will succumb. 

 

Easy availability increases consumption every time, rather than decreasing it. I don't agree with the member who spoke 

previously. There is no doubt that if liquor is right at hand, you are going to use more of it. 

 

An Hon. Member: — There's better medicine than that, Marj. 

 

Mrs. Cooper: — Well, I just have one more thing to say but I can't let it go even if I have to cough doing it. 

 

You are going to permit- salesmen to go around and try to encourage more sales. Now, I think this is retrograde step. 

The argument that you use is that people know, that they are doing it all the time any way so we might as well legalize 

it. I think that is the most weak-kneed argument I ever listened to. If you know they are doing it, there can't be score 

and hundreds of them, why didn't you prosecute them? If you know that they are doing it, you know where they are and 

here again you are doing something to encourage the sales of liquor and I think that the record of government is most 

unsatisfactory and I will oppose the bill. 

 

Mr. D. V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, the lady member for Regina West, (Mrs. 

Cooper) who just finished speaking was quoting, I believe from a document or paper or circular. I wonder if she would 

be good enough to table it. 

 

Mrs. Cooper (Regina West): — I would be very glad to. Yes, I would be very glad to table it. 

 

Mr. R. H. Wooff (Turtleford): — I personally can't help but view with alarm this broadening of liquor outlets beyond 

the scope of the provincial liquor store. As some of the speakers have already pointed out, I believe that once outlets 

are allowed into private business establishments and what have you, there will be a multitude of pressures exerted upon 

the business people. 

 

There are many types of outlets that have been used down across the line, south of us, and these are the sources that 

give the revenue officers the most trouble. I would suggest that if we have to have more outlets, that they be the regular 

liquor store outlets that are properly controlled, even if they do not make a profit. 

 

I was amazed at the arguments of the member from Elrose, (Mr. Leith) suggesting that even though we had more 

outlets, it wouldn't necessarily up the consumption. I challenge him to go back over the history of the liquor business as 

far as he likes, in any country he likes, and every time that the outlets have been increased consumption has gone up. I 

don't think he can find any history in the liquor traffic that doesn't prove this. Some of the arguments that he used were 

to the effect that they are going to do it anyway so let's give them more which absolutely throws has other argument 

into a cocked hat. 

 

But I don't want to waste the time of the house, Mr. Speaker, I do have some figures, they are from across the line but I 

think they can be used as a guide and I am suggesting that the kind of outlets that the government is proposing now, do 

correspond very closely to what has become known as the speakeasies in the United States. 

 

Colliers magazine of 1952, and I'm going back that far because in . . . 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1413 

Hon. D. Steuart (Minister of Health): — 1932? 

 

Mr. Robert Wooff (Turtleford): — 1952, this gives the buildup. The Colliers Magazine of June 13th, 1952, John B. 

Starr makes this statement that there are 100,000 outlaw stills operating. 

 

Mr. Starr personally went with the revenue men to investigate them when they were raiding them and that the 

government at that time was losing $150,000,000 in taxes. One of the largest was a still that had cost $75,000 to build. 

It operated for nine months and made the operators $4,000,000. It was prophesied at this time that by 1958, the illegal, 

(and the member for Elrose, (Mr. Leith) used that naughty word of 'bootlegging‟) the bootlegging group had increased 

their business until it reached astronomical figures. In 1958, Saturday Evening Post, John Cobbler makes this 

statement; 

 

Last year in the states revenue men dynamited 9,511 illicit stills and dumped 209,058 gallons of liquor down the 

drain and they arrested 10,175 moon-shiners. 

 

This is not the prohibition days that the members opposite like to talk about. This is right at the present time. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I don't know about this. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That's the hillbillys. 

 

Mr. Wooff (Turtleford): — The outlets, Mr. Speaker, the outlets for this illicit liquor are the very type of thing that 

the government is now suggesting to put in in Saskatchewan. They are not the government-controlled liquor premises 

such as our liquor stores, but they are these premises operated by private businesses and private individuals and they 

provide the legal front for illicit liquor and Mr. Chairman, I am opposed to this kind of outlets. 

 

Mr. Leith: — On a point of privilege, Mr. Speaker, I . . . 

 

Mr. Wooff: — You can have the floor. 

 

Mr. Leith: — I must correct something that the hon. member, (Mr. Wooff) has just said. He said that these will not be 

government-controlled outlets. He is absolutely wrong because they will be government-controlled outlets. Controlled 

as to hours of sale and every other control that is exercised over a government liquor store. 

 

Mr. Wooff: — Mr. Speaker, I am sorry, but I didn't say that. I said the type of outlet in the States was not government 

controlled in the sense that our provincial liquor stores are controlled, and this type of outlet that you are now 

proposing even though there is supposed to be these controlling hours, is not the same type of safeguard that you have 

in the liquor store that is now the outlet. 

 

Mr. I. H. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I only want to make a few brief observations but as for all 

those members that spoke against these new outlets, I would recommend to the minister in charge that any of the towns 

in those particular areas, I recommend that he doesn't put any new outlets in there. I have three towns in my 

constituency that have already asked for some liquor outlets in their town, because these people feel that they shouldn't 

have to drive thirty or forty miles to get what people in the cities/such as Regina and some of the other cities can get by 

driving a few blocks. I think that the constituents of some of these members that have spoken so much against the bill 

will certainly register their disapproval of the thoughts expressed by these members and I would say to the minister 

who is bringing in this bill, that they should have had thirty or forty outlets let alone twenty because there aren't going 

to be enough to go around. 

 

There are many, many towns in this province that are going to need these types of outlets, particularly the border 

towns, because people are driving into Manitoba and Alberta to purchase their liquor when they should be purchasing 

our own liquor here in Saskatchewan. If we are going to control 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1414 

this sort of thing in our province, then we should make it available to these people without all the rigmarole that they 

have to go through to get liquor., They are going to get it anyway and so we might as well make it available to them. 

 

Mr. M. Breker (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my seat mate, I think I should come to his defence. I am not 

petitioning on behalf of the druggists. In my constituency, if any of these special outlets are going to be given, I would 

prefer the hotels and furniture stores in P.A. that is. 

 

Now in answer to the member from North Battleford, (Mr. Kramer) he said much pressure would be put on druggists 

etc. for buying of liquor. Now, it is true, people are continually asking for something that they can't have. And 

especially this is quite true for the druggist. The druggist is continually asked by the public for drugs which he cannot 

legally and morally have. There is the phenobarb. This is a terrific problem which the druggist deals with day in and 

day out. There are the many derivatives of benzedrine, there are the new type of pill, the birth control pill which we are 

continually saying 'no' to. There are the narcotics . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who is he talking about? 

 

Mr. M. Breker: — . . . and there are the many other antibiotic drugs. You wouldn't know. But I believe the druggist 

now is conditioned to the public's reaction to the term 'no' which he so often has to use nowadays. 

 

Now I have a little green booklet. This is really why I have come to the defence of the member for Elrose, (Mr. Leith) 

 

Liquor sales outlets inquiring committee 1958. 

 

The effects of outlets on consumption. The committee itself had pursued the question of increased consumption 

during its visits to neighboring provinces and States. 

It has been informed that in the nine month period following the introduction of new outlets, liquor sales in Manitoba 

had risen by some ten per cent. It was surprised to learn that the sales had also risen by ten per cent In Ontario, 

British Columbia, Alberta, and North Dakota and (more surprising still in the province of Saskatchewan). 

This ten per cent increase seemed to be general indicating that the consumption had moved responsive to other 

factors, since neither Saskatchewan nor Alberta had any new outlets in operation. 

Furthermore, the committee was informed that only three per cent of total sales of alcoholic beverages in Manitoba 

was made through the new outlets, and only between five and six per cent in Ontario and British Columbia where 

new type outlets have been operating for some years. 

 

Now it is interesting to note that people on this report or on this committee, were Messrs. Fines, Walker, McDonald, 

Berry, Neidbrandt, Wood, Webber, and Mrs. Batten and Mrs. Cooper. 

 

This is all I have to say. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Good point, Matt. 

 

Mr. S. K. Asbell (Bengough): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of vendor outlets, I represent one of the constituencies that 

we all note was notably in the news, that concerned the hamlet of Crane Va1ley. My interest in this bears something 

very close. I notice the people across the way, have had continuous speakers but there has been only one of the 

members from a rural seat. It would seem very indicative that those taking most interest are from city seats and this to 

me is rather irrelevant. It is a fact that they can phone up the liquor commission in the cities and get delivered to their 

homes, a quantity of liquor for thirty-five cents per bottle. 

 

If you would recall the contingent that came from Crane Valley into Regina here to visit the government, (there are 

only 100 people in the hamlet) but yet the community at large were so aroused that a seventy-car 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1415 

delegation came in in defence of their liquor stores. I might say that this is an isolated area somewhat. The member 

from North Battleford (Mr. Kramer) mentioned that these outlets be in the hotels but I must add, Sir, that these 

particular communities do not have hotels. They are too small for hotels and also too small for drug stores. That is the 

reason that a reputable service areas be allocated for the supply of liquor in bottles. 

 

I would add, Sir, that some of verbiage that come from across the way recalls the old-day rum runners. For a couple of 

the members over there, it makes very historic listening but today we live in an enlightened view and I say, one of 

broadened attitudes. For the rural people, this is a definite need and for one of the areas definitely involved, I speak in 

support of the motion, for vendor licensed liquor outlets. 

 

Mr. Broten (Watrous):: Mr. Speaker, I rise to oppose these amendments to the liquor etc. I think that we have gone 

through a period where people were quite satisfied with complete government control over liquor, mainly through their 

own stores. This has been quite satisfactory. Based upon a good argument that one of our members from this side of the 

house mentioned that the personal interest wasn't there in after hours or during the day. I think that this is an important 

factor in this. A very important factor. We all like to promote things which we can make milk money out of, extra 

money for extra effort. This seems to be an inherent human factor. 

 

I think that the government control is absolutely necessary to this degree unless you want to go to a different state in 

our society, and I think that we would rather not see this too greatly. I have two towns that I'm sure would like these 

new outlets, but I also realize that these two towns could have a government liquor store if the necessity really seemed 

to be there. They are towns that are nearly 1,000 population a piece. I think that we should be very careful on this in 

that it does open up all area where the temptation, I think, repetition is emphasis in this area, where people will be 

selling after hours by reason of local pressure, by reason of opportunity, selling in the same building and probably the 

same room as they dispense other products. 

 

For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I will oppose this and I think other means can be found to satisfy. Certain areas 

probably have legitimate reasons for outlets, but in these areas, the liquor board could subsidize a few of these areas 

where distances are a great factor. Therefore, I oppose the amendment. 

 

Mr. I. C. Nollet (Cutknife): — Just a very few remarks. Now, the arguments put forward by the hon. members 

opposite are that distances are great and .it will be more convenient to meet this particular problem by having drug 

store outlets. This argument is completely invalid. We can still have additional outlets without, of necessity, making 

liquor available to drug stores under a system in which the druggist will buy the liquor from the liquor board and then 

resell it again in bottle form. 

 

The act says it is to be confined to twenty. Well, heavens, this doesn't mean a thing, Mr. Speaker, in terms of meeting 

the kind of situation that has been held up as being a problem to the general public by the hon. members opposite. I 

anticipate, Mr. Speaker, it won't be twenty; it might be twenty in the act now; next year it will be forty; the next year 

after that, probably sixty. Is it going to effectively meet the kind of situation described by the hon. members opposite? 

Like my colleagues here, I think liquor, the sale of liquor in bottle form, should remain exclusively in the hands of the 

government as it has in the past, and surely we could open additional outlets under which the person selling the liquor 

would actually be a representative of the Liquor Board. This could be done without channelling this to the drug stores 

in the manner that is proposed on the bill. 

 

For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I am opposed to this legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I would draw the attention of the house, that the mover is about to close the debate, if anyone wishes 

to speak, they must do so now. 

 

Hon. A. H. McDonald (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, some of the arguments that have been put forward 

by some of my friends opposite are, I think, logical arguments, and arguments that bear some weight. But again, most 

of the statements that have been made are totally unrelated to the bill at hand. They have no connection. Some of my 

hon. friends have wandered from Mississippi to the 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1416 

North Pole and talked about situations that have no bearing or no fact as far as the province of Saskatchewan is 

concerned under its present legislation or as far as this province will be affected under the amendments that I have 

proposed: 

 

One of the main criticisms of my friends opposite has been that the government take as the main consideration, when 

considering outlets in Saskatchewan, whether they are profitable or not. Nothing could be further from the truth. What 

my friends opposite fail to see and fail to recognize is that citizens of this province are equally citizens whether they 

live in Regina or down in the small communities that my friend from Assiniboia referred to, and this government 

intends to treat people in Saskatchewan the same way whether they live in the large cities or in the smallest hamlet in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now it is true . . . 

 

Mr. Wood: — Open liquor stores. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — Now you have had your say, if you will just be quiet, you will know more about this 

bill when it goes into committee than you know on second reading. 

 

Now, my friends opposite have said that opening twenty outlets isn't going to solve this problem. The government 

know that, I know, and personally I hope that as time goes by outlets may be made available to our citizens whether 

they live in Regina, Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, or in one of the smaller towns in my constituency. 

 

Now, I can assure my hon. friends opposite that if they don't want any of these outlets in their constituencies, we are 

not going to force them. The member from Moose Jaw, (Mr. Snyder) said he had received letters and petitions. Well, I 

happen to be the minister who introduced this bill and I have yet to receive one letter in opposition, or one name on a 

petition but I have received hundreds of letters from people throughout the whole of the province of Saskatchewan 

asking for an outlet to be established in their community. 

 

Mr. Walker: — How many thousands. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — Pardon. 

 

Mr. Walker: — How many thousand? 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — We can table them if you like. Would you like them tabled? 

 

Mr. Walker: — Sure. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — When they settle down, Mr. Speaker, I will go on. Are you ready? Well, then we 

talked about the government being responsible for law enforcement. Mr. Speaker, no government can enforce a bad 

law, and we have had some bad laws in this province; laws that have permitted bootlegging, that have permitted the 

manufacture of alcohol, when my hon. friends opposite were in power. These conditions existed in Saskatchewan. One 

of my hon. friends said we were going to create conditions similar to speak-easies. I could have taken my hon. friend to 

a speak-easy in this city, when he sat on this side of the house. 

 

Mr. Wooff: — How do you know? 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — I know, because I have been there, and you probably have too. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Didn't see you. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — No, I didn't see you there, Bob, they threw you out just before I arrived. Then my 
hon. friends say that the Liberal government will be appointing people throughout Saskatchewan to dispense liquor 

through outlets rather than government liquor stores. A good government won't appoint any of these people. These 

people will be appointed by the Liquor Board under the exact same conditions and control as government liquor stores. 

They are not going to have one set of rules and regulations for 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1417 

government liquor stores and another set of regulations and rules for private outlets. Why, the province of Manitoba 

moved in this direction a few years ago and today more than fifty per cent of the outlets in the province of Manitoba are 

through business outlets rather than government liquor stores and their experience has been excellent, and as a matter 

of fact they are moving in this direction where they will have no government stores other than in the larger 

communities. 

 

I expect the commission-that will be paid to these liquor vendors will be ten per cent, the same as in the province of 

Manitoba. My friends opposite said, "Why this is going to increase the sales to minors". Do my friends opposite have 

no more regard for reputable businessmen across the province of Saskatchewan than to make this kind of a statement? 

Do you mean to tell me that the senior businessmen in Saskatchewan are not as reputable as far as their character is 

concerned as the people who work in the government liquor stores? Is this what you think of private businessmen? It is 

a shame and a disgrace that this thought should have been permitted to pass the lips of my friends opposite. 

 

Then they are complaining because we endeavor to protect the liquor business. But I want to refer my friends to some 

of their own legislation. Let us take a look at what the provisions are under the Liquor Outlet Act with regard to an 

individual who has sold or dispensed liquor to a minor. I am going to read it to this house, section 138 

 

No person shall in an outlet, sell, give or otherwise supply liquor to a person who is apparently under the age of 

twenty-one. 

 

Apparently under the age of twenty-one. Your act. But what does the Liquor Licensing, or the Liquor Act say. There is 

no mention of the word "apparently” and this is what we are asking to amend this act. So that it will be the same as this 

act. But you people opposite would put one interpretation on one act and the exact opposite in the other act. 

 

Why on earth shouldn't a person who has dispensed liquor unknowingly to an individual who is under twenty-one have 

the right to defend himself, Now you say under your act that he is guilty. He cannot defend himself. What sort of 

British justice is this? We have said that this individual ought to be given the opportunity to go into court and to defend 

himself. Look at the position you are placing these people in. If a young person under the age of twenty-one, comes in, 

and puts down an official document that states he is twenty-one, and the liquor vendor provides him with liquor, and he 

finds out afterwards that he isn't twenty-one, the liquor vendor is guilty. Why shouldn't the individual who presented a 

false document, be guilty? I suggest to you that he is equally guilty. 

 

Then they go on and they talk about private interests in the liquor business. When you were in the government didn't 

you have any private interests in the liquor business? Did you? What about all the people who run your beer parlours? 

Aren't they private business people? What about the people who run our beverage rooms? 

 

Mr. Walker: — They don't sell hard liquor. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — Well, then what about the people who run the cocktail lounges? Do they sell hard 

liquor? You walked into that one with your mouth open. 

 

Mr. Walker: — They don't sell it by the case, or by the bottle. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — Well, some of the people that come out of them, have bought it by the case, but they 

didn't have it in the case or in the bottle, they have it in their stomach, and I will refer to that a little later on. 

 

I want to refer to one or two other statements that have been made. The statement with regard to advertising. This 

government has allowed institutional advertising, and I have one of the ads in my hand. I think any fair-minded person 

who has taken the trouble to look at these ads couldn't complain about them. What about this ad? This is one of the ads 

that have been placed by one of the breweries in our province. It is a picture of an old river steamer going down the 

Saskatchewan River, and a story on Saskatchewan's heritage. Part of Saskatchewan's history, that I, as a citizen of 

Saskatchewan am proud to read and to learn about. The only reference 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1418 

to liquor is down at the, bottom, it says, “A public service message from Sick's Bohemian Breweries Limited”. I 

suggest that this is much better advertising than the type of advertising my friends opposite have sponsored. I have in 

my „ and one of your ads. This is in the Commonwealth. It has nothing to do with Saskatchewan heritage, nothing to do 

with people who have made a great contribution in one field or another to the province of Saskatchewan. But this is the 

type of advertising my CCF friends do, in the Commonwealth. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Picture of you. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — Yes, it is, and it is a disgrace to you and the party that you belong to. 

 

Mr. Heald: — Yes, and it is a disgrace to the province 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — Yes, it is a disgrace to the province of Saskatchewan; it is indecent, immoral, and a 

trick of a group of people just like the ex Attorney General, (Mr. Walker). That does it show? We will read you the 

facts and you are not going to like them by the time I am finished. What does it show? Progress under Saskatchewan's 

Liberals? Then they have a big bottle of booze that has blown its cork, and there is a cartoon of the Premier and myself 

hugging this bottle of whiskey. Well, you know the same day . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — Well, you know, don't laugh yet, because I am not finished. The same day an 

ex-minister that served in the previous government was involved in a certain accident here in the city, and left the scene 

of the accident, and the account appears in the same dated newspaper, October 24th last. Now he was fined $150 . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Drunk as a skunk. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — Drunk as a skunk. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — And I object, Mr. Speaker, to any political party, to any opposition in this house, 

peddling this kind of Garbage about the province of Saskatchewan. And what are they condemning? Down in the 

bottom, they make reference to 8. new winery in the city of Moose Jaw. Are you opposed to a winery in the city of 

Moose Jaw? Are you opposed to a winery in the city? Are you? If you are, speak up and say so. No, you are not. But 

you would like to have certain people who oppose liquor in the province, think that you people are opposed to that 

winery. But you haven't got the courage or the audacity to stand in your place and say so today. 

 

Then they refer to liquor advertising. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, is this liquor advertising? Is it? Does anybody in this 

house object to This type of advertising? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — If they do, Mr. Speaker, then I have lost all confidence in those people . . . 

 

Mr. Robert Wooff (Turtleford): — Do you . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — Now I want to refer to my friend who just got on his feet from Turtleford, (Mr. 

Wooff) and he talks about conditions where they have speak-easies, moonshiners, and probably the need for Elliott 

Ness to clean up the mess. What. brought about these conditions? What brought about these conditions was prohibition, 

the thing that you are preaching for. 

 

Mr. Robert Wooff (Turtleford): — No. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — And these conditions only exist . . . sit down. Have you got a question you want to 

ask? 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1419 

Mr. Wooff: — Yes, I'm just prepared to say . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — Sit down if you haven't got a question. 

 

Mr. MacDougall: — . . . wiskey in the Turtleford Hills. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — My friend opposite doesn't realize that every place on the North American continent 

where these conditions that he referred to exist today, is a state that is dry under prohibition. Is this what you want? Are 

you promoting prohibition? Are you in favor of the conditions that existed in Saskatchewan thirty years ago? Then he 

went on to talk and to leave the impression that if legitimate business places in Saskatchewan are allowed to dispense 

liquor under rigid government control, then we are going to have similar conditions in Saskatchewan that exist in states 

of the Union where prohibition is in effect today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is utter garbage, utter nonsense. This government intends to make similar services available to our 

people, irrespective of what area of the province they live in. That is exactly what this bill is designed to do. Some 

reference was made to brewery representatives. My friends opposite when they were in the government, allowed by 

agreement, two of these people to operate in Saskatchewan, illegally . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — . . . by agreement . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Sure, just looked the other way. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — But, Mr. Speaker, we intend to make this practice legal and to police it and if you are 

going to close your eyes to an illegal act how can anybody police it, but if you bring these people under the law, and set 

down rules and regulations under which they can operate, then you police it. I think that is about all I wanted to say, 

Mr. Speaker, but I suppose next week there will be another cartoon in this rag, predicting myself as a drunken 

alcoholic. I object to this nonsense. It is hypocritical, it is dirty, Mr. Speaker, and I would hate to be associated with a 

political party that had to stoop to such levels. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — Surely, surely my friends opposite at least some of them, have a little bit of decency 

in their souls, but sometimes I wonder. This isn't the first one. Signs have appeared on telephone posts, placed there by 

my friends opposite, I would be ashamed to be associated with such a group of filthy, niggardly, dirty, and then you 

oppose a decent ad such as this one, and yet you sponsor and pay for this. What kind of people are you? 

 

Mr. Walker: — Point of order . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — I am . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — Point of order, is "filthy" and "dirty" a proper word to use against members of this house, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — As I understood the hon. member correctly he was using it in connection with the advertisement, not 

against the members. 

 

Mr. Walker: — He said we would be ashamed to be associated with members on the other side of the house who 

would do this sort of thing . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Send for the Hansard record. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes, I will send for the record, I do think, I haven't seen the advertisement, but if it is as the member 

states, I suggest that it comes very close to an infringement on the privileges of the house. 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1420 

Mr. Walker: — That has nothing to do with it. Every member of this house is required to abide by the rules of 

parliamentary language, irrespective of his provocation, or irrespective of his feelings. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, now, I have taken this matter in hand in exactly the same way that I have done in the past, and 

I propose to continue to do so in the future. Now I wouldn't create an injustice to anybody. The record has been sent 

for; the record has been got; I shall consider the matter and I shall raise it at the correct time. The debate continues. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, if anyone would think this was a personal attack on them, I would be 

very surprised, and if they take it as a personal attack I hope they will accept my apologies if they took it that way. I am 

complaining about an organization to which my hon. friends opposite belong, printing this filth, malicious literature, 

and when I said I would be ashamed to be associated with such an organization, and so I would, and I ask them to 

examine their morals, and if after having examined their morals, 1 am confident that no such garbage is going to appear 

in this kind of a document. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, whose morals is the hon. member referring to, whose morals? There 

you are, Liberal thinker, on a point of order, I ask the hon. member to withdraw that statement. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, all I ask was that he examines his morals. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — I'll have the hon. member know that the morals on this side are probably on par and much better than 

his. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division and bill read the second time. 

 

YEAS — 31 
 

Thatcher Gardiner Romuld 

Howes Coderre Weatherald 

McFarlane McIsaac MacLennan 

Cameron Trapp Larochelle 

McDonald (Moosomin) Grant Asbell 

Steuart Cuelenaere Hooker 

Heald MacDonald (Milestone) Radloff 

Guy Gallagher Coupland 

Merchant (Mrs.) Breker Pederson 

Loken  Leith  

MacDougall Bjarnason  
   

NAYS — 22 

 

Brockelbank (Kelsey) Willis Baker 

Cooper (Mrs.) Whelan Wooff 

Wood Nicholson Snyder 

Nollet Kramer Broten 

Walker Dewhurst Brockelbank (Saskatoon) 

Blakeney Berezowsky Pepper 

Davies Smishek  

Thibault Link  

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Hon. J. W. Gardiner (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I could interrupt the proceedings for a 

moment to introduce a group of students from the File Hills Roman Catholic School from the Pepaqusies Reserve from 

the File Hills agency who have just come in. I want to congratulate them today for their courage in coming under the 

weather conditions that they have to visit the city and 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1421 

also to visit the assembly. I want to welcome them on behalf of all members and to extend to them, the hope that they 

will enjoy a very pleasant day in the city and a safe return home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. D. T. McFarlane (Minister of Municipal Affairs): moved second reading of bill no. 16 — An Act to amend 

the City Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, there are several amendments to the City Act, most of which are for the purpose of updating the 

act. All of them have been discussed and agreed to by the executive of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association and many of the amendments have been suggested by the cities throughout the province. Some of the 

amendments are required to bring this act into line with amendments which have been made to other acts, for instance 

the Secondary Education Act and the School Act. A good many of the amendments have been proposed by my own 

department in order to make the act more workable. And I would say that, for the most part, the amendments proposed 

cannot be called controversial. 

 

There is one amendment which I would like to enlarge upon, however and that is the one dealing with night opening of 

shops. The present provisions of this act would permit shops to remain open until 10 o'clock p.m. on Saturday unless 

the city passes a by-law to prohibit Saturday night openings. A good many of our cities have passed such a by-law and 

consequently many cities do not have any night opening. The amendment proposed in this bill would allow cities to 

chose Friday night instead of Saturday for night opening, however, when we get into committee,: propose to introduce 

an amendment providing for Thursday or Friday instead of Saturday for night openings. 

 

The situation is, therefore, not changed to any great extent in that the city still has control over whether there will be 

night openings, and in any case, there can be only one night opening, a Friday or a Saturday as designated now in the 

bill, and Thursday as I mentioned, I propose to bring in the amendment. This will be done at the discretion of the city 

council. My department has received submissions and reports from various groups interested in the question of night 

openings and there is a general trend favoring this change in the legislation. The city of Saskatoon has submitted a 

request to the government asking for night opening authority on a night other than Saturday. The Saskatoon Chamber 

of Commerce has submitted the results of a survey through our government, which survey was conducted between 

Board_ of Trade and Chamber of Commerce, and the results in the case in Prince Albert, North Battleford, 

Lloydminster, Melfort, Estevan, Yorkton, Melville, Swift Current, Saskatoon, are all in favor of letting the community 

decide what night the stores should remain opened. By way of background, Mr. Speaker, I would like to indicate to 

members of the legislature, that in 1962, the Department of Municipal Affairs sponsored a special advisory committee 

on closing hours of shops. Invitations were extended to a number of organizations to take part and the following 

organizations were asked to participate: The Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association; the Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural municipalities; the Canadian Association of Consumers; the Saskatchewan Farmers Union; the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour; the Retail and Wholesale and Department Store Employees Union; the Chamber 

of Commerce; the Retail Merchants Association; and the Federated Co-operatives Limited. 

 

The purpose of this advisory committee, was to look into the question of store closing hours with a view of ascertaining 

whether or not definite recommendations for legislation in this field were advisable. In addition to the question of store 

closing hours, certain other aspects were dealt with, such as the question of the variation in types of goods which could 

be sold outside of closing hours etc. The question of whether shop closing legislative power should remain in the hands 

of the provincial government as opposed to putting it under local control of cities, towns, and villages, and rural 

municipalities, was also one which concerned many of the groups taking part. The organizations taking part were asked 

to submit the briefs and recommendations to the committee in written form. For the information of members of this 

house, the following groups submitted briefs indicating they were in favor of at least one night opening; Retail 

Merchants Association; the Consumers Association of Canada; Saskatchewan Branch; the Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce; Federated Co-operatives Limited; the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association. It should be noted, 

however, Mr. Speaker, that the Retail Merchants Association since its submission to the committee in 1962, has made a 

further submission to the 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1422 

government that is now opposed to night shopping. However, we received a further submission about a month ago, 

from the Retail Merchants Association and they have asked for Thursday night opening only. The Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities indicated in its submission, that it desired all the power to regulate store closing 

hours, to be placed in the hands of local governments, namely the cities, towns, villages and the rural municipalities. 

The Saskatchewan Farmers Union indicated that there appeared to be many in favor of Saturday night openings, but 

that group made no comments on the question o! night opening on a day other than Saturday. The Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour and the Retail Wholesale and Department Store Union indicated that they were not in favor for 

night opening. 

 

The present proposed amendment does not allow opening on more than one night, but merely gives local governments 

the power to choose Friday instead of Saturday. As I indicated in the amendment that I proposed to bring in that would 

include Thursday, as a day for night opening. Since this committee was formed in 1962, the government has received 

requests from the following organizations for changes in present legislation. 

 

The city of Saskatoon requests to allow the city to decide whether stores can open Friday instead of Saturday night. The 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce want government restrictions on store closing hours removed so that local 

governments can decide whether or not there should be night opening and what night stores may remain opened. The 

Melfort Retail Merchants Association requested legislation allowing stores to remain open the night of their choice. 

The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, Collection division, want legislation amended to allow stores to remain open any night 

but Saturday. 

 

The Federation Co-operatives Limited has assured the government that its position is the same as in 1962 when they 

favored shop opening anyone night of the week. The Sherwood Co-operative Association in Regina agreed to one night 

opening on Thursday or Saturday. Since 1962, the government has had assurance that three groups want no charge in 

existing legislation, and these are of course, as I mentioned before are the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, the 

Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Unions and the he tail Merchants Association. However, as I pointed out, we 

had further submission from the latter group requesting Thursday only, for night opening. 

 

In Alberta and in Manitoba the matter of store closing hours is left entirely up to the local councils of the cities, and the 

towns etc. In British Columbia, the stores are permitted to open anyone night of the week. 

 

In conclusion, it can be said that there is a preponderance of opinion, favoring one night opening of stores, and the 

government takes the position that if one night opening is permitted, as it is under existing legislation, then the councils 

of the cities, towns, etc. should decide what night it is to be. Either a Thursday night or a Friday night or a Saturday 

night. 

 

So with this brief review, Mr. Speaker, as I pointed out, any of the other amendments, I feel can be best dealt with in 

committee, I move second reading of this bill. 

 

Mr. E. I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I will agree with the Minister of Municipal Affairs,(Mr. McFarlane) 

that most of the legislation which is brought forth in this bill, is not something that should be discussed in this debate. I 

think it can much better be handled in the committee. I also agree with him, however, that this clause, this section 

dealing with night opening of shops or the closing of shops, is something that does concern the people of the province. 

He has given up a very good resume of what has transpired on some of these things in the past. 

 

You will recollect that, Mr. Speaker, the legislation which we have had on the books, has largely been that which has 

been passed by the former Liberal government back in 1943, I believe it was first passed. There has been very little 

change in that regard through the years. I believe that by and large, the people of the province of Saskatchewan, have 

been quite well satisfied with this legislation. There has not been very much argument against it, except by some of the 

larger stores who have approached us in that regard, but the public at large has mot been too concerned, I think through 

the years. 

 

He has mentioned the fact, that we did set up a committee back a few years ago, to look into the pros and cons of the 

situation concerning the closing of shops. There was, at this committee, a good deal of discussion 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1423 

concerning the items that could be sold by those confectioneries and drug stores and such, that were staying opened 

after six o'clock. There was a good deal of trouble involved in this, because the law was being broken and when you 

have a law that is being broken as flagrantly is that one was, it was quite apparent that it was not a good law. So we 

endeavored to do something about this, and I am hopeful that the legislation we passed at that time did assist a great 

deal in clearing up the situation concerning confectioneries and garages, filling stations and such, throughout the 

province. 

 

But in regard to closing of shops generally, there was a good deal of disagreement. The minister has pointed out largely 

the basis which the division fell. We found that the Farmers Union, as I recollect I don't have the briefs before m_ now, 

but they were in favor of leaving the legislation as it was. They were not concerned that it should be changed. The 

retailers in their brief did mention the fact of having another night, but their brief was basically opposed to night 

opening, and as the minister has said, this has been their stand quite constantly throughout. The Retail Wholesale 

Employees Union also. So we have these three classes of people, the farmers, those who operated the stores, and those 

who worked in the stores, were pretty well unanimous that there was no need for any change in regard to the 

legislation, and this was the way that we decided to leave it at that time. I think that we were quite justified in making 

that decision. 

 

The argument has been advanced that this legislation should be taken out of the provincial jurisdiction and allowed the 

local governments to make the decisions in regard to the opening of shops. I would like to point out to you, Mr. 

Speaker, that this decision as to whether or not any town or city had night opening did lie with the city or the town. The 

fact was that the only night that was allowed was Saturday night. So whether or not the town or city did have night 

opening on Saturday night, has always ever since 1943, at least, lain with the town or city involved. It has always been 

a decision that could be made by the local people. The question before us is not that of whether or not it should be a 

decision by the local groups, but whether or not it should be extended beyond the Saturday night opening which has 

been allowed for the last some twenty years or so. This is what the argument is about. As far as I can see, it is whether 

or not, the night opening should be extended. 

 

Now I think there are quite a few good arguments against the practice of night opening of shops. One is, that if it is 

going to extend the hours of shopping in the community, it is bound to increase the price. If you are going to have 

extended services given and extended hours, you are going to find that the reaction in price is not going to be good. I 

think that basically one of the reasons why, especially the small shop owners are against it, is because it is quite 

apparently weighted in the favor of the larger stores and the larger centres. If a person is going down town shopping on 

a Saturday, on a Friday or a Thursday night, he is necessarily going to go to these larger places. He is not going to go 

wandering down any back streets or another street looking for a place to shop. These people who if they were going to 

endeavor to compete at all in the staying open at night are going to have to be staying there, burning electricity and 

providing services, providing staff, with very little patronage, while the great bulk of shopping that is being done, will 

flow to the larger department stores and the shopping centres. I think that this is in itself, is very unfair to the smaller 

operators and it is quite apparent that this legislation will benefit the larger operators more than the smaller ones. 

 

It also interferes with the hours of work and of the lives of the employees. It‟s a strong probability that split shifts will 

have to develop in order for some of these employers to be able to have employees in their stores in longer hours, if 

they are going to keep open for later hours in the evenings. I think this is very apparent a reason why it is opposed by 

the employees in these stores, and I think they have a very logical and legitimate reason for being opposed to the stores 

staying opened at night. 

 

I feel that when you size up these features, insofar as I am personally concerned, night opening is not a good thing on 

balance. This is something that we should oppose. I was opposed to this bill when it was stated that the allowance for 

night opening was to be increase from Saturday night to Friday night as well, and I am more opposed to it, when I see 

that it is also going to be extended to Thursday night. I think the principle of this is not good and I am afraid that I will 

have to oppose the principle of this bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear!  



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1424 

Mr. W. G. Davies (Moose Jaw City) — I would like in beginning to concur with what has already been said by the 

member for Swift Current, Mr. Wood) that this bill does not appear in many of its provisions to be controversial, as is 

evident a number of changes that are suggested have to do with the routine matters of civic and municipal 

administration. Of course, from year to year, we make a number of these changes. 

 

But on night opening, Mr. Speaker, it is apparent that this is a most disputed question throughout Saskatchewan and 

particularly in certain Areas. The Minister of Municipal Affairs, (Mr. McFarlane) has told us this afternoon of the 

support that has been given to the principles of night opening by some organizations. He has also told us about some 

organizations that dispute the idea. I think personally, on balance, if I were to take the merchants in my own city area, 

they city of Moose Jaw, a majority of the merchants would be opposed to night opening of stores. I think that following 

the decision of the government to introduce this bill, they have become resigned to that fact that this may go in effect 

shortly. They have made some representations to the minister, on Thursday evening opening as an alternative, but I 

would like to make clear that from all that I have been able to learn from discussions with the Retail Merchants Bureau, 

there is a general sentiment against night opening. The minister mentioned the fact that the Chamber of Commerce 

survey had indicated support in the city of Prince Albert, and some other areas of the province. I would like to point out 

of course, that the city of Prince Albert has Monday closing. It is likely that a number of the smaller merchants, and 

usually they are in the majority, would look with a somewhat jaundice edge on the idea of one night opening for 

shopping in that city. 

 

I don't think there is any question but that in the city of Regina a great majority of the people in business don't favor 

night opening. I believe also, that many of these merchants see this bill as a threat to Monday closing, because they 

believe that a deviation from the pattern that they have established and which is popular here in this city may lead 

eventually to the opening of a door that will be disastrous for employees and employer alike. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, insofar as the retail employee is concerned both organized and unorganized, they are almost to 

a man opposed to the idea of night opening of shops, probably for quite obvious reasons, some of which I will go into 

as I proceed with my remarks. 

 

Now, I believe, Mr. Speaker, and I think there is evidence for this, that the push for night opening of stores, is mainly 

channelled through the big chain store operations. I remember the first time that I saw a night operation in effect about 

ten years ago in the city of London, Ontario. I walked out of my hotel down the street to buy something, I forget the 

names of the department stores there, but I walked into one of them. It seemed that all the business was concentrated in 

this store and in the other large stores that were counterparts. Everybody was going to these to do their buying during 

the two hours during which they were able to shop in the evening. The smaller stores, the stores that dealt with men's 

clothing, ladies clothing, millinery or whatever, down the street, were practically deserted. 

 

I think there is a buyer psychology in night opening, a man, his wife, his family, go into one store. They want to as far 

as possible, do all of their shopping in that one concern, so they can get out of the store, can get home, watch television, 

get out to the beach, or whatever. So there is no doubting that the big store. owners like the night-opening principle for 

this particular reason, that they get the business. 

 

Now, I believe, the psychology of the day-time buyer is much more deliberate. He is more inclined to go from store to 

store to do shopping on a pretty discriminate basis, whereas the evening buyer is a buyer that is inclined to buy quickly 

and do his shopping as quickly as possible. Again, that this is a reason why the individual merchant protests against 

night opening and finds that it is harmful to his own operations. 

 

I have watched night opening since, in a number of cities where I happened to have been during the time that the stores 

were opened in the evening-hours. The conclusion that I have briefly tried to sum up, have been insofar as I am 

concerned abundantly confirmed. I don't think there is any doubt about it that the conclusions that I have arrived at are 

the ones that have been arrived at similarly by the Saskatchewan Retail Merchant Association. 

 

This body in briefs to the present Liberal government has made 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1425 

their stand very plain. They want no part of the night opening of stores. The minister has told us that they have 

supplemented their representations of last fall with a brief about a month ago. Incidentally, Mr. Speaker, I think it 

would be very helpful to the house were the minister to table the briefs that had been given to the government so we 

can see precisely the nature of the submissions that have been made. I think it would be fair to say this however, that 

the Retail Merchants are looking at things now, somewhat in this fashion, "its coming anyway, if it is coming, let's 

make some representation about the nights that stores will be opened" I believe that the minister said in this connection, 

that the organization had made representations for another night in the week, other than Friday. But I don't think there 

is any doubt that the opinion of the Retail Merchants' Association, a body of some 2500 businessmen in this province, 

still holds quite firmly against the idea of night opening itself. I have a copy of the submission that they made to the 

government last year, I note that they have included nine objections to the night opening of stores. They have said first 

of all, that, these are very brief, Mr. Speaker, I'll put them on the record, that there would be complete abandonment of 

regulated uniform hours of store operation. There would be an increase in commodity prices. There would be a sharp 

increase in the cost of operation for urban business places. There would be a heavy loss of small independent operators 

in all categories of trade. As a fifth point, there would be a serious loss of and closing of, a large number of business 

places in the radius of fifty to sixty miles of each urban area in the province. Chaotic hours would be the result as each 

urban area would endeavor to outbid each other. There has been no demand from consumers for a change in legislation, 

that organized retailers have not requested any change, that it is not in the public interest for a change in this act. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would agree that not all of these points that have been advanced by the Retail Merchants are not 

open to dispute. I think, frankly, that a number of them are argumentative. But at least a rather large body of retail 

opinion in this province has made their feelings very well known to this government and believe that those nine points 

sum up their thinking. 

 

I have said that I don't think there is any dispute about one thing, and that is that the employees of all merchants, small 

or otherwise, are generally opposed to the idea of night opening. The Retail Merchants, I should also go on to say, have 

told us that there is no reason to believe that with longer store hours there should be any noticeable increase in trade. 

They have pointed out to us, Mr. Speaker, that from 1951 to 1961,( a ten year period), Saskatchewan has had higher 

sales percentage than any of the western provinces and much higher than the Maritime provinces. The Retail Merchants 

point out that in 1963 independent merchants in the province of Saskatchewan, were able to attract sales to the tune of 

about sixty-eight per cent of the total amount of business. They clearly, greatly fear that with night opening, their share 

of the total amount of business is going to dwindle and decrease with night opening. 

 

Another point made by the Retail Merchants' Association is that there is nothing strange or inimical in the idea of a 

central government controlling store hours. They have told us that this control is effective in Great Britain, in Ireland, 

Germany, Sweden, Switzerland, Yugoslavia, France, Austria, Denmark, to name at least some of the countries where 

the central government controls hours and where apparently it has been decided from experience over the years that this 

is a wise course. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we might contemplate for a moment, the probable results of night opening in this province. We have 

already seen, I think to our cost, what has happened in the province with variable time elements, different communities 

on different times. We know how much annoyance this causes to our own residents and I am quite sure that this causes 

far more annoyance to the travelling public, especially to those from outside the province who come to visit in this 

province. I suggest that a considerable annoyance is going to exist with a crazy-quilt pattern of store hours across the 

province. I think this could be avoided by not proceeding with the recommendations that are made for night opening in 

this bill, especially with the growing tourist trade that this province is fortunately encountering. I think that we have a 

good reason not to go for what has been recommended in the bill. So I say again, that it seems to me that there is every 

reason to believe that we may have, because of this bill, a chaotic pattern of store hours and we should avoid it by not 

accepting these provisions. 

 

What is the situation for people that I think deserve real consideration when we look at this bill? What about the retail 

worker. May I first say, Mr. Speaker, that the retail worker today has a working pace on 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1426 

the job much more onerous than it was say twenty-five years ago. There is more efficiency in stores; more has been 

done; more thought has been given to patterns of work that are more efficient and the individual by and large is the 

person who is speeded-up because of these things. So that the individual employee today is likely to deal with more 

people, handle more transactions, than his counterpart of a quarter-century ago and consequently is a pretty hard 

working individual encountering more strain than I think was the case in yesteryear. His overall responsibility and the 

tempo of his work has increased in this experience. 

 

Anyone who has watched the operations, in a big modern store like, say, Safeways or Loblaws, must have been struck 

as I have with the kind of work and the tempo of the work that must be performed by employees in those concerns. I 

for one, would not very much like to have to work eight hours as a checker at one of the counter in these stores. I say 

that any extension, Mr. Speaker, of the total hours of opening in a store must inevitably, at some point, put more onus 

on the employee and limit the free hours when normally he would rest and he would relax. 

 

One of the things that will happen, I think, again inevitably, Mr. Speaker, is that we will have more employees on split 

shifts and split shifts may be a necessary evil in some parts of the economy where a continuous operation is necessary. 

It cannot be argued, however, that a split shift is a necessary thing in the retail trade. But split shifts will come because 

they have to come with the increased hours of work. So that you have an employee perhaps coming in in the morning, 

coming in in the afternoon, coming in in the evening, with breaks in between. that offer him no real opportunity of 

leisure or use of his time and where there is nothing but a consistent irritation for that employee. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that if the government insists on going through with legislation that I think is ill advised and 

undesirable, the least that should be done is to require that the retail employees' shifts should, in this new context, be 

continuous. He should not be asked to work for three hours, go away for two hours, come back for three hours, go away 

for another two hours and back for the remaining hours of his working day. I would like to suggest to the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs, (Mr. McFarlane) if he cannot be dissuaded, from the proceeding with the recommendations in this 

bill, to consider in addition to the amendments that he has already intimated will come before the house, some revisions 

that will make the lot of the retail employee easier in the respect that I have just referred to. 

 

I give you an example of a schedule of an employee who started work at 9:30, worked until 12, and was asked to leave 

his duties until 3:30, then to work until 9:00 p.m. This would still be an eight hour day but he would have in the whole 

process, a world of irritation, inconvenience and added strain. 

 

The Minimum Wage Act or Regulations, I think perhaps both, Mr. Speaker, do require in some parts of industry, that 

split shifts shall be confined to a certain number of hours. I do not think from my examination that these hours apply 

for the retail worker and so far as I know there is no control for the confinement of working hours for the retail 

employee. So that quite clearly, some redress is necessary if this bill is proceeded with. 

 

I also submit, that if the employee is required to work on night schedule hours, he should be reimbursed for overtime 

payments for hours after 5:30 or 6:00 p.m. on the same principle that workers who have evening schedules are given 

night bonuses. I think there is reason to say that overtime should be paid because of the extra strain and inconvenience 

to workmen regardless of what the situation. Because all night work, after all interferes with the enjoyment of the retail 

worker and his family and in his evening recreation and other amenities that may be available to him. If the government 

insists en legislating night opening, I think it is only fair and certainly to my mind, absolutely necessary, that there be 

some such protection inserted into the act. Too, Mr. Speaker, if the retail employee is asked to work during evening 

hours, there is reason to insert in the bill a provision that any stores undertaking those hours should be closed in the 

forenoon of the following day so that the person that has to work until 9:00 or until 10:00 o'clock in the evening, and as 

everyone knows it may be after that because of the tasks that have to be performed in the store after the store has 

closed, that worker, at least, would not have to be on the job the next morning. This to my mind, is almost a mandatory 

reform. I say that surely, considering the nature of night work, the government should undertake to so make changes 

that during the following day the persons that 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1427 

have to work during the evening would not have to work in the forenoon. 

 

Much has been said about the feelings of the consumer. If I were debating this matter with the minister, I would have to 

say that I think there is a lot of dispute among consumer circles about the need or the efficacy of night opening. Many 

consumers might say, if you put the question to them, "Do you want night opening?" "Sure, why not'! Because after all, 

the fact that there are longer hours of shopping doesn't particularly adversely affect or seemingly adversely affect, a 

consumer. But the legislation certainly does. The practice of night opening certainly does affect the persons who are 

directly concerned. 

 

I am sure too, that many consumers that have given some thought to it, recognize the points that have been made by the 

retail merchants and believe that the night opening hours, by their very nature, will increase the cost to the consumer 

and create a situation where eventually costs will go up if not at the first, at least after a time. Surely, in view of the 

mounting sales figures that the retail merchants have referred to in their brief, I don't think there is any disputing this, 

don't really show or suggest, a need that people don't have the proper time or sufficient time to buy or that in some 

major way their rights to buy are impeded. I think the whole history of the last ten years would dispute that assertion. 

 
There may be some inconvenience for some people it is true, in hours of work, that don't enter into the evening hours. But I 

think this has to be weighed with all the other factors, including the convenience and the well being of the thousands of 

people that have to give service to the public and are directly concerned. 
 
I say, that if independent business, the people who have made the representations that are in the retail merchants' brief, if they 

suffer as they say and feel they are going to suffer as a result of this bill, then results are going to be adverse to the interests of 

the consumer. Because just as surely as we press out of business, small merchants, or make it more difficult for them to 

operate, then just as surely we encourage inroads of monopoly institutions and enterprises and with that inevitably, after the 

quashing of competition comes higher prices. Finally, Mr. Speaker, I say that if this bill is proceeded with on the basis that 

there will be one night a week shopping, I say there will be inevitable pressures, not for one night but for multiple, for a 

number of nights during each week. Once the door is open, I think the pressures for more nights will creep in. 

 

It is said that these determinations are going to be made on a local basis by local vote. I hope that some members of the 

house will not try to draw a parallel here with the institution of Sunday sports. In the case of that kind it is largely a 

matter of attitude and opinion. But in the case of night-opening, it is a major question for the economy, for the rights of 

thousands of employees and their convenience and for the welfare and the rights of independent business people. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, also, and I am about to conclude, that communications of all kinds have opened up our province 

to a point where it is just a few hours between communities, by all the types of conveyance that we have been able to 

mobilize over the years. Local action on store hours is no longer realistic. One community by the very nature of its 

juxtaposition to another and the convenience of getting to another community, affects what goes on in another 

community. There is a good reason why the hours during which stores are open as between one community and 

another, should be the same. Long ago, when we didn't have this communication, I think there may have been more 

reason why the pattern of store hours might reasonably differ from community to community. But even a Liberal 

government in past years, let us not forget, instituted the legislation that we have before us: I think experience had 

convinced the government of the day and had convinced business people of the day, that a scattered, patchwork pattern 

of store hours in the province was not a good thing for the population at large and introduced elements which were 

really antagonistic to the public interest and to the interest of the people who were most closely concerned. 

 

Above all, in closing, I would like to say that the most important thing in this issue apart from the rights and welfare of 

the businessmen concerned, are the rights of employees. I would certainly hope, regardless of the other factors that I 

have mentioned here today, that some consideration will be given to the welfare of the employees. 

 

Mr. A. H. Nicholson (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, my colleague from Moose Jaw, (Mr. Davies) has 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1428 

covered the subject at some length but there are a few comments I would like to make and I would like to suggest that 

the minister hold this legislation for another year. I feel that if passed, it would have a serious effect on first, the small. 

merchants; secondly, the small communities, and thirdly; on the people who work in all stores. 

 

I am aware that the Retail Merchants Association did offer a second submission after it became clear that the 

government was determined to proceed with this legislation. The Retail Merchants had their annual meeting in Regina 

May 11th, after our government had been defeated and before the Liberal 'government took office. I have the 

resolutions which were passed at that convention and which were submitted to cabinet of the 16th of October. I think 

there has been no change in their general approach to this resolution which they passed unanimously at their May 

meeting, The Retail Merchants Association in Saskatchewan asked the government of Saskatchewan to continue the 

legislation governing store hours and asked that no change in the City's Act be made that would give municipalities the 

right to legislate store hours. They made this significant comment, which I am sure the minister will not challenge, that 

Saskatchewan has the best legislation respecting store hours in Canada and possibly in North America. They were kind 

enough to give the credit for the original legislation in this deal to the father of the Minister of Public Works (Mr. 

Gardiner). They point out that this legislation dealing with store hours was put on the statutes by a former Liberal 

government. In their submission, they point out that nearly all the important countries in Europe where .tourists travel 

on a year round basis, have found it in the public interest to have limited hours. 

 

In Austria, Monday to Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon; then they take a two hour rest and open from 3:00 to 6:00 and 

on Saturday from 8:00 to 2:00. There are similar hours in Belgium and Denmark. They have hours from 9 in the 

morning to 5:30 on week days and close not later than 2:00 on Saturday. France, Germany, Great Britain, and so all 

across Europe. In their brief they point out that the limited hours which exist in Saskatchewan were possibly a factor in 

Saskatchewan for 1963 leading all Canadian provinces in consumer purchases on a per capita basis. We had an average 

of 1,119. 

 

In their special edition, they point out that Regina led all the urban centres in Saskatchewan in the percentage gains in 

1964 compared with 1963. Regina had an increase of 12.99 per cent in sales in 1964 over 1963. Saskatoon was close 

behind but it is pointed out that the less than average crop in the Saskatoon area last year was a factor in our retail sales 

being down. They point out that the independent retailers and the department stores, the chain stores and co-ops, all 

reported increased sales. For the first time in our history, the sales in the urban communities exceeded sales in the 

rurals. There has been a development in this direction for the last number of years but in 1964, for the first time, the 

sales in the urbans totalled 50.54 per cent as compared with 49.46 the previous year. This statistic must be disturbing 

for the people from smaller communities. Should this legislation be passed, it is my considered opinion, that cities like 

Regina and Saskatoon, will probably benefit. People will be prepared to drive long distances to take advantage of the 

night shopping in these two larger centres. Smaller cities like Yorkton, Swift Current and North Battleford, will have a 

similar impact on the smaller communities thirty, forty or fifty miles away from these centres. 

 

So I suggest that members from the rural communities should have a careful look at this proposed legislation. I did a: 

poll in the city of Saskatoon in several of the shopping areas, I didn't call on the chains and the department stores, the 

organizations that had publicly committed themselves for longer hours, but without exception, the owners of the small 

stores in Saskatoon I visited felt that the passage of this legislation would be just one more factor that would force 

many of the smaller operators out of business. Apparently, their experience prior to Christmas when there is night 

opening, indicates that those who do shop at night, do their shopping in the large department stores and the small 

operators on Second Avenue and Twentieth Street and over on Broadway, find that they do have to keep open but sales 

are so limited that it doesn't pay to remain open the additional hours. 

 

I would suggest that having proposed the legislation, the minister might allow years to elapse to get further reaction 

from the people in the small communities, in the cities and see if the existing legislation should not be continued for an 

additional period. 

 

Somewhere I read that one of the officials of the Simpson Company indicated that Regina has been one of their most 

successful stores. Their 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1429 

return from their investment in Regina has been more favorable than in any other city in Canada. I am sure that the 

people in business in this province who have enjoyed, in the past year, sales on a higher per capita basis than in any 

other province in Canada, should have a careful look at the extending of the hours and changing the pattern so that 

stores might be open five or six nights a week as suggested in some of the information presented by the Retail 

Merchants Association, if this trend is encouraged by the present government. And the consumer must accept the fact 

that consumer costs are going to increase if the stores are required to be open longer hours and if an additional number 

of smaller operators are going to be forced out of business. This is going to have a serious impact on our smaller 

communities and on our small businessmen who have built up a business in our cities and are giving a service which 

the people in the particular community appreciate. 

 

So I ask the members on the government side of the house who have rural communities which are involved to have a 

careful look before deciding that they will support this measure before the house. 

 

Mr. H. H. P. Baker (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. L. P. Coderre (Minister of Labour) moved second reading of Bill No. 72 — An Act to amend the Gas 

Inspection And Licensing Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak to this bill, this act is being amended for the reason that it will facilitate the 

issue of licenses for a period of exceeding one year. 

 

At present the act states that any license issued will be good for one year and shall expire on December 31st, of the year 

of issue. 

 

The amendments will allow the department to issue a license for a period of up to five years duration. This in itself will 

cut down considerably in administration cost and after the act is amended, new licensing regulations then will be 

necessary. At the option of the licensee he may choose to take out a one year license or a five year license. The cost of 

the annual license will be the same as it is now. On the five year license, it will be reduced considerably, therefore both 

saving time and money for both the person who is buying his license as well as for the department. 

 

With these few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I move that the said bill be now read the second time. 

 

Mr. J. E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon): — Mr. Speaker, having had the opportunity to look over this is as the minister 

states, facilitating necessary or if desired, and I see no endorsement of the assembly particular bill, it appears that it the 

issuing of five year license if reason why it shouldn't receive the Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

Hon. D. T. McFarlane (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of bill no. 32: An Act to amend The 

Town Act. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, during the year the Department of Municipal Affairs received suggestions from towns and town 

solicitors, town auditors, other levels of local government, and also from provincial government branches regarding 

changes which should be affected in the Town Act so as to either make the act more workable in view of changing 

needs, and to make the act more consistent with other legislation related to this act. 

 

In addition, my own department, in dealing with the act, finds that year after year changes are needed in this and other 

municipal acts, for the same reason of bringing the act up to date and alleviating inconsistencies. 

 

The Saskatchewan Association of Urban Municipalities also offers suggestions in this regard and in this way, such 

municipal acts as the Town Act, are amended each year so as to keep abreast with the changing times. 

 

You will thus note that the majority of amendments here are of a technical nature. All of these have been discussed 

with a representative 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1430 

of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association and at this time I want to draw the attention of the house to one 

amendment that I should explain, it is the amendment concerning night opening of shops which I explained before in 

dealing with the City Act. This provision is the same as that being proposed in the City Act and it provides towns with 

the power to pass a bylaw enabling shops to remain open until 10:00 p.m. on a Thursday or Friday provided that if such 

a law I passed shops in a town cannot remain open after 6:00 p.m. on Saturday. I should clarify that by saying the bill 

before you, states Friday or Saturday, now by proposing or bringing an amendment proposing to change it to Thursday. 

 

The other amendments in the act, Mr. Speaker, are of a minor nature. As you know The Secondary Education Act has 

been amended last year and a number of corresponding amendments are required in The Town Act to bring it up to date 

with those changes. 

 

There are also amendments which bring some of the provisions of this act into line with existing provisions in the City 

Act. On the whole these amendments, I feel, can be dealt with more clearly in committee. 

 

I wish at this time to move second reading of this bill. 

 

Mr. E. I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, before the hon. member sits down, could I understand that he said 

just now that the choice between Saturday and Thursday and not between Friday, or Thursday? Or is it just Saturday 

and ask him a question? Did I for the municipalities was one night out of Saturday, Thursday? 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — When I bring in the proposed amendment in committee, it will be the same as the City Act, 

Thursday night or Friday night, in place of Saturday night. 

 

Mr. Wood: — Thursday or Friday in place of Saturday. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Thursday night or Friday night or Saturday night. 

 

Mr. Wood: — Yes, just one night out of the three. There will be just one night out of the three? Mr. Speaker, I agree 

with the hon. minister (Mr. McFarlane) again that the section in this act which we are liable to have some argument 

concerning is that on night opening. It is undoubtedly true that this section dealing with night opening, although it is 

worded the same as what it is in the City Act, may have a different effect upon the towns in some ways to what it will 

upon the cities. They can't say that because it is passed in one that it should be passed in the other or vice versa. But I 

think basically the principle is largely the same. 

 

I would think, Mr. Speaker, that we would do well to deal with this in regard to the cities an_ that we would like to see 

the argument as it is developed, as it has been presented and will be presented in regard to the City Act before we are 

asked to vote in regard to the Town Act. 

 

There are some more things I would like to say on this and if I may, I would like to have leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Minister of Labour) moved second reading of Bill No. 73 — An Act to amend The Electrical 

Inspection and Licensing Act. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak to this bill, the Inspection and Licensing Act, the provisions are incidentally, 

identically the same. I think the matters can be best dealt with in committee. 

 

With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I move that the bill be now read the second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

The assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. A. H. McDonald, (Moosomin) for 

second reading of Bill No. 60, An Act to amend 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1431 

The Saskatchewan Government Insurance Act 
 

Mr. M. P. Pederson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I want to say at the outset that I am rather pleased that we had this 

break between adjourned debates this afternoon and this evening. Seeing that it was the same minister introducing both 

bills, I wanted to put as much space as I could between this debate and the bootlegging discussion that was going on 

this afternoon. 

 

When this debate adjourned the other day, I believe the hon. member from Hanley, (Mr. Walker) was speaking at some 

length on the implications that are involved in the passage of this act. I made some notes of some of the comments that 

he made at that time that I would like to deal with, which of course, have a direct bearing on the principle involved in 

this bill. 

 

One of the first things, Mr. Speaker, that I want to mention is a statement that was made and has been made on several 

occasions. In discussing the rates that are applied by the Government Insurance Office in connection with these specific 

areas that we are discussing in this act. The insurance for schools, hospitals and so on, I find, Mr. Speaker, from my 

experience, that these rates that are set by the Government Insurance Office are in many cases are not necessarily the 

best rates obtainable. If that were the only reason for repealing this section of the act, I would say that perhaps it's not 

too valid. But I believe that the Government Insurance Office, just as any other insurance office, should be required to 

be as competitive as possible. This was an act that was set up originally, I believe, to act as a check or at least this is the 

concept of the government insurance that I like to hold a check on these other so-called outside companies who are 

inclined to charge exorbitant rates and I have nothing but praise for the job that the Government Insurance Office has 

done in that regard. 

 

But I believe that over the years, there has crept into the concept of government insurance, something more of a 

competitive company with certain built-in monopolies and this is the area that I take strong exception to. 

 

I believe that it is necessary, in order to provide equitable rates for various areas of insurance, that it is as necessary for 

the Government Insurance Office to be put in the position of having to compete as anyone else. If I understand the act, 

and I believe that I do, the Government Insurance Office will not be precluded from bidding and obtaining insurance in 

these various areas even though the prerogative of having sole recourse to this area of insurance is denied them. This is 

the first point that I want to make. In passing this act, in supporting this act, you take into account the fact that the 

Government Insurance Office must be competitive or it should not be entitled to the business placed by these various 

institutions. 

 

Another point that I want to make that I think is of extreme importance, and that is the tendency, with monopoly, to 

ignore the various pressures that are exerted in a field that is competitive such as other insurance companies are 

subjected to. There is a tendency amongst employees of any firm who do not have, shall we say, a direct pecuniary 

interest in the insurance company, to allow themselves to fall into the leisurely habit of applying rates that are not 

necessarily in line or in keeping with the modern trends. In other words, a monopoly tends to ignore the pressures that 

are exerted on other companies to stay competitive. 

 

Speaking again of the principle of compulsion, I believe that if you were to follow the arguments that were advanced 

by my hon. friend from Hanley, (Mr. Walker) the other day, if you were to extend these to their logical conclusion, then 

it would be right and proper to suggest that these monopolies should be extended into many fields of endeavor. This, in 

my opinion, can only lead ultimately to complete government ownership of all of these types of situations with the 

monopolistic control by the government. I don't believe for one minute that even most of the most ardent supporters of 

that type of theory in some areas on this side of the house believe that that is a good thing. I most certainly do not and I 

would do everything I could to halt that type of a trend. I believe that all governments in this country provincial and 

federal have been over the years. a bit guilty of taking over the right of people. In other words) legislating in various 

fashions in such a manner that they indicate they know better. That they can provide things better than people can for 

themselves. I don't subscribe to that. 

 

I believe that people should be given a right of choice. I believe that these various organizations that are mentioned 

specifically in the 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1432 

section that is being dropped from the act, each of them have a board of some type running them. I believe that they 

should be given as much autonomy as possible. 

Now there was a good deal said the other night about the question that taxpayers will no longer benefit. If you were to 

argue, Mr. Speaker, that the profits that would be made by these institutions placing insurance with the government 

would in fact come hack to the people through the amount of money turned over to the public purse, you could make 

out a fairly substantial case. But this completely ignore another section of the economy. I happen to have been in the 

insurance business for several years, and I know how difficult it was to compete with an insurance office who had a 

virtual monopoly in many fields. In other words, many fields were excluded from the area that individual agents could 

seek business in. I know, on many occasions, it was very vexing to try and obtain fairly substantial amounts of business 

so that myself and many other agents who were dependent on this business, could make a decent living. I believe that 

this will give a chance to private individuals, literally thousands of individual families in this province, to increase their 

salary each year and to make a better standard of living. 

 

I am not at all convinced, Mr. Speaker, that there will be a very direct benefit to many, many people. I recall in the days 

when I was in the insurance business, as I say, when it was extremely difficult for some of us who perhaps were not as 

friendly on occasion to the government of the day, to obtain a license to sell insurance for the Government Insurance 

Office. I am sure that one of the hon. members from Saskatoon will know exactly what I am speaking of because we 

tried on numerous occasions to obtain a license to sell under the Government Insurance Office and were denied. 

 

Now, I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this type of monopoly is removed from the act, that we will have taken a step in the 

right direction. It is not good enough merely to say that big companies will benefit from this act because this is not 

necessarily so. If the Government Insurance Office quote a rate that is extremely competitive, that is in fact lower than 

outside companies will offer, then they will get the business of that I am certain. I believe that in order to deserve this 

business, then the Government Insurance Office should be in a position to compete with these outside companies. I 

don't think it is good enough that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan who support these various institutions that are 

mentioned in this section of the act, that we're dealing with, should be asked to pay on some occasions, more than is 

normal. 

 

I was just thinking the. other night when the hon. member from Hanley, (Mr. Walker) was speaking when he was 

talking about the question of leaving these areas under the jurisdiction of the Government Insurance Office, leave this 

compelling force in existence, I was just wondering how he would like it if the government were to say that in a certain 

area of law, as an example, all transactions dealing with land transactions, etc., that people had to take that business to 

the lawyers in the Attorney General's department. How he would like that if a very large area of income was cut off for 

him? I rather think that he would be one of the first to object and I think that the same principle can be applied here. I 

think the principle of what is good for the other man should also be good for yourself, and if it doesn't apply then I 

think that it is wrong to express the attitude that it should apply in this case but not on me. 

 

I heard something mentioned about the trucking industry. I was interested in what the hon. member for Shaunavon, 

(Mr. Larochelle) had to say about that, because this too is an area of industry that I have participated in a few years ago, 

and I can recall the annoyance that I felt in being compelled to buy insurance from the Government Insurance Office 

and find that not only were rates not competitive, contrary to what some members have claimed, but were in fact much 

higher than what individual companies could have provided that insurance for me if I had been permitted to buy outside 

of the Government Insurance Office. 

 

I recall too, the amounts of deductible under those insurance policies were prohibitive, as I recall, and this is a few 

years back, I believe it has changed since, but at that time, on a semi-trailer tanker, I believe the deductible on the 

standard insurance was $500 on the vehicle, and, if I recall correctly, it was $300 on the cargo insurance. If you have 

the misfortune to upset a load and lose a quantity of fuel, you had a $800 loss to pay before you start. With that type of 

deductible, Mr. Speaker, I felt that they should have been able to offer an extremely cheap insurance but I found that 

this was not so, because I did have companies quote me rates that were somewhere, at that time, and this was quite a 

few years back, 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1433 

somewhere half of what I was paying to the Government Insurance Office. 

 

Now, I am not suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that this in itself again, is sufficient reason for supporting this bill but I am 

saying, Mr. Speaker, that the type of compulsion that was embodied in this act and which this bill before the house 

seeks to remove, is the type of thing that leads to the situations that I have mentioned. The lack of competition does not 

make rates competitive. The lack of competition does not allow the Government Insurance Office to seek business at its 

own level and provide that restraining effect on other insurance companies that I am sure it would have if the other 

companies were given a free hand to seek business. 

 

Very naturally, Mr. Speaker, from the remarks that I have made here this evening, you will conclude that I intend to 

support the bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must draw the attention of the members of that fact that the mover of the motion is about to close 

the debate. If anyone wishes to speak he must do so now. 

 

Mr. W. D. Davies (Moose Jaw): — Mr. Speaker, I want to say just one or two brief things about this bill, rising I 

think, mainly out of the remarks of my friend from Arm River, (Mr. Pederson). 

 

I find, Mr. Speaker, myself feeling that we are in a rather ironic situation when people speak of monopolies in terms of 

the Saskatchewan' Government Insurance Company. After all, what are the monopolies in the insurance field if you 

like, or if you want to speak about people that are in a position to exercise a monopoly. Surely it is not the public 

insurance concerned that we are talking about but the giant insurance companies that dominate the scene so much in 

North America. Institutions that have reserves of billions of dollars and have a great deal of control and indeed, over 

time, have exercised some pretty overt control. This is a matter of record, I'm sure I don't need to spell it out to the 

members of the house this evening. 

 

What we are talking about restricting is a public insurance company in a province with a population of less than one 

million people. Something that has been built up rather uniquely to serve the people of the province and which I think 

has been successful in a large degree in reducing the amounts that people have to pay for insurance coverage. 

 

Now, I don't pretend to be an expert. I don't have any figures here this evening. There may be other members that do. 

But I can remember the amounts that I paid for insurance on my house and furnishings before the Government 

Insurance Office came into being. I know there were much more than the rates that are paid at this time. I know that the 

fact of the existence of the Government Insurance Company caused rates, both here and in other provinces to decrease. 

I think this is really the fact that we face here this evening. 

 

I can't see how we can call a public concern of this kind a monopoly in the sense of the word that I understand 

monopoly, because this institution here has done more to reduce the impact of the big insurance companies in this 

province than any other institution that I know of. 

 

My friend from Arm River, (Mr. Pederson) spoke about the extra good that this might do for insurance agents. I want to 

remind the house that there are seven or eight hundred people who are employed by S.G.I.O. who do, I think, a very 

good job as employees of this concern, whose livelihoods are perhaps also at stake. I don't know what effect this bill 

will have on the Government Insurance Company. I'm sure it won't have a good effect, I personally can see: little the 

matter with municipalities and schools having to insure with a public concern when they themselves are the recipients 

of very large grants and very large sums of money from the senior government. Anything that goes to weaken the 

public insurance concern in this province, at this time, is not, I think something that spells good for the people of this 

province. After all, the people of this country Canada and the United States have had their little battles with the 

insurance concerns of which I speak. 

 

One talks about competition. How much competition do we honestly think exists between insurance companies today? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Lots. 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1434 

Mr. Davies: — There may be some. I think it is more apparent than real. Certainly if you go out and buy life insurance, 

the differences are very small indeed and it is a fact that if one buys group insurance that you can get rates that are very 

much better than rates that you buy for individual insurance. This is the same kind of principle, of course, that is 

employed in the Saskatchewan Government Insurance operations. 

 

All I can see here, Mr. Speaker, is that we are going to somehow reduce the impact of the public insurance company 

that has done so much for the people of the province, not only in respect of insurance coverage itself, but in the 

investment of the premiums that it has been able to get from the people of the province in their insurance for all sorts of 

public endeavors. These monies are not invested outside of this province and I remind my friends opposite that they 

must acknowledge this because almost daily this is the story we get in the advertisements of the S.G.I.O. over 

television and radio. They must admit that this is a fact. 

 

I don't want to say more than this at this time. But I honestly cannot look on our public insurance company as a 

monopoly. I think that it has done a good deal to defeat monopoly. I think it has done something to create competition. 

I feel that while rates may be advanced now from the private companies which may be low at this time, when they have 

eliminated the public competition, you will see those rates shoot up and that in the analysis this will not be good for 

anyone. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must again draw the attention of the members to the fact that the mover of the motion is about to 

close the debate. 

 

Hon. A. H. McDonald (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, at the outset, I would like to thank the member for 

Arm River, (Mr. Pederson) for his comments during this debate. I am very, very pleased to see that he supports the 

government in their move to remove certain compulsions from the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Act. I want to 

refer to some of the remarks that he made a few minutes ago, later on in my address. 

 

But before I do that I want to refer to some of the remarks that we listened to here a few evenings ago from the member 

from Hanley, (Mr. Walker). He was talking about whether our schools, hospitals and other institutions that receive 

grants from the provincial government would carry adequate insurance or not once this section is removed from the 

Government Insurance Act. 

 

I want to remind my hon. friends opposite, and the member for Hanley, (Mr. Walker) if he were here, that it is not up to 

the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office or the legislation that is now before this house, to compel our hospitals 

and schools to carry adequate insurance. But I do submit, in regard to hospitals and schools that legislation that can be 

used and is used to see that public institutions such as hospitals, sanitoriums, schools do insure, is found in the Hospital 

Standards Act and the School Act. In the event that these acts are not strong enough, or do not spell out definitely, that 

adequate insurance is carried by such institutions, then I would suggest that this house should strengthen those acts to 

see that the public institutions that receive grants and that provincial governments do carry adequate insurance. But I 

want to repeat, that this is not the concern of the Government Insurance Office. This is the concern of this legislature 

and if members are concerned, then I suggest that they look at these two particular acts. 

 

A great deal has been said with regard to the investment of the premium income from the Government Insurance Office 

in Saskatchewan. This is true. All of the premium income from the Government Insurance Office is invested in one 

type of investment or another, here in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, there are many private insurance 

companies, who invest more money in Saskatchewan than they receive in premiums from Saskatchewan. So the 

Government Insurance Office is not alone in this field. I know of some insurance companies that have investments in 

Saskatchewan that would total 125 per cent of the premium income from their Saskatchewan business. I think that with 

the business climate that exists in Saskatchewan today that many of these insurance companies are going to have more 

money invested in Saskatchewan than they take in premiums from this province. So this, despite the fact it is one of the 

ads used by the Government Insurance Office, we are not the only company to invest our total earnings, and I want to 

repeat that many of the other insurance companies, invest more than their premium income here in the province. 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1435 

The member for Hanley, (Mr. Walker) when he spoke the other night, said that this may save the school boards and the 

hospital boards some money, but after all, it will go into the provincial coffers or into the Government Insurance Office 

and they will get it back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why on earth should a provincial government tax school boards and hospital boards through excess 

premiums on insurance. As the member for Arm River, (Mr. Pederson) mentioned, I think it is about time that we said 

to our school boards and our hospital boards that we believe you have the ability to place your insurance wherever you 

think it ought to be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. A. H. McDonald (Moosomin): — Why should this legislature tell any school board or any hospital board where 

they have to buy their insurance? Surely to goodness the people that represent Saskatchewan on these boards, have the 

ability to make this decision. Everyone on this side of the house, and the government believe that they have this ability 

and ought to be given the opportunity to use it. 

 

Then my friend from Hanley, (Mr. Walker) concerned himself with competition that would boil up. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

we in the Liberal party and I am glad to see that my friend from the Conservative party represented in this house, have 

some confidence in free enterprise and in competition and I want to say to this house that the Government Insurance 

Office today, as a result of free enterprise methods, is writing more business than has ever been written in the life of the 

insurance office. In the month of February last, the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office wrote forty per cent 

more business than they did in the month February back in 1964. Forty per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. A. McDonald (Moosomin): — The reason for this, is because of free enterprise methods and doing away with 

monopolies. Any company that has to depend on a monopoly to survive, sooner or later, will stagnate and die. This is 

what will happen to the Government Insurance Office if you continue to insist that certain insurance be placed with that 

office and with no one else. I also want to tell this house that during the month of February, this last month, the 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office wrote 606 new and renewal policies more than they wrote in the month of 

February, a year ago. My friends opposite, had they remained in power, had they continued to insist on the type of 

business that the insurance office has been operating under, up until last May 22nd, that insurance office would have 

withered and died on the vine. But by bringing into effect, private enterprise principles, principles of open and free 

competition, the insurance office, I want to repeat, is doing forty per cent more business than it was when you were in 

office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't believe that by removing section 15 from the act, that this office will write less business. I think in 

total, they will write more, but they will write it in open competition, without subsidy, without protection, without 

monopoly and I believe that this is to the best interest of the insurance office and in the best interest of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to say a word now about cargo insurance in answer to some of the questions that have been posed by my friends 

opposite. Back in mid-summer the board of directors of the Government Insurance Office were considering the 

compulsory cargo insurance. At that time, I thought that the truckers themselves should tell the government of the day 

whether they want to continue under compulsory cargo insurance, or whether they want to be given the freedom to buy 

this insurance, wherever they see fit. And I wrote the Saskatchewan Truckers Association, and they wrote back, 

informing that their annual meeting would be held later in the year, and that they would discuss this matter at their 

annual meetings and advise me at that time. After their annual meeting, I was made aware of a resolution passed by the 

Truckers Association, that they wanted this compulsory cargo insurance done away with. It has been down away with, 

and as a result of it, Mr. Speaker, again, I believe because of the free enterprise policies . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — . . . in the insurance office today, we're writing more 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1436 

truck insurance than we have ever written before. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Cleaning out the socialists. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — You don't always gather business to your door because of compulsion. The majority 

of times I think you drive more weight away than you compel to buy from you. Some of my friends opposite the other 

evening were saying that I did not believe in removing this section, that this had been thrust upon me. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I must admit that it's true. This has been thrust upon me by the people of Saskatchewan, the great majority of 

the people of Saskatchewan asked the Liberal party to remove this compulsion from the Government Insurance Office, 

and I think any government that is worthy of governing will meet the needs and the wishes of the people of this 

province and that is exactly what we are doing. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — True, true. 

 

Mr. A. H. McDonald (Moosomin): — Then my friends opposite said they believed in as much freedom as possible. 

Well, there isn't much freedom that is possible apparently, because according to my friends, they not only believe in 

compulsion as far as insurance is concerned, the statement that came from the member for Hanley, (Mr. Walker) if you 

were to follow it to its ultimate conclusion, would mean that the state would market every product that is marketed in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

He suggested that we should go into the clothing business, the food business. Do you think that the government ought 

to do all of the business in Saskatchewan? Do you believe this? If you do, then I don't think that anyone on this side of 

the house and my friend representing the Conservative party, (Mr. Pederson) and the vast majority of the people of 

Saskatchewan, want to have any part of it. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Have the whole province broke. 

 

Mr. A. H. McDonald (Moosomin): — I want to come back to review the remarks that were made by the member for 

Arm River, (Mr. Pederson), when he talked about insurance rate. It's quite true, Mr. Speaker, that insurance rates in 

Saskatchewan today, are much less than they were several years ago. This is not only true in Saskatchewan, this is true 

virtually all over this continent, that insurance rates are lower today than they were fifteen years ago. Then he went on 

to attempt to tell this house; it was because of the activities of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office, that 

insurance rates were down in California . . . 

 

Mr. Davies: — . . . down . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — . . . in Texas, or Tennessee, or Alberta, Mr. Speaker, or . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Or Montana . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, this is ridiculous even to suggest it. Then in addition, Mr. Speaker, any 

insurance company whose activities are confined to the province of Saskatchewan can write cheaper fire insurance. 

Why? For the simple reason that your loss ratio in Saskatchewan, is lower than it is in any other province in Canada, 

and has been for many, many years, even before the Government Insurance Office ever came into existence. 

Fortunately we do have a rather low loss ratio in Saskatchewan compared to some other parts of Canada, and this is 

another reason that we have been able to write cheaper insurance then some of our competitors who had to set their 

rates on a dominion wide bases. 

 

I think in conclusion, all I can say is that I do appreciate the support of the member for Arm River, (Mr. Pederson). 

Sometimes he votes against us; sometimes he votes with us. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Forgive him. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — This time he is going to be right. I hope some of my socialists friends across the way 

will also have a change of heart and support it. Support us on legislation that is improving the business of the 

Government Insurance Office. My friends seem to have the future of the 

 



 

April 2, 1965 

 

 

1437 

office at heart, but I can only repeat, that if we are doing forty per cent more business, we must be doing a better job 

than you were. We ask for your support, so that we can increase the business above February and I am convinced that 

the removal of this section, will allow us to write more insurance than ever. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division and bill read the second time. 

 

YEAS — 31 
 

 

Thatcher MacDougall Romuld 

Howes Coderre Weatherald 

McFarlane McIsaac MacLennan 

Boldt Trapp Larochelle 

Cameron Grant Asbell 

McDonald (Moosomin) Cuelenaere Hooker 

Steuart MacDonald (Milestone) Radloff 

Heald Gallagher Coupland 

Guy Breker Pederson 

Merchant (Mrs.) Leith  

Loken  Bjarnason  

 

NAYS — 14 

 

Brockelbank (Kelsey) Thibault Link 

Cooper (Mrs.) Willis Baker 

Wood Whelan Snyder 

Nollet Dewhurst Pepper 

Davies Smishek  

 

 

The assembly adjourned at 10:00 p.m. 


