



















































Hansard: February 26, 1965


695 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

16th Day 
 

Friday, February 26th, 1965. 
 

The assembly met at 2:30 p.m. o'clock 

On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mrs. Marjorie Cooper (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are proceeded with I would 

like to say a word of welcome to a group of grade seven and eight students from Wascana School. They are here 

today with their teacher, Mr. Sandiss. We want to thank Mr. Sandiss for bringing them and to say that all the 

members of the house welcome them and we hope that you will enjoy your afternoon and find it informative as 

well as a pleasure. 
 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I would like to ask the house to join 

with me in welcoming a group of students from Birch Hills high school, along with their teachers, Mr. Tony 

Jerika and Mr. Leonard Alm, their bus drivers, Mr. Stan Hunt and Mr. Ernest Lowe and their chaperone, Mrs. 

Muriel Cromoday. They drove in 200 miles this morning. They started by visiting the Steel Mill, and they will be 

spending most of the day in town. I am sure that the house wants to join in welcoming them, and we hope that 

their trip will be an informative and a happy one. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Walter Smishek (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I would like to extend a 

welcome to the grade eleven and twelve students from the St. John Bosco High School, which is located in my 

constituency. The students are here with their teachers, Mother Catherine and Mr. Brandholm. I would hope that 

their stay in the assembly this afternoon will be pleasant and also informative. I am sure that we all greet them 

with a pleasant welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I would like to draw the attention 

of the assembly to the grade eleven and twelve students from Hazlet High School, who are visiting the house 

today. The Hazlet school is very close to the border, between Swift Current and Maple Creek constituencies. 

Some of these students are from the constituency of the hon. Minister of Mineral Resources, (Mr. Cameron). I 

can't tell you which one is which, but these are fine young people, and we are very pleased to have them with us 

today. They have been visiting the Steel Plant this morning and they have had an extensive tour of the city. We 

are very pleased to have them with us this afternoon. I know that the members of the house will join with me in 

wishing them a very profitable and pleasant time with us today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are proceeded with, I would 

like to extend my greeting and the greetings of the house to the grade seven students from Vibank School in my 

constituency, who are seated in the upper rows of the west gallery. They are accompanied by their teachers Rev. 

Mother Rita and Rev. Mother Catherine, and they are also accompanied by five drivers and the wives of these 

drivers from Vibank. They are having a very interesting and useful day in the city. About an hour ago, they cut a 

broadcast tape to be sent to Sillong, India. They are also going to tour the buildings and they are, of course, going 

to observe our operations here this afternoon. Most of these students come from my constituency, however, some 

of them do come from the neighboring constituency of Qu'Appelle-Wolseley and my colleague, the minister of 

Municipal Affairs, Mr. D. McFarlane, wishes to join with me in extending this special greeting to them. 
 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

696 

ANNOUNCEMENT OF APPOINTMENT OF WM. R. PARKS, 

SASKATCHEWAN FOREST PRODUCTS 
 

Hon. J.M. Cuelenaere (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day are 

proceeded with, I would just like to make a very brief announcement that William R. Parks, will be appointed to 

the position of General Manager of Saskatchewan Forest Products. 
 

Mr. Parks, presently director of Forests, will be given leave of absence from his department to accept the new 

appointment. He attended the University of Toronto where he obtained his Bachelor of Science degree with 

honors in Forestry. Prior to his appointment as Director of Forests in Saskatchewan in 1956, Mr. Parks was plant 

forester and Woods Superintendent with the Ontario Paper Company and District Supervisor of Quebec North 

Shore Paper Company in Quebec. 
 

I should like to make the announcement, which follows the previous one that Mr. Frederick H. Hewitt, who is 

presently the Assistant Director of the Forestry Branch, will be appointed the Acting Director of Forests. Mr. 

Hewitt has been with the Forestry Branch of this department since 1930. Both men had distinguished careers in 

the RCAF and Mr. Parks was awarded the DFC. 
 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Kelsey) (Acting Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the 

minister of Natural Resources, (Mr. Cuelenaere) the reason for giving Mr. Parks leave of absence from the 

Department of Natural Resources, to become Manager of the Saskatchewan Forest Products. Is it that you do not 

expect to maintain Saskatchewan Forest Products as a corporation for very long? 
 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Mr. Speaker, I think I made it very clear yesterday that there were no intentions of disposing 

with the Timber Board. The Timber Board will continue. The reasons for giving him leave of absence is that it 

was his request when he applied for the position. 
 

QUESTION — RE CKCK RADIO BROADCAST 
 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Before the orders of the day are proceeded with, I would like to ask the 

Premier a question. 
 

On February 11th, CKCK Radio Station during the re-broadcast of the proceedings of the house that evening, cut 

off in the middle of a member's speech and didn't broadcast any of the speech on the next speaker who was on the 

supposed list for broadcast time on the air. 
 

Two members, the member from Redberry (Mr. Michayluk) and the member for Saskatoon, (Mr. Nicholson) sent 

notes to the chairman of the Select Standing Committee on Radio Broadcasting of Selected Proceedings. This was 

done at the suggestion of the Premier, I believe, or the Leader of the house, when it was raised before, and I want 

to know what has been done in respect to this. Have these proceedings been re-broadcast after being advertised at 

another time or was nothing done about it at all? 
 

Hon. W. R. Thatcher (Premier): — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member didn't give me notice that he was going 

to ask this today, and offhand, I cant answer him now, but I will try and have an answer for him on Monday if he 

will be content to wait until then. 
 

QUESTION RE AUTOMOBILE INSURANCE RATES 
 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I wonder if I might direct a 

question to either the Premier or the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. A.H. McDonald). I wonder if they could advise 

when the new schedule of rates under the Automobile Accident Insurance Act is likely to be announced? It is 

ordinarily announced at this time of the year or even a little earlier. 
 

Hon. A.H. McDonald (Minister of Agriculture): — They will be announced, I expect, within the next few days. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER RE: GIFT FROM BRITISH GOVERNMENT 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

697 

Mr. Speaker: — Before the orders of the day are proceeded with, I would like to inform the house that this 

morning the Deputy British Trade Commissioner for the British High Commissioner on behalf of the government 

of Great Britain, presented to the legislature of the province of Saskatchewan a very remarkable and I think a very 

outstanding picture of Sir Winston Churchill, together with an eminent group of contemporary British Statesmen 

who surround him in this picture. I accepted the picture on behalf of the legislature and expressed our very sincere 

thanks through him to the government of Great Britain. The picture will hang in my office for those who wish to 

see it until such time as a suitable caption to the government of Great Britain is prepared and then it will go to the 

library and be hung there where I am sure that it will become one of the most interesting and honoured 

possessions of our province. If anyone wishes to see the picture before it is hung in the library, they are most 

welcome to do so, by coming to my office. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 

The assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Thatcher, "That Mr. Speaker, do now 

leave the chair", and the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Blakeney, and the proposed sub-amendment thereto 

by Mr. Michayluk. 

 

Mr. Martin Pederson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, before carrying on with the debate and the remarks that I 

was making last night, I would like to associate myself with the words of welcome that have been expressed to the 

students in all three galleries this afternoon, and I wish them a very successful and interesting day. 

 

I am pleased too, Mr. Speaker, that we are proceeding this afternoon with a somewhat more normal routine than 

was evidenced yesterday. I found myself, Mr. Speaker, yesterday afternoon, somewhat in the position of the 

fellow who slept in a church a good deal and his minister was determined to teach him a lesson. He waited until 

this fellow was sound asleep and then he very quietly said to the congregation, "All those who want to go to 

heaven, please rise," and of course, the congregation rose to a man except my friend who was sleeping. Then in a 

very loud voice he said, "Everyone who wants to go to the devil, please rise," and my friend became very startled 

with this loud nowise and all he heard was "please rise" and he leaped to his feet, looked around rather sheepishly 

and said, "well, Preacher, I don't know what it is we are voting for, but it looks like you and I are the only ones for 

it". I hope, Mr. Speaker, that we may be able to proceed in the ensuing weeks with something of the decorum that 

has been shown in this house today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pederson: — As I said, Mr. Speaker, I want to carry on with the thoughts that I was expressing last evening 

in the budget debate, but before doing so, I also want to express a word of appreciation and thanks to members on 

both sides of the house for their courtesy in relinquishing to me some radio time so that my party's position could 

be placed before the public in general, as well as this house, and I want to tell them how very pleased I am that 

they have shown me this extraordinary kindness and courtesy. 

 

I have searched the estimates, Mr. Speaker, expecting to see some substantial cost savings, as predicted by hon. 

members opposite when they formed the government. Well, there have been some savings all right. Let us 

examine just a few of them. I noticed that the budget for Industry and Commerce was reduced from $1,020,850 to 

$554,050, almost one-half, but let us not be fooled by this, it wasn't all saved. 

 

You will notice that $60,000 is now included in the Executive Council Budget for office of the Agent General 

was included in Industry and Commerce in 1964-65. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the department could be reduced 

as drastically as that, why it wasn't eliminated altogether. When you can reduce a budget by almost one-half in a 

department, it makes you wonder if this wouldn't be possible. 

 

In the field of co-operative development, we notice that there have been some slight reductions in some of the 

other departments. 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

698 

Co-operation and Co-operative Development, Highway Traffic Board, Local Government Board, the Provincial 

Library, Public Service Commission, and some others. But again, let us not be fooled. Looking at the figures for 

the Public Service Commission budget for 1964-65, we see a figure of $365,450. Now to adjust this figure for 

comparison purposes we must deduct $116,750 with respect to employee contributions to group insurance 

premiums, leaving a net budget of $248,700. this would then show a saving of $23,400 in 1965 and 1966 as 

compared to the previous year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I notice that the employees contributions to group life premiums are estimated at $228,000. It would 

appear to me, Mr. Speaker, that the Provincial Treasurer was able to reduce the Public Health budget by slightly 

less then $6,000,000. No wonder he was able to reduce the Education and Health tax, the government was able to 

do this, Mr. Speaker, because they had already, as has been suggested in this house, increased Hospitalization and 

Medical Care insurance. Now, I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that no one is going to be fooled by an obvious tax shift 

such as that. 

 

I want to refer again to the Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Department budget, which has been increased by 

$220,000. I say, Mr. Speaker, that this government will be faced with an ever-increasing social welfare cost if it 

continues on the course suggested in the budget, and I mentioned that last evening. The expenditure on education 

is an investment, not an expenditure. The government obviously considers that highways are more important than 

the people of the province, because tremendous attention was directed towards building of new highways. Equal 

attention should have been directed towards providing greater funds for education. Well, you know, we could 

have the best highway system in the world, but it wouldn't necessarily contribute increased revenues to the 

treasury. Education would pay off in two ways, Mr. Speaker; one — in increased revenues to the treasury, as a 

result of higher earning power of people, and two — in reduced welfare costs because of high employment at 

good wages. 

 

Social aid costs are estimated, I note, at about $13,400,000, an increase of about $500,000. It is significant that the 

costs shared by the municipalities have also increased, which puts a further burden on the municipal taxpayer, and 

this is the area which I referred to when I felt that this government should have allocated greater quantities of 

funds to the cost of education so that some of these tax loads could have been shifted from the municipal 

taxpayer. 

 

Now, I want to turn, Mr. Speaker, to the field of development, and I want to state first of all something of the 

Conservative record in this province, and their attitude towards development and government aid in development 

of industry. I refer back to June of 1961, Mr. Speaker, and as has been mentioned previously in this debate, the 

question of IPSCO, when the then Leader of the Opposition, now the Premier, was wrong and stated so 

emphatically, and I refer to a Leader Post headline of June 12th, which says: "Pederson Backs IPSCO Aid". This 

is the attitude that our party has always taken, but I want to refer specifically to the new heavy water plant that 

was announced the other day, and I want to state that our party still believes the government, if necessary, offer 

aid in the form that was offered to establish industry such as the heavy water plant. But I am concerned, Mr. 

Speaker. In the agreement that was signed we see a five year guaranteed contract for the sale of the heavy water, 

and as the hon. minister said, some verbal assurance for further five years. The taxpayers of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, through SEDCO are financing on a twenty-five year lease-back arrangement. Now, we could be left, and 

I am not saying wee are going to be, but we could as taxpayers, be left with a large investment in a big plant in a 

market that well might be diminishing. It seems to me, that in following the course of nations who have large coal 

supplies, that many of them are looking seriously towards the possibility of erecting plants such as this, and would 

hope, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier and his government would be very cautious in offering aid in plants such as 

this to make certain that there is a reasonable opportunity for success for these plants in the future. I have every 

confidence that this heavy water plant that has been announced does have a good future, but I would caution the 

government not to rush in without 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

699 

carefully searching the field first of all to make certain that there is some reasonable chance of success. 

 

I feel that it is necessary in this regard to draw the attention of the house to a situation that we find ourselves in as 

a nation on the federal level insofar as the uranium industry is concerned. We have invested as taxpayers, millions 

of dollars in the uranium industry of Canada, and we are in serious trouble today with massive plants and vast 

investments sitting on our hands, and we are desperately stockpiling and trying to find new methods to make 

those investments pay off. I would respectfully suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier when he says, as he does 

on page 10 of the budget debate, that he will make and guarantee loans to industry during 1965 on a massive 

scale, that he will temper that with a little bit of caution so that we will not be led, as it were, up the garden path. 

 

Now, I want to leave the question of development and turn to the question of highways that I mentioned in 

passing a few moments ago. I believe that the government was wise in increasing the amount of expenditure on 

highways. I was particularly pleased with their announcement in regard to shifting the work of building highways 

and so on into the private industry field. I believe that this is sound principle and again, I would hope that it would 

be done slowly and gradually so as not to upset the industry supplying machinery and heavy equipment, and the 

question of supplying trucks and cars and so on for this industry. But I believe that it can be done if it is carried 

out on a sound and reasonable program. I am particularly pleased, of course, to find that No. 19 highway in my 

constituency from the junction of 15 to Elbow will be oiled in this year's program. This was a piece of highway 

that, in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, needed it very badly. The dust situation there was extreme. Heavy traffic 

servicing the South Saskatchewan River Dam had made travelling on that piece of highway extremely hazardous 

and I am delighted that the minister has seen fit to include it in this year's program. 

 

Now, in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to this government that there can only be a real saving to the 

taxpayer if the government reduces administration costs in providing various services. The government is to be 

congratulated, in my opinion, for having appointed the Johnson Commission, and it will be interesting to all of us 

I am sure to learn just how many recommendations the government intends to implement and how much 

government spending will be curbed. For a government that promised to curb government spending, it is a 

surprise to see the largest provincial budget in the history of the province, and I would urge the government to 

reduce non-essential spending as far as possible, and increase spending in areas of education and economic 

development. 

 

Now, turning to the question of the sub-amendment, Mr. Speaker, I have noticed in the estimates that there are, in 

fact increases in providing technical education, modest ones, but we can't have everything. I would suggest on 

those grounds, Mr. Speaker, that I cannot support the sub-amendment. However, in referring to the amendment, 

Mr. Speaker, our party have advocated, and will continue to advocate, that we must look very hard at this question 

of supplying greater funds for the field of education with its far-reaching effects on the municipal tax load, and I 

find, Mr. Speaker, that I must support the amendment and in doing so, I find that I cannot support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Leonard M. Larson (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, I want to associate myself with this house in welcoming the 

students that have come here for a short while this afternoon. I hope that their stay will be educational as well as 

to serve them in the future as guideposts. I hope that we don't discourage them too much from going into politics. 

If this is the case, I hope the lessons they learned here will not have caused this. 

 

Now, I want to say a few words to the people of Pelly constituency at this moment. It is my real pleasure to be 

able to serve Pelly. We have a great number of mixed nationalities, nationalities from every corner of Europe, 

United States and other countries. We have learned to live together, thriving and prosperous community. It is my 

humble privilege to be able to serve them, and on their behalf do what I can in this legislature. I want to say that I 

am at your service and any time that I can assist you, I would welcome you to call on me. 

 

Now I want to congratulate the hon. Provincial Treasurer on his 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

700 

preparation and eloquent presentation of the budget. At the outset, I was rather full of anticipation and to say the 

least some real curiosity. After all, because of the promised tax cuts, as well as the loud rantings about fat and 

waste of the former administration, I anticipated some really earth shaking and far-reaching announcements, both 

as to tax cuts and efficiencies in administration. I was full of curiosity to see who would be the major benefactor 

in these anticipated announcements. Now, that the speech has been made and all the plums allocated, I must say 

that my curiosity and anticipation has brought little more than disappointment, misgivings and a great deal of 

confusion. 

 

I want now, Mr. Speaker, to address myself to a few of my misgivings and disappointments. I, too, did some 

comparisons of the budget, I looked at the projected tax picture where the money is to come from. I looked at 

where we have had decreases and where we have had increases. I found a rather interesting picture. Sales tax, of 

course, is decreased, some $4,000,000; gas tax again a decrease of over $1,700,000; mineral tax, a minor decrease 

and in spite of all the benefits that this was supposed to bring, I find it hasn't decreased to any appreciable amount, 

$148,000. Then we look at some of the increases; I find the individual income tax, an increase of $2,900,000; 

corporation income tax decreased of $783,000,000, and of course, the tobacco tax and I like to smoke once in a 

while, an increase of $3,400,000. 

 

Now, these are some rather substantial shifts in the tax picture of the province. I want to address myself to a few 

of these misgiving and disappointments in some of the figures that I have just read out. 

 

The hon. Provincial Treasurer, in his speech, again reiterated the Liberal creed, of its dedication, yes, almost 

enslavement to the cause of private enterprise and of profit-motives philosophies. He had not been on his feet 

more than a few minutes when he expressed his passionate belief and profound admiration for this kind of society. 

To me, these passionate eulogies make us think that this kind of propagating can only serve to sound a clear bell, 

or a warning, of the things that are in store for us, not only now, but for future generations, and your young people 

yet unborn. This kind of passionate pronouncement to me can only mean that the for-sale signs have gone up on 

everything that the people of Saskatchewan have come during the last twenty years to look upon as their own and 

to be preserved for future generations. Such things as timber, natural gas, public utilities, transportation and even 

power generation, as well as public-owned enterprise apparently are going on the auction block. To make matters 

even worse, the hon. Treasurer does his best to discredit and belittle the value of what the province owns. Even 

the most novice of businessmen knows that if you have anything for sale, you don't first go around discrediting 

and belittling what you have to sell. 

 

It's very interesting to note at this point that there seems to be some confusion and some misunderstanding in the 

ranks opposite with regards to this sell out. The Premier was most emphatic and clear in his speech of his 

intentions of Saskair. With a weak qualifying "if" he said this. "The operation of Saskair will be discontinued". Of 

the bus company, he said the government will ask and expect management to show a better net return for 1965; of 

the timber board he said this and this is a real gem, "from this time forward, the company will be expected to 

stand on its own two feet", Saskatchewan government printing he said, "will be expected to meet competition in 

the future", of Saskatchewan Guarantee and Fidelity, "the government would like to sell this company, failing 

this, we will consider winding up the whole operation," Wizewood, these statements, some more real gems, "This 

operation has been in trouble since its inception, last year had depreciation been taken, losses would have 

approximated $295,000". Then he said, "In actual fact, the plant is in serious financial trouble and since by far the 

largest equities are owned by the government, we're trying to dispose of it". This is first-class advertising for a fire 

sale. Then the Premier says this in concluding his remarks on government owned enterprises and utilities as well 

as resources, I quote, "I say again, that this government believes that most competitive business should be left to 

private enterprise, in the years ahead, we will act accordingly". 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, following these outbursts by the Premier, we have seen minister after minister stand up in his 

place and state that the various assets of his department will not be liquidated. The Minister of Highways, (Mr. 

Grant) said, "Contrary to reports, government-owned highway machinery and crews will continue as before". I am 

very glad that he said this. I think he is on the right track . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — For this year. 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

701 

Mr. Larson: — Oh, agree on it first. 

 

Mr. Willis: — Get together on it, Ross. 

 

Mr. Larson: — The Minister of Natural Resources said last night the timber board would continue to operate. He 

went on to some considerable trouble to explain the better rates that were being received for forest products. The 

Minister of Public Works, (Mr. Gardiner) likewise has assured this house that his department will continue to look 

after its responsibilities much as before. 

 

Now, I ask you, Mr. Speaker, is this not confusion. We on this side would like to know who is right. Who is really 

saying what will happen? The people of Saskatchewan as well have a right to know. You don't just do this kind of 

thing unless of course you have a very good reason. It would seem only fair to ask what these reasons are. I shall, 

therefore, be looking forward to getting the true answers. I am just as sure that the people of Saskatchewan are 

equally interested in knowing why this for sale sign has gone up in this province. 

 

As we proceed through this debate, it's becoming more obvious to me that the sign will soon read "Fire Sale". I 

question the right, Mr. Speaker, of a minority government having polled less votes than the official opposition, 

arrogantly proceeding to disregard and to disrespect the interests and the rights of the people and resources of this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larson: — I too noted with considerable concern, the order of priorities as outlined in this Liberal budget. I 

feel that, department by department, expenditures as outlined in the estimates clearly establish the priorities. I find 

it rather ironic that the Liberal party who are so verbal about their love for the farmers, should ear-mark this group 

of people as a target for reduced expenditures. In the capita expenditure in the Department of Agriculture, if the 

$400,000 item provided for land acquisition, which is a new item, is deducted, I find reductions in almost every 

field. Under ordinary expenditures, the same story is true. A few calculations will show that a total sum $672,000 

of agricultural expenditures have got the meat axe. Indeed some valuable services have been eliminated; 

conservation and water rights development branch as well as agricultural machinery administration are two in 

point. To offset this glaring deficiency, the use of tax-free purple gas in farm trucks is proposed. 

 

I want to make a few comments on this purple gas deal. It certainly will be welcomed by those who benefit from 

it. It of course fulfils one of the Liberal election promises and as such, I will have to give them credit, Mr. 

Speaker. Aside from this, there's not too much else that can be said for it. I have to agree with the member from 

Hanley, (Mr. Walker) that the idea has been ill-conceived and not planned to an extent where the ultimate success 

of the program has been assured. In the first place, Mr. Speaker, it does very little to solve the basic problems of 

agriculture. If hon. members opposite think that this kind of tid-bit will help farmers, they really display the very 

limited knowledge they have of the agricultural problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larson: — This kind of piece-meal program can be likened to putting a silk patch on a pair of ragged old 

overalls. The other point I would want to make, Mr. Speaker, is the net effort of the program. Allowing the 

farmers the use of purple gas in farm trucks serves in the most undesirable manner possible. It simply categories 

and grades the people of this province. It sets the farmers who own and drive trucks into a special category ;or 

class. It puts them on a preferred list. This kind of treatment will certainly not be well accepted either by the 

farmers themselves or by their friends in the local industries that service the farmers. 

 

I do not particularly relish trying to explain to my many friends who drive small trucks in the performance of their 

jobs, why farmers are different and why they are special. Why these people who must use their trucks to earn their 

very living should be discriminated against, I would like to know. Why the small carpenters, plumbers, 

electricians, and small business men and many others, who depend on small trucks for the living do not deserve 

the same treatment, will certainly have to be explained. My contention is that this kind of special segregation 

treatment is not preferred 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

702 

by farmers especially coming from the Liberal party with its farm record at Ottawa and now in Regina. 

 

The need of most farmers is improvement in roads to drive on. Grading and gravelling are of utmost importance. 

Farmers never object to the payment of their fair share of costs of running the country. It is obvious however, that 

this special privilege of driving trucks on purple gas is going to cost more than is gained. Aside form the 

Department of Agriculture's estimate, it is only necessary to again look at the estimates of the Department of 

Municipal Affairs to find what these costs will be. Under the ordinary expenditure I find that even with an 

estimated increase of over $1,000,000 in federal grants, the estimates are only slightly over last year. Under 

municipal road assistance authority, I find that the figures are even worse. In the assistance for the market road, 

grid, the estimates are down by $100,000. The best that the government could do in the other expenditures was to 

hold the line. 

 

In the overall picture, the total estimates in this department are down by a little over $156,000. This, Mr. Speaker, 

I contend is not good enough, when everyone knows the costs to municipalities can only go one way and that is 

upward. This can only mean one of two things. Road construction will have to be curtailed or the taxes on land 

must go up. This is a classic example of tax shifting for political purposes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about highway construction, and in doing so, I will say a few words 

about work in my own constituency. I want to thank the hon. Minister of Highways, (Mr. Grant), I wish he was in 

his seat, for the work that he has proposed in the Pelly and Kamsack areas. I sent a note to him the other day to 

thank him and I want to do so again today. The regarding and gravelling of no. 5 highway from Kamsack to 

Canora is welcomed. The oil treating of no. 49 highway, Pelly to Stenen is again very necessary and very much 

appreciated. Of particular interest to the people of the Kamsack and the people living to the south of the town, is 

the building of a new bridge over the Assiniboia River on no. 8 highway. This bridge has been a real bottle-neck 

for traffic for some time. I would have welcomed announcement of construction work on no. 8 highway however, 

I ask the minister to keep this in mid for future programs. All in all, the highway program is a satisfactory one. It 

is obvious, it has been placed high on the priority list. I think that this is to be desired; I think it is necessary as 

future patterns of travel will certainly indicate that we need more highways. 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — Liberal programs. 

 

Mr. Larson: — I was disappointed however, that grid roads and municipal roads were not afforded the same 

treatment. In Saskatchewan there is a real danger that we may find our highway and our local people's programs, 

municipal programs, completely out of line, out of scope. This certainly ought to be watched for. I would have 

appreciated very much if we could have had some assurance that we would have had more assistance to 

municipalities by way of grid roads and by way of market road constructions. This is something that will have to 

be taken into account. The minister however, revealed a very important point the other day. He said it was one of 

the highest dollar budgets in the history of the province. Then he said in the same breath that there may have been 

more cubic yards of earth moved as well as more miles built in other years. This of course proves that at today's 

costs, it requires more money to do the same amount of work. Again I say that with a stand-pat program for 

municipal road work and assistance, the municipalities must raise money from taxes or do less work. This puts 

them on the priority list, when I would say they should have gone up. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to look a little further at priority. I have scanned the estimates and made some 

comparisons as I said before. I find it really interesting to see where the emphasis has gone and where the 

meat-axe has been applied. Let's look at the estimates and note where cuts have been made or expenditures 

entirely wiped out. Heading the list of course, is the centre for community studies, Embury House, AMA and 

following these are cuts in expenditures for Co-operation and Co-operative Development, Industry and 

Commerce, Labor, Municipal Affairs, Municipal Road Assistance, Public Works as well as the Saskatchewan 

Diamond Jubilee, to mention only a few. Public Health, after substantial head tax increase of $20 per family, has 

barely been able to hold its own. Not too much doubt here as to where the emphasis or the priorities lie. I have no 

particular quarrel with the departments that show increases in the expenditures; in this time of affluence there is 

no real reason why some of the basic departments should have had their estimates cut. If this is the range of 

priorities that this government 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

703 

establishes, then I feel they're sadly lacking indeed. 

 

With regards to tax priorities, the reduction of the sales tax presents some very interesting prospects. Keep in 

mind the fact that the sales tax is paid very largely on major items, cars, TVs, radios, fur coats as well as similar 

luxury items. These items, Mr. Speaker, are bought largely by the people in the upper income brackets. This to me 

is a fair distribution of this kind of tax. On the basis of the 1961 DBS figures, a total of 142,203 families in 

Saskatchewan; 44,923 or 31.5 per cent had annual family incomes of under $3,000. These families all paid their 

$20 head tax; they will make very little savings form the reduction in the sales tax. These people don't buy cars, 

TVs, or luxury items. Again, Mr. Speaker, the tax shift goes to the wrong group of people. The principle here 

seems to be unto those who shall be given, and from those who have not, shall be taken. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larson: — Again, I draw attention to the priorities. I do not agree with them and I feel they are very wrong. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about the education. Kamsack has over the years, recognized its 

responsibilities in this field. We have some of the best schools in the entire province, a junior high, a collegiate, 

several public schools and we certainly are prepared and interested to expand into the education field. Our tax 

load is at a point where we cannot bear much more. If we are to have the kind of developments, increases and 

improvements, in education, there will have to be more money made available from outside sources. This budget, 

with its increases, with its absorbance of last year's unspent funds, with its loan for university expansion certainly 

does not provide the basic needs for the kind of education, for the kind of training and the kind of world that our 

young people are going to be faced with, in the futures. To this end, the budget has not met the required needs and 

to this end it is very, very short and it leaves very much to be desired. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I will comment on the use of surplus funds. These funds have accumulated over the 

years. This is sound and practical business sense. There are many reasons why these surpluses should be 

preserved. There may be just as many reasons, why they should be spent. One of the best reasons to preserve 

surplus funds, is to have them available for emergencies that can come in many unknown ways and at many 

different times. One of the better ways it could have been spent would have been to expand health services such 

as drugs, dentistry or optometry, at least a start could have been made in this field. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, could well be done even at the risk of becoming hypochondriac. The poorest reason I can think 

of, for spending or depleting surplus funds, Mr. Speaker, is to hide a deficit and present a bold front that is very 

much out of reality. This budget consists of tax shifts, priority shifts, and tax emphasis on the wrong people, as 

well as concealing deficits. It is therefore obvious, that I cannot support the motion, however, Mr. Speaker, I can 

and I will support the amendment and the sub-amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. F. Larochelle (Shaunavon): — Mr. Speaker, the other day when I goy up on my feet for just a few minutes 

to second the motion on rail abandonment, I congratulated you very shortly, Sir. I want to elaborate a little more 

on this today. I must say that I am very happy about your appointment as Speaker. It is an honor well-deserved. 

Knowing you for your fairness, I do not think that this house could have made a better choice. As to your fairness, 

Sir, you have already shown it in this house. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I address this house for the first time in this budget debate, I must first congratulate all the 

members of this house for the confidence that their electors have placed in them, and particularly all the new 

members, like myself, it must be quite an experience for them. I would like to thank the people of the Shaunavon 

constituency for their support and the confidence that they have placed in me. I will try and serve them well. 

 

Shaunavon constituency has a diversified economy. We have the Dollard oil fields, which supplies a large 

quantity of crude oil for this 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

704 

province, and this part of the province produces a large quantity of wheat, which is the highest in protein content 

that can be found. The cattle industry is a thriving one. Cattle are shipped from this area to most of the markets of 

this continent. We have in the Shaunavon constituency Cypress Hills Park, an oasis in the middle of the prairies; it 

is a very nice place for tourists to stop during their travel across the vast prairies. It is known for its cool nights; 

it's a wonderful place to rest after a warm day on the road. 
 

While on the subjects of roads, I would like to remind the hon. Minister of Highways, (Mr. Grant) that in the 

Shaunavon constituency we are badly in need of road work, on no. 13 and no. 46 highway. I wish to thank him for 

making a start this year on no. 13 from Consul to Robsart. Also I want to thank him for the bridge at Eastend, 

which was badly needed. 
 

Sir, this is my first experience as a member, of this legislature. I must say that I am proud to be sitting on this side 

of the house, the side that represents the philosophy of free enterprise. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Larochelle: — Sir, I believe socialists can distribute wealth, but they cannot produce wealth. This has been 

proven by the previous administration. 
 

We have only to look away from this continent of ours to prove this. One of the largest socialists countries of the 

world, after having implemented a socialist regime to the furthest degree, is now reverting slowly to the system of 

free enterprise. This vast country under strictly socialist ideas could not even produce food to feed all its people. 

When we look to the south of us, we see a free enterprise country, the richest in the world, with the highest 

standard of living. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I do not want to say that, and I do not think it would fair to say that the previous administration has 

not done any good things for this province. But again, I do think it is not fair of them to say that the Liberals have 

never done anything for the people of this province. Sir, some of our best legislation was passed in this house by a 

Liberal administration. I do not think that it is fair for the members across this house to compare the years 1930 to 

1944, with the years 1944 to 1964. The economy of both these periods can certainly not be compared. The 

depression of the thirties was not confined to Saskatchewan. Sir, it was a world depression and I believe that all 

countries of the world suffered as we did. The government of this province at that time, could barely raise 

$10,000,000 a year in taxes to administer the affairs of this province. I believe that they did well with what they 

had. Today when we speak of budgets, we speak in terms of $220,000,000 a year. It is small wonder that the 

people are receiving more services, and I believe that more services could have been rendered if it had not been 

for the squandering. 
 

Mr. Speaker, a few days ago I listened to one of the speakers across this house telling us all the wonderful things 

socialists have given us; roads, rural power, sewer and water on farms and small urban centres, medicare and 

hospitalization. Sir, they have given us nothing that we as taxpayers have not paid for and will continue to pay for 

in the years to come. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Larochelle: — Let me cite as one example, rural power which is a great thing for the rural people. The 

socialists charged us $500 per farmer for the installation, and today we are saddled with a $451,000,000 debt in 

the form of debentures plus interest that we have to pay for years to come. Whether it’s a net debt or a liquidating 

debt I couldn't care less, but we will have to pay for it. 
 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Listen to that, Ross. 
 

Mr. Larochelle: — Mr. Speaker, as we . . . 
 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — You'll have to educate him. 
 

Mr. Larochelle: — . . . as we are discussing this budget and the economy of this province, I have a subject which 

I think is of vital importance to the economy of this province. I wish to speak for a few minutes on the matter 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

705 

of highway transport in this province and about the effect it has on our economy. 

 

Many hon. members will know, of course, that I have a special interest in this subject since I am also in the 

highway transport business. First of all, I believe relatively few people have a full appreciation for the role that 

truck service plays in our daily lives. We have become accustomed to the services the trucks provide; more or less 

we take them for granted. Our farm produce, grain and fodder, milk and cream, livestock, all find their way to 

market via truck. Our farm implements, the vast gallonage products we annually use in our agricultural 

production reach us in large measure through highway transport. Merchandise of all types, our groceries, our fuel, 

are delivered by truck and delivery is speedy and flexible. Gone are the days when we had to order well in 

advance of need in time to meet that demand. We pick up the phone, order our supplies and have them delivered 

right to our doorstep in the matter of hours. We no longer are required to keep a large stock on hand, with a major 

tie up of funds in inventory. I submit, that this one facet of highway transport has meant a good deal to our 

economy. For a businessman, quick turnover of stock is important, and we are able through fast delivery truck 

service, to accomplish this with a minimum of inventory. 

 

I would like, for a minute, to emphasize the growth that has taken place within the last several years in highway 

transport. The industry, and it is an important industry, in my view, has demonstrated its ability to progress with 

the times, and to adjust to the ever-changing demand for service. I don't wish to bore you with too many figures 

but I shall use a few here to illustrate what I mean by growth in this industry. In 1925 there were roughly 5,500 

trucks of all kinds registered in this province. This figure grew to 69,000 by 1950 and 122,000 in 1962. An 

increase over that thirty-seven year period of some 117,000 units. 

 

During that same interval 1925 to 1963, private car registration, in this province, increased by 150,000. So that 

while we're inclined always to think about private cars in terms of how very mobile our present daily population 

has become, it is very important that the use of trucks for road transport has not lagged behind. The use of trucks 

for transportation of our varied needs was insignificant in the early years, as members will recall. Not until the 

late 20s was there as trend toward highway deliveries and it was very limited indeed. The one ton truck was about 

standard. Farmers hauled fifty to sixty bushels to town and I recall one farmer whose community status went up 

rapidly when he appeared with a roe speed wagon which carried 100 bushels of grain and with speeds up to forty 

miles an hour. 

 

Over the years truck use increased. I wonder how many people realize that there are today, in this province, 745 

communities, from hamlets to cities, that now receive regular scheduled general merchandise highway delivery, 

that there are almost fifty communities that rely entirely on truck for their daily needs, and for which there is no 

alternate means of transport. 

 

There is no doubt that road transport has made a substantial contribution to the increase of commerce in this 

province. However, I would like to emphasize too that quite apart from that obvious contribution, the use of road 

transport has also contributed to our general revenues in a direct way. I'm referring now to the revenues received 

from license fees and fuel taxes. 

 

May I just review for a moment with regard to these two items, license fees and fuel taxes. License fees have 

grown, although I hasten to add that our permitted gross weight has also grown thereby taking into account the 

improvements made by manufacturers in vehicle design and increased weight bearing capabilities of our much 

improved highway system. In 1921 the fee for all types of vehicles, including trucks, was $18 and that was the 

maximum. General purpose truck fee in 1923 was $35 again and also a maximum. By 1930, the fee for the same 

truck, with a maximum gross weight of 18,000 pounds was $180, and this rose to $202 in 1933. In 1937, the 

maximum permissible gross was 30,000 pounds and the general purpose truck fee had risen to $277. 

 

Let's skip over the next ten years. In 1948, our permitted gross was up to 34,000 pounds and the fee had risen to 

$500. The next decade produced another weight increase. In 1958, the gross was 58,000 pounds and the fee was 

$925. Six years later, in 1964, the allowable weight was 74,000 pounds, and the fee was $1,710 for a general 

purpose and semi-trailer unit. 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

706 

As you can see, Mr. Speaker, there have been some changes in that forty odd year period. If I might just repeat, 

the next time we buy our annual car license, and have to put out $15 or $20, let's give a little thought to that truck 

operator who has to find $1,700. 

 

Now, let me say a word or two about contributions fuel tax-wise. I don't need to remind the hon. members that the 

kind of larger truck unit to which I just referred, doesn't get anything like the miles per gallon that you and I get 

on our cars. Far from it. They average anywhere from four to six miles per gallon they do well. Perhaps, the house 

would find it of interest if I reviewed gasoline prices in rates of fuel tax first. 

 

In 1920, we paid 42 1/2¢ per gallon for gasoline. By 1940, this had reduced to 22¢ per gallon, the lowest price it 

has ever been. During the war years the price remained steady. Since 1946, the cost has swung up and down. It 

got up as high was 32.8¢ in 1950 and we presently pay 27.3¢ at the pumps. Of course that is less the road tax. 

 

Road tax on fuel was introduced in 1928, 3¢ per gallon. It was 7¢ in 1940 and 10¢ during the war years, including 

a 3¢ federal tax to 11¢ in 1945. As we all know, we now pay 14¢ per gallon gasoline tax and 17¢ per gallon on 

diesel fuel. So there have been some changes in the fuel tax, from 3¢ in 1928 to 17¢ at present. 

 

A moment ago, I mentioned a direct contribution that the trucking business makes to revenues. Of course, I had 

reference to license fees and fuel tax. As I've pointed out, the larger units pay about $1,700 for a license plate, 

about eighty times the price of an ordinary car license. Unfortunately, it's difficult to get accurate figures of total 

license fees paid by this group. However, I did some research on this and here is what I found. For the year just 

passed, 1964, and using only that relatively small category of units, which provide over the road for higher 

services known as class A and B units, there were 1,620 units which paid license fees totalling $1,172,862. It has 

been estimated that total revenue from motor vehicles for that year would be almost $9,000,000 derived from 

registration of about 380,000 units of all types. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we find that the owners of less then one-half of one per cent of total motor vehicle registration in 

1964, paid about eight per cent of total revenues received from this source. 

 

As regards fuel taxes, this same group also contributes substantially to revenues from this source. Based on 

figures obtained through the Dominion Bureau of Statistics, I have estimated that this group of truck operators, 

paid, in 1964, $1,459,000 in fuel taxes which works out to $900 per unit. 

 

Taking license fees and fuel taxes together, Mr. Speaker, the owner of these units of which I am talking, paid over 

$2,600 per year per unit, for the use of our highways. Now I surely do not wish to leave the impression with the 

house, that the trucking industry of this province of ours, is complaining. No one knows better than the truckers 

how important it is that we have good roads and he appreciates that the money has to be acquired to pay for them. 

We do have good roads in this province and as the Minister of Highways, (Mr. Grant) told us about plans for 

1965, we find that we're going to have more of them. All of which is to the good. 

 

While I'm on the subject of highways, I have often wondered about the theory that a country needs to be wealthy 

before it can have good roads. I believe that it would be more accurate to say that you don't get wealthy until after 

you get the good roads. No, Mr. Speaker, I am not complaining. I merely wanted to take these few minutes to 

remind everyone that our over-the-road truck services are a very important part of our general economy and that it 

is essential to our economy that those services continue. I believe that having heard the figures I just cited, you 

will agree that probably our trucking industry is paying its share of the cost incurred in the construction and 

maintenance of our fine highway system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have here in my hand, the 1965 budget presented to this legislature by the Provincial Treasurer. It 

is a good budget which will give more for agriculture, more for highways, and more for education and still give 

the people of this province $12,000,000 in tax reduction. This is a reduction in taxes that is greatly needed by the 

farmers and the laboring man in this province. As you see, Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion but not the 

amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

707 

Hon. G.J. Trapp (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, as I rise to take part in this debate, I would like to 

draw attention to some remarks made by the hon. member from Arm River, (Mr. Pederson) regarding the heavy 

water plant. The last thing I thought he would complain about was the heavy water plant in Saskatchewan. He 

seems to be also a little bit out of step with his counterpart at Ottawa. I have a clipping from the Star Phoenix, 

February 24th, stating; 
 

Saskatchewan Premier praised for heavy water plant. There were kudos here Thursday for Premier Ross 

Thatcher at the announcement of the Saskatchewan water plant was being given to Saskatchewan. Even 

Conservative M.P.s from Saskatchewan praised Mr. Thatcher for this catch. 
 

And then again we have Southam from the constituency of Estevan who said: 
 

He had been pushing for the plant to be located in Estevan for a couple of years. He praised the efforts of 

Premier Thatcher saying: He bent over backwards to offer the necessary incentives. 
 

And then Mr. Rapp, the other Progressive Conservative member from Humboldt-Melfort-Tisdale, said: 
 

It is a very, very great thing for Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Rapp said: 
 

Premier Thatcher deserves credit for opening the doors to new industry. 
 

Mr. Pederson — On a point of order, I did not condemn the heavy water plant at all, Sir. I supported it 

completely, but warned about the future arrangements. 
 

Mr. Trapp: — Mr. Speaker, I would now like to turn for a moment to answer some of the questions, some of the 

statements made by the hon. member from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) on Monday of this week, regarding 

education. 
 

First I would like to mention that he was reluctant to use figures regarding the university capital cost. I have often 

noticed that when our learned friends lack facts and figures they resort to an emotional appeal. Yesterday, 

somebody called it a red-herring. This he did very well. But let us look at some of the facts and figures which he 

so willingly ignored. 
 

Let us consider loans to the university for capital construction. Let us start with the year 1962-63. In that year, the 

government backed university loans for building to the amount of $4,000,000 which is well over fifty per cent of 

the capital allotment to the university in that year. Then, let us look at the current year, in which C.M.H.C loans to 

the university of $2,400,000 were made. But this is not the whole story for the current year. In the current year 

there was $1,000,000 in grants from the Canada Council, which is no credit to the provincial government. Also, 

$1,000,000 was used for building from the Jubilee fund raised by public subscription. I don't think the 

government can take credit for that. 
 

If it had not been for these two windfalls, they would have needed to borrow $4,000,000 last year. Now, the 

precedent for borrowing for university capital construction was set by the previous government and it was set 

during prosperous years. Why does the hon. member for Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) condemn the present 

government for borrowing money for university capital construction, when the precedent was set by the present 

opposition? There is a good and valid reason why portions of the money for university capital construction, 

should be borrowed at this time. 
 

The university expansion at the present is greater than ever before in its history. Not only will the university need 

$13,400,000 for construction this year, it will need $9,300,000 for operating costs and that is $2,200,000 more 

than last year. The Premier has stated that he will spend in the neighborhood of $5,000,000 on construction on the 

two campuses during the next four years. Does the hon. member for Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) recommend that 

the taxpayers of the next four years should shoulder this total sum out of current revenue? This would certainly 

not 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

708 

fair. These facilities should serve this province for the next fifty to 200 years. Surely, this tremendous expansion 

of the university should be spread over a longer period of time. 
 

I cannot see the continued expansion at this rate. If it should be, under good Liberal government, we will be happy 

to continue to expand, for we all know that Saskatchewan is also expanding. I think that the next few years will 

see the facilities at the universities strained to the limit. This will not be the fault of the present government. As 

you know, it takes from two to three years to complete a building at the university. I have, however, noticed in 

this year's figures that the high school enrolment increase is seven per cent up over last year, while the grade one 

increase in enrolment is only one per cent up. This would mean that the great bulk of our post-war student 

population is now in the high school area. 
 

Secondly, the hon. member for Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) made some remarks about the present government 

not building technical vocational schools and that $2,000,000 had been provided in the budget. I can assure this 

house that I would have been very pleased to spend this money in the current year for these facilities. But I ask the 

hon. member for Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) on what could we spend it? There was no program. How can you 

build buildings when you don't know what you are going to build them for or use them for? Where were they to 

be built? 
 

An Hon. Member: — Hear, Hear! 
 

Mr. Trapp: — These were under the sharing agreement with the federal government. No one set of plans had 

even been approved. Let me tell you the facts of the matter. The whole pattern of the control of these so-called 

technical vocational schools which the previous government talked about establishing was altogether, 

unacceptable both to the trustees of this province and to the teachers. We don't need, at the present time, more 

technical institutes. We need schools to teach the division four programs in many of our areas. It was just so much 

election propaganda. The previous government stomped this province last spring promising ten technical schools 

in this province. With two already, that would make twelve. How in God's earth do we need twelve technical 

schools in a province of less than 1,000,000? We may need more technical school, and when that day comes we 

will provide them. But let's provide schools at the secondary level first for our boys and girls who are now 

neglected. 
 

When I came to office every community of 500 or more expected within a few months to have one of these 

technical school. It was propaganda. The hon. member from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) used the word 'shame' 

on Monday. I say, shame and disgrace to you who would use the future of the children of this province for 

political gain. 
 

Thirdly, I want to turn to school grants for the moment. Here again, my friend kept repeating the increase made in 

1964 which was an election year. Let us examine the whole four-year period of the previous government . . . 
 

Mr. A.M. Nicholson (Saskatoon): — Go back twenty. 
 

Mr. Trapp: — . . . and we'll consider the increase and actual expenditure for school grants; 1960-61, the increase 

over the previous year was $3,600,000; 1961-62 — $1,100,000; 1962-63 — $4,100,000; 1963-64 — $4,100,000. 

If you add these up and divide by four, you have an average of $3,200,000 increases from one year to the other, 

on the average over the four-year period. Our increase this year, on the same basis, will be $3,800,000. This 

shows that in our first year our increases toward school grants will be $600,000 more than the previous 

government's average over the previous four years. 
 

I want to remind the hon. member from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) that the present government will give 

$600,000 more for school grants than the previous government over the four year period. This has been done in 

spite of major tax cuts which were promised. 
 

I'll put it another way. The highest percentage paid on school operating costs was less then forty-eight per cent by 

the previous government. For the first time in history, it will be over forty-nine per cent of operation costs this 

year. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

709 

Mr. Trapp: — Also grants this year also will be provided to private high schools. The amount allotted in the 

budget, $140,000. Plans are to pay it per Saskatchewan pupil, on a basis of $85 per pupil. Other regulations will 

be drawn up with the schools concerned. 

 

Now, let me turn to the educational program for a moment. First I want to talk about technical vocational 

education. Immediately after taking office our new government set up a committee of trustees, teachers, home and 

school members, and people form industry and other educators, to write and recommend the program for division 

four. Not a word had been written on this division. How could you build schools? This is now well under way. 

Briefly, the new program will feature five distinct types of training to meet the needs of all students whose 

interests and abilities lie in these fields. First, technical courses in three broad fields, mechanical, electrical and 

construction. These will lead to technology courses at the technical institutes. Second, courses in business and 

commerce, leading to employment or further training at technical institutes. Third, courses in vocation or 

agriculture for youth who intend to enter farming or occupations related to farming. Fourth, specialized 

occupational courses in a wide variety of subjects for students who wish to enter the grades or service fields. 

Fifth, courses for young adults who left school before completing their basic education. Also, of course, the 

present full academic program which we all know. 

 

These schools will not be segregated schools. They will be part of the total school program and will be operated 

by school boards. All division for students, grade ten, eleven and twelve, will attend the same school. Some 

students will take the straight academic course which will lead to university and the professions. Other students 

will specialize in the technical institutes. It is important to keep in mind that all students will attend the same 

school and that all students will take as much general education as possible. I feel that there is a great danger of 

narrowing a student's education too early especially in this day of automation in which a person may be required 

to be retrained a number of times. There is no compulsion in this plan. School boards are free to discuss with the 

department staff, their plans in this regard. We need to be aware to come under the federal-provincial agreement 

certain standards must be met. To date six centres are working with department staff to plan for setting up such 

comprehensive schools in their areas. They are Yorkton, Lloydminster, Melfort, Regina separate schools, Swift 

Current and North Battleford. Some of these will be ready to start construction this summer. Under the federal 

provincial agreement the capital costs are shareable, seventy-five per cent federal, twenty-five per cent provincial. 

For that portion of the school used by technical vocational education, those parts for general use will qualify for 

fifty per cent to sixty per cent federal-provincial grants. 

 

This broad and diversified program of technical and vocational training will be implemented in the province 

through the development of new composite high schools and the extension of existing plans. Grants will be made 

available under the federal-provincial agreement, which will defray a large part of the capital costs of these 

developments. This will mean that it should be possible to provide these new courses in many of the larger 

schools of the province. 

 

As indicated earlier, technical and vocational training for adults is being stepped up as well. The demand for 

training and for skilled technicians in the engineering technologies, has made our existing facilities inadequate. 

Therefore, plans are under way to double these courses and train twice the present number of workers. In addition 

with intensification of business and industry in the province, new training fields will be needed to meet the needs 

for new employment skills. 

 

As a part of this program of expansion, a large addition will be made to the Saskatoon technical institutes this 

year. Other features of expanded program of training for adults will be an incentive program for training and 

upgrading of workers within industry and the development of extensive night school programs at the institute in 

Moose Jaw and Saskatoon. 

 

In the current year, $91,000 was provided in the budget for upgrading sources. We in the coming year will 

provide $333,000 for upgrading courses, to put these people back in the labor market. For disabled persons 

training, last year there was $71,000 in the budget; in this year, we shall provide $181,000 more than twice as 

much for improvement of the educational qualities of the disabled persons. 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

710 

One of the great problems in technical vocational education, not only in Saskatchewan I must say, but throughout 

Canada, is the shortage of qualified teachers in the technical vocational area. As an essential parallel development 

the College of Education in collaboration with Saskatchewan Technical Institute is sponsoring a program of 

education for technical and vocational teachers. The department proposes to provide a system of bursaries to 

encourage prospective teachers to take advantage of these opportunities. I would hope that we would establish 

outstanding technical institutes in government that would compare in the technical field as our university does in 

the academic field. I would also hope that some of the courses would be interchangeable. Our over-all objective in 

the area of technical education will take time to develop, it cannot be done overnight. We are looking forward to a 

continued emphasis in technical education in the years ahead. 

 

Next, I want to say something about our Student Aid Fund. Last summer for the first time Saskatchewan 

participated in the Canada Student Loan Plan, and by the end of June, 1965, this new government will have taken 

advantage of all the monies made available by the federal government for this program, about $1,900,000. Under 

this program about three times as much money was loaned to students as in any other year, and I feel certain that 

this coming year, no student in this province will be denied a university education because he lacks the money, if 

he otherwise qualifies. I think this will be a very proud first for Saskatchewan that no student will be denied an 

education because he hasn't the money, but more than this, we hope this coming year to use the Provincial Student 

Aid Fund for loans to students who up until now have not been able to qualify. We will go easy at first in this new 

area, until we gain some experience, but I hope the day is not too far off when we can say that no student will be 

denied an education because his parents haven't the money. No matter what type of post-high school training he 

may require to fit him for his place in society. 

 

A word about scholarships, the general scholarship program will be continued, but there are one or two areas I 

would like to mention especially. The graduate scholarship, there will be sixteen graduate scholarships, value 

$1,500 each, to university students to do graduate work. No university can really do the job it should do until it 

has a good graduate program. 

 

Another item I would like to mention is eight $2,000 scholarships to qualified tradesmen who wish to obtain 

vocational teachers certificates. We need these people and we must encourage them to take the required training. 

We cannot expect a tradesmen who has a wife and family to leave his work and go to university for a year. We are 

providing scholarships of $2,000 each, eight of them to tradesmen this coming year. 

 

Let us turn for a moment to northern education. I listened the other night to the member from Cumberland, (Mr. 

Berezowsky) describing the terrible conditions in his constituency. I am sure that what he said was right, but I am 

sure that he does not blame the present government for the intolerable and deplorable conditions that he finds in 

his constituency, the blame must surely not be given use. We are this year establishing for the first time a Board 

of Education for the northern areas, and on this board will be three residents of the north. I think it is time these 

people had a voice in the educational affairs of their communities. Enrolments in our northern schools are steadily 

increasing and the following school buildings are definitely provided for in the 1965-66 budget. A four room 

addition at Lac La Ronge; a two class room addition with library and other facilities at Ile A La Crosse; two class 

rooms, library and other facilities at Buffalo Narrows. The provision of comfortable and modern teacherages is of 

prime importance if you are going to attract and keep qualified teachers in the north. We have here budgeted for 

three to four modern teacherages in the north, one at Ile A La Crosse, another at Buffalo Narrows, another at 

Beauval, and a fourth at Sandy Bay. Another first this year will be Saskatchewan Supervisor of French 

instruction. He will be appointed early this spring. About three hundred classrooms in Saskatchewan are 

following their advanced French program and we would hope that the appointment of a supervisor will provide a 

more organized approach to French instructions which will produce more French teachers. Many of our schools 

lack teachers who are truly bilingual. We think that this program will provide us with the necessary teachers who 

are bilingual. 

 

I would briefly like to mention the pensions, the improving of pensions for about 700 older teachers who retired 

previous to 1963. There are about 700 teachers in this group who will get an average increase of $325 a year. To 

qualify for an increase under this, a teacher's present pension must be less than $2,400 calculated on a single life 

plan. I am proud to be associated with a government which thinks of people before dollars. 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

711 

I am proud of this government's program on behalf of the various levels of government. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the present government knows that our young people are our most 

valued resource, and that to invest in them in the form of education is the best investment we can make. 

 

I cannot support either the sub-amendment or the amendment, but I do support the motion. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D.W. Michayluk (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, before the member sits down, would he mind if I asked a 

question? The minister mentioned in the course of his remarks that a committee had been set up to work on 

division four. Now, would the minister mind giving me the year that this program will be introduced in division 

four, and what divisions have already been introduced or are in the process of being introduced and when. 

 

Mr. Trapp: — Division one has now been introduced. I would think that division two should be ready for this 

September. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon): — Mr. Speaker, I listened with interest to the remarks of the hon. member 

from Shaunavon, (Mr. Larochelle). One particular remark that caught my attention was an admission that we do 

have good roads in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon): — There was one other thing that was notable by its absence in his speech, 

and that, Mr. Speaker, was the mention of purple gas. However, I hope the Premier was listening very closely to 

the member from Shaunavon's speech because it seemed to me to be the soft-sell for purple gas for the trucking 

industry. I don't know if that is the kind of relief he was talking about, but is sure sounded like it. 

 

Mr. Larochelle: — Certainly not. 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon): — I would like to express in the beginning, Mr. Speaker, satisfaction with 

two recent developments that have taken place in Saskatchewan, the establishment of a potash mine operation at 

Viscount, and the location of a heavy water plant at Estevan. The potash is private capital and will be a 

continuation of the extraction of potash begun a few years ago. The location of the heavy water plant at Estevan is 

welcome. This plant is a living vindication of the policies of the past government as they regard governmental 

assistance in the development of basic industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon): — At times in the past, Mr. Speaker, as you have noticed, the legislature has 

been immature in its actions and sounds, I hope that my behaviour now and in the future will not add to the low 

opinion of the legislative conduct that is in the minds of some of the citizens of this province. I believe that the 

best way to judge the effectiveness of legislature is to judge the final results. For a time the CCF were in power 

they can be judged by the following results, hospitalization, low cost government insurance, medicare, the best 

workmen's compensation, the best labor statutes, a unique electrical energy distribution system, a large and 

popular grid road system sand many other features. 

 

My only hope is that the Liberal government, however short its term in office, can produce proportionately as 

good a record. I received on my desk the other day a highway map of Saskatchewan, and I am sorry the Minister 

of Highways, (Mr. Grant) in not here at this time. It has a fine picture of the former Minister of Highways, (Mr. 

Willis) on it. The present Minister of Highways, (Mr. Grant) is to be complimented, because he didn't show the 

indecent haste of Mr. Pinder in getting his name on our highway maps before he had won the election. 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

712 

My colleague, the senior member for Saskatoon, (Mr. Nicholson) discussed at length, a matter that I am quite 

interested in. He was concerned that the present government was unprepared as a member of the partnership 

formed by the provincial and federal governments to go ahead and acquire abandoned housing, at the Saskatoon 

airport for another low-rental housing complex in Saskatoon city. The city wanted to go ahead, they prepared a 

brief and this brief stated quite clearly their position. As a member of the Board of Directors of the Saskatoon 

Local Housing Authority, I can say that there were sufficient prospective tenants to occupy it fully. What was 

happening in Regina? The Minister of Industry and Information, lately removed as the result of the Liberal 

miscarriage in the Hanley by-election, had this to say: "If the airport housing becomes low rental housing, it will 

depress the real estate market." It made me wonder about the remarks of the minister. He was more interested in 

housing for people, or real estate values. I, too, am very interested in the letters that the Premier of Saskatchewan 

has said that he will bring forth in this legislature. 
 

My general comment on the budget has to do with the profusion of words used by the Provincial Treasurer to 

create the impression that this budget was somehow different. Words such as private capital — commercial 

endeavor — privately owned — private ownership — private investment — private initiative and finally private 

enterprise, which he repeated ten different times. Those two statements drew my attention as well, Mr. Speaker; 

the government "passionately believes that only private enterprise methods will achieve this much needed 

investment", and further, the government is "convinced that industries will establish in Saskatchewan for only one 

reason, because it is profitable for them to do so". Keeping in mind the government's passionate belief in the 

profit motive, it would be wise for this assembly to examine some particular aspects of the budget, but first, Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to present a poem. This poem parallels the liberal philosophy and could possibly serve as a 

contribution towards Saskatchewan's long trek out of the cultural wasteland, that the Premier says we are in. this 

poem reads as follows: 
 

Conspirators on every side 

Free enterprise have slandered, 

Forgetting that it has given us 

The world's best living standard. 

We eat and drink supremely well 

At Royal York and Rideau, 

And no one drives more Cadillacs or 

Bigger ones than we do. 

How blind the Socialists to plot 

This way of life to shatter. 

Free enterprise brings wealth to all, 

At least to all who matter. 

Then hail we now free enterprise, 

Extol and give it praise 

In it the world's salvation lies 

Without it every freedom dies. 

Oh, glorious Free Enterprise, 

Oh, wonderful Free Enterprise, 

Oh, marvellous Free enterprise, 

The enterprise that pays. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Minister of Public Health): — Some poet . . . 
 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon): — I could lend the hon. Minister of Health, (Mr. Steuart) the booklet if he 

wants to read it. There is more, I could lend it. 
 

Last year the CCF government made a commitment regarding the building of auditoria in the cities of Saskatoon 

and Regina. On that basis, Saskatoon and Regina went ahead with plans to raise their share of the capital. Indeed, 

the cities took definite steps to raise the capital because they were sure of their position vis-à-vis the government. 

What is their position now? The Liberal government has slashed the previous commitment, and further they 

provide no indication of the amount of future consideration. 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

713 

The budget address states "further funds will be made available as construction proceeds". Mr. Speaker, how does 

the government expect my constituency to proceed on a basis such as this? I might remind the government that 

1967 is drawing uncomfortably close to allow sufficient time for the completion of projects of this magnitude. If 

these two auditoria are incomplete by the year 1967, the blame may properly be laid at the feet of the present 

government. 

 

In preparation for my next comment regarding technical schools, I would like to present quotes from some trade 

magazines. In my position working with instruments, I have coming across my desk quite a number of trade 

magazines from the business world and form the major instrument companies. I would like to refer to Canadian 

Controls and Instrumentation, November-December, 1964. This particular article has to do with computers in 

industry, something that is relatively new to people in Canada. It says here: 

 

Three Canadian industries are installing digital computers for process control this year. 

 

In the following pages, Canadian Controls and Instrumentation takes a look at the state of the art of computer 

control in each of these industrial areas. They deal with three areas; computers in the steel industry; computers in 

the paper mill and it suggests here that there is quite a bit of incentive for putting computers in paper mills. It says 

"the potential pay-out is a large-scale computer control experiment at Chalk River". Another gives details on the 

CDC636 installation at the 200 megawatt Douglas Point Station. This is the Canadian nuclear station in Ontario, 

and Chalk River is another nuclear establishment in Canada. 

 

The next magazine is Canadian Chemical Processing, December, 1964, and this particular article refers to the 

newsprint industry and computers controlling the quality of the products in this particular industry, and it says 

here: 

 

Worthwhile savings have been achieved already by several mills. Three Canadian installations are now being 

worked into service under conditions of secrecy, unusual in this rather open industry. 

 

I might remind the members that the newsprint industry is one of the strong foreign exchange earners for the 

Canadian economy. I am sorry that the Minister of Natural Resources, (Mr. Cuelenaere) is not in his seat at the 

present time, but I had an article in this same magazine, just aside form the topic for a minute, about pulp and 

paper and I have the clipping here from the Saskatoon Star Phoenix on July 14th, 1964. 

 

One million dollar Saw-Mill for Hudson Bay announced. The Mill will be in operation by January. 

 

And this may be sufficient, but it doesn't say which year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon): — Apparently it is not going to be 1964. It starts something about the pulp 

and paper industry here, it says: 

 

There are five new paper mills on the way and two of these were previously announced in this article. 

 

and here is the thing that I wanted to come to, that might be part of the reason why our paper and pulp industry 

keeps getting bogged down. Here is one of the little quirks; 

 

MacMillan-Bloedel-Powell River price bomb-shell may halt projects. MacMillan-Bloedel and Powell River 

announced a price cut of $10 per ton for newsprint. the dust has not yet settled. B.C. Forest Products and Crown 

Zellerbach Canada Limited, third and first ranking newsprint producers in B.C. respectively, 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

714 

grudgingly followed suit, both claimed the cut unwarranted, but it seems that MacMillan Bloedel faced with 

growing competition in the newsprint field and with the prospect of finding markets for its giant Kitimat 

project, wants to ensure a firmer grip on the sales in B.C. and the western United States. 

 

Now the quotation from these two particular trade magazines establish conclusively that the computers are being 

coupled with automation in Canada, and I think that it is a reality we cannot argue with it. 

 

There is one more page that I pulled out of Canadian Chemical Processing for November 1964, and it deals with 

the topic of automation. It is not directed to union people; it is directed to management. I just quote five little 

places that I have marked here and it is available to anyone who wants to check it. 

 

As computers take over planning jobs the blue collar worker will still be needed, but the white collar man will 

be surplus, and since they now outnumber plant crews, the white collar worker poses a real problem for 

management. 

 

This article was written by a Dr. Martino. Dr. Martino examines the human problems involved in the computer 

revolution, and suggests 

 

that R & D should be expanded to make better use of the talents of white collar workers. 

 

This is research and development, Mr. Speaker, and I think that we could say that research and development there 

would correspond to a topic in the estimates here referred to as research and planning Department of Labour. 

 

I notice that in the estimate research and planning has had a cut of one in staff, and a cut of eight per cent in the 

amount of money they will be using in the coming year. This doesn't appear to be the trend that this man is 

recommending in this article on automation. He seems to be indicating that they will require more planning and 

more research as far as automation goes. 

 

A couple of other quotes from this page, 

 

A generation ago we had no computers, no transistors, no space program, no lasers, no linear programming. 

Thousands of Canadians are today employed in jobs that didn't even have a name ten years ago. There is a 

double trend towards bigness and complexity, both in factories and in systems required to run the factories. 

While this trend is resulting in fewer jobs, it is also calling for more complex skills. The problem is not so much 

a cutting down of the need for a specific type of engineers but rather an increase in well-qualified experts in the 

development and application of modern technology to business, government and industrial problems. 

 

This three fold program, and they lay one out here, about the work force, about education and about research and 

development, it says; 

 

This three-fold program is a must if we are really to solve the problems of today and capture the potential of 

tomorrow. On the whole we need a program to plan and to use properly the greatest national resource we have, 

our people. Such a program should not be a government program, it should be a joint one, jointly paid for and 

jointly executed by each company, each industry, local and national unions and local and provincial and federal 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

715 

government. If such a program is instituted we will solve our problems, if not then today's boom will be 

replaced by tomorrow's anguish. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, the Economic Council of Canada in its first annual report has some interesting 

observations about this topic. I might refer for a moment to page 74, the last paragraph; 

 

There will be a continuing need for substantial capital expenditures, for schools and universities, over the 

balance of the decade. 

 

and incidentally, this projects economic goals to 1970. This is why they are calling for it over the next decade. 

 

The growth in the number of children of school age has levelled off, but the pressure of numbers will be felt 

increasingly in post-secondary technical schools and universities with substantially higher levels of real income 

at potential out-put and the increasing recognition of the importance of education rapidly growing proportion of 

young people will want and will need a higher level of education. 

 

Another observation comes from the section referred to as Consumption and Investment, and the next section is 

Some Significant Factors in Economic Growth. The Economic Council of Canada has this to say: 

 

There will also be an urgent need to make the most efficient uses of the high level manpower which is already 

available, so that persons which require top level skills are not employed at tasks which do not allow them to 

make the most valuable contribution. For this purpose it will be necessary to ensure that these key workers have 

sufficient supporting staff and other resources. There is, for example, considerable evidence that qualified 

engineers are being employed at tasks which could just as well be performed by technicians. If the latter were 

more readily available. Because of the long period of training required to produce some of these workers, it is 

necessary to anticipate possible areas of shortages well in advance so that policies, to overcome these 

deficiencies be developed and take effect in time. 

 

It would appear from an examination of the Budget Speech and estimates that the government is now in retreat 

from the previous CCF government's position on the expansion of our technical school system. The intent of the 

remarks in the Budget Speech regarding technical schools is indeed bad news for the young people of our 

province. With the industrial growth that is evident to all, it is unfortunate that the budget of this Department of 

Labour has been slashed by over $100,000. The staff have been reduced by fourteen people if my information is 

correct. The employees of the department are working at full capacity and it seem logical to me, Mr. Speaker, that 

since the labor force is expanding there is need of larger staff to attend to its requirements. 

 

I am sure that the deletion of the Women's Bureau will receive little attention from the daily press in my 

constituency. There was considerable fanfare when the Liberals named the supervisor for the bureau, prior to the 

Hanley by-election, November 28th, by the way. The editor dutifully followed with a glowing editorial about the 

fire service being established by a new Liberal government, "Friends of the working women". Most certainly, 

women will increase in numbers in the working force. In fact, the Economic Council of Canada predicts that there 

will be a greater proportion of women in the working force. That is why our party made the initial step towards 

establishing a Women's Bureau in 1964. However, freedom of the press is what it is, a two say street as we all 

know, freedom to print what the owner desires, and freedom to withhold what the owner desires. Mr. Speaker, 

now that the Hanley by-election is over, the matter 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

716 

of the Women's Bureau has been dropped like proverbial hot potato. I can only assume the before-mentioned 

editor will not editorialize his regrets but instead ink his pen for another blast at the socialists for obstructing the 

well-intentioned Liberals. 

 

The Provincial Treasurer stated that this was his development budget. I can assure this legislature that it has been 

developed in such a manner that I cannot support it. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. A.C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I believe that there is other business yet 

to come before the house, time is passing, and we don't sit this evening, and this is the type of budget which you 

can't do justice to by taking part of it today, and part of it the next day because I want to give a complete rounded 

story of this tremendous budget in the interests if Saskatchewan, and because of this I would move to leave to 

adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate Adjourned. 

 

PRIVILEGE — ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Kelsey) (Acting Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, I 

would like to raise a point of privilege in regard to the way question 189 was answered yesterday. The answer is: 

 

See the publication of the Workmen's Compensation Board entitled "Classification of Industry" dated January 

1st, 1965. 

 

Now, as far as I know this publication was not even distributed to members but even if it were, it would be quite 

an improper answer. Beauchesne in citation 181, page 153, states: 

 

Questions must be answered briefly and distinctly, and be limited to the necessary explanations, although a 

certain latitude is permitted to Ministers of the Crown whenever they find it necessary to extend their remarks 

with a view of clearly explaining the matter in question. 

 

You could argue that it is a brief answer, but you certainly couldn't argue it is a distinct answer to this question, 

and I would refer you, Sir, to the Journals of 1941. At that time on March 26th, 1941, the Leader of the 

Opposition, who happened at that time to be myself, Sir, asked the government a question, "How much has been 

collected by the government in each fiscal year, since April 30th, 1937, as (A) corporation tax and (B) succession 

duties?" The answer to the whole works was "See Public Accounts". I took objection to that, raised a point of 

order on it, and on Friday, March 28th, Mr. Speaker Agar ruled as follows: 

 

With reference to the objection raised yesterday by the hon. Leader of the Opposition as to the manner in which 

a question asked by him on the 26th inst., was answered by referring him to the Public Accounts. I wish to say 

that after careful consideration I am of the opinion that it would be unwise to lay down any hard and fast rule in 

this matter, but think that answers generally should not refer the inquirer, even to readily accessible documents, 

except in special cases or where the quotation would be too lengthy, and should give the desired information as 

concisely as possible. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is obvious, I think that if someone presented a question asking "What is the total amount of 

the expenditure estimates proposes by the government for the coming fiscal year," when we have on our desks the 

blue book of estimates giving that total number, it would be quite proper to either rule it out of order or answer it 

by reference to that printed document. In this case, to refer to a document which is, as far as I know not 

distributed to members of the house, is not a proper answer to a question 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

717 

and I would suggest that if the answer was too long to be considered desirable to print in the votes and 

proceedings, there is nothing to prevent the minister from saying "Stand as an Order for Return", and submit it as 

a return. But to get this reference the publication of the Workmen's Compensation Board entitled "Classification 

of Industry, dated January 1st, 1965" is not a proper answer. 

 

Hon. L. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, on this point, the reference could have easily been 

probably converted into an order for return. There are thirty-two pages in this booklet which is available to the 

public at any time, from the Workmen's Compensation Board. One copy was tabled, and the fact that if you have 

to print this into an answer you are printing a lot of unnecessary stuff which is time-consuming and costly. The 

information is available; it is tabled to the Clerk of the Assembly. What more do you want? You are just being 

technical right now for something that is not necessary when the information is readily available at any time. 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, there is a procedure by which in reply to a 

question, the hon. minister may make that document a document of the house, by simply having it converted into 

a return, and he may do that and he may attach the pamphlet to the return and then it becomes properly before the 

house in answer to the question. But to refer to it in an answer to an ordinary question is, I submit, quiet improper, 

and he has the option open to him, he should accept the ordinary procedure of having it converted to a return. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, may I speak very briefly on the point of order. If, in point of 

fact, the answer is too long for the hon. member, the hon. Minister of Labour, (Mr. Coderre) to attach it as an 

answer to a question asked in this house, then I think by that very argument, it doesn't help much to table the 

information with the Clerk. Presumably the member who asked the question would like to have the answer, and 

have it available to him. This he clearly will not have if he has to go look in the office of the Clerk, and copy out 

thirty-two pages. I think that the appropriate practice is nothing which prevents one from attaching material filed 

in answer to an order for return, pamphlets, or copies of booklets, and in that manner the member who asked the 

question would have his answer and the minister would be put to the difficulty only of acquiring seven or eight 

copies of the booklet. This is all there would be to it. 

 

This seems to me to be the appropriate response to a question asked in the house, particularly when, as I gather in 

this case, the booklet has not been distributed to members and it may not be that readily available to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I have listened to the question of privilege raised by the hon. member, the Acting Leader of the 

Opposition, the member for Kelsey, (Mr. J.H. Brockelbank), and I appreciate the comments that have been made 

by himself and by other members. I would ask the house to allow me to defer any ruling which I might make in 

regard thereto until such time as I have had the opportunity of considering all the facts of the case, and all the 

parliamentary practice relevant thereto. I will do my best to have such done by Monday next, if it is the wish of 

the house that I have leave to do so. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 25 — An Act to repeal the Leasehold 

Regulations Act, 1963. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this is a bill to repeal the Leasehold Regulations Act, 1963. The Leasehold Regulations Act 

was brought into this province back in the days, the war-time days, and immediately thereafter, when rent control 

was, of course, very necessary, there was a great shortage of accommodation in various parts of the province. 

However, since that time it is the feeling of the government that the need for rent control has ceased with the great 

building boom throughout the province in the last number of years, there is no longer any need for it. I am sure 

my hon. friends will agree with that. There is no longer any need for rental control. 

 

The petition is that all housing for which there was a lease in 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

718 

March, 1950, it was under rent control, However, by Order in the Gazette of October 1st, 1956, the board was 

authorized to allow landlords and tenants to rent premises under mutual agreement and the provisions were that 

copies of the mutual agreements were to be placed in the board's hands, at which time the board had nothing 

further to do in the matter. 

 

The board feels that the act has not been abused and they are also of the opinion that no serious hardship would 

ensue if the Leasehold Regulations Act was repealed at this time. Over the past number of years, there has been a 

steady decline in the number of requests to the board insofar as the rental accommodation which is still under 

control, and we feel that there is really no useful purpose to be served by continuing this act. Having in mind that 

all accommodation which has been built since 1950 is not under rent control, has no need for it any longer and 

therefore, this bill proposes to repeal the act. 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, the Leasehold Regulations Act, provided as I recall it, that the Rent 

Control Board, which was the same board as the Mediation Board, has the power to prevent evictions, or interfere 

with evictions, or stay application for possession, and it also had the power to fix rentals and to prevent increases 

in rentals, or at least to approve any increase in rentals. I think further to what the Attorney General has said, it 

should be drawn to the attention of the house that so far as possession is concerned, this power was vested in the 

board pursuant to the Landlord and Tenant Act in the session of 1957, so that the possession part of the Leasehold 

Regulations Act continues to be in full force and effect by virtue of the provisions of the Landlord and Tenant 

Act. 

 

The only aspect of the Leasehold Regulation Act which is still potentially enforceable is that relating to rent 

control, that is the fixing of the levels of rent, and since the board has the power to stay evictions under another 

act, this tends to remove, in my opinion, the necessity for maintaining the Leasehold Regulations Act on the 

Statute Books. It should be recommended that a large part of the protection formerly given by the Leasehold 

Regulations Act, is now in the Landlord and Tenant Act, and still is available to the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

Insofar as I know the board is still implementing that responsibility. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 27 — An Act to amend the Queen's 

Bench Act, 1960. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, we are proposing two amendments to the Queen's Bench Act, 1960, and I would deal with 

the proposed insertion of section 40A. First of all, section 40A provides that in every case in which a person is 

charged with adultery with any party to a suit, or in which the court may consider in the interest of any party not 

already a party to the suit, that that person should be made a party to the suit. The court may, if it thinks fit, allow 

that person to intervene upon such terms, if any, as the court thinks just. 

 

This amendment has been thought suitable because of a judgement of the Court of Queen's Bench by the hon. Mr. 

Justice MacPherson in the case of Dennis vs. Evans a short time ago, in which Mr. Justice MacPherson held that it 

would not be possible for a wife to come in and defend an action for criminal conversation where someone was 

suing another man, alleging that she had committed adultery with this other man and he was seeking damages 

from a third party, a paramour. Under existing law it would not be possible for the wife to come in and defend the 

action and to deny the allegations of adultery against her. This was the case, these were the facts in the case of 

Dennis vs. Evans. This is a case of a wife who wanted to come into court and deny any allegations of adultery 

made against her, and under the law as it now exists, the court was held, that she wasn’t able to. 

 

This amendment simply puts the court in the position where they would be able to order that she be joined as a 

party to the action and she would have her day in court and would have an opportunity to present her side of the 

case. So that is the first amendment. 

 

The second amendment section 72A is requested by the Court of Queen's Bench and it reads, "in any cause or 

matter before it, the court may if it thinks is expedient to do so call in the aid of one or more assessors 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

719 

especially qualified and try and hear the cause or matter, wholly or partially, with their assistance and then it 

provides that the remuneration if any to be paid to an assessor shall be determined by the court and the court may 

direct payment by any of the parties. 

 

In some lawsuits, there are very complicated and involved questions as to, for example, the construction of a 

manufacturing concern, there may be very involved questions requiring the assistance of an expert. In other 

provinces in Canada, there is provision for the judge to call in the assistance of an expert or an assessor, to assist 

him, to advise him on technical matters and to assess those costs against either, or one, or both of the parties. 

 

This amendment will simply enable our courts, if they think it necessary, in complicated cases to acquire or obtain 

this technical assistance and this is the purpose of this amendment. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend the Land 

Contracts (Actions) Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this is a proposed amendment to the Land Contracts Action Act, the present section 10 

provides as follows "no costs shall be allowed by the local master on any hearing unless in his opinion the 

application is made without proper justification, in which case he may order payment of costs by the applicant". 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this statute deals with foreclosure actions and cancellations of agreements for sale and 

mortgages, and it provides, of course, that the local master, who is a district court judge, may look into the 

circumstances, or has to look into the circumstances before leave is granted to commence an action to foreclose or 

cancel. 

 

This provision with regard to costs, we believe is not a complete provision and should be changed. At the present 

time, the judge hearing the matter has no discretion to award costs except as is provided in the present subsection 

10; he can only award costs where he is of the opinion that the applicant that would be the creditor, has 

commenced the application without justification. 

 

Now, the proposed amendment is the local master may in his discretion order any party to an application to pay 

the whole or any portion of the costs of the application. This amendment that is submitted would bring the law in 

this regard into harmony with law dealing with most other litigations and lawsuits in the province. It is customary 

to give the judge discretion to award costs in accordance with the circumstances of each case. If this amendment 

is enacted the judge, the local master, will have the power to decide to look into the circumstances in each case, if 

the applicant, if the creditor, has brought a frivolous application then he will have power to award costs against 

him as he has now. If on the other hand, the debtor has acted unreasonably and hasn't preformed his side of the 

bargain and it is a very bad case, then the judge would have power in his discretion to award costs against the 

debtor. It is putting the discretion where it should be, I submit, Mr. Speaker, in the hands of the judge who has the 

opportunity to hear all the evidence on both sides and make a determination as to who should pay the costs. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 33, An Act to amend 

The Rural Municipality Act, 1960. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the members of the house may be interested to know that the several amendments in this 

act have been discussed with the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, and there is nothing 

proposed here that has not been given the approval of that group. The amendments to this bill are mainly for the 

purpose of bringing to act up to date, and in some cases altering the existing provisions to alleviate problems 

which have been encountered by the rural municipalities. 

 

Many of these amendments have been suggested by the rural municipalities, as well as by the staff of my own 

department, who have occasion throughout the year to deal with this act in advising to the different rural 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

720 

municipalities. I certainly don't feel there is anything controversial here and I feel that these amendments can be 

better discussed in committee. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 34, An Act to amend 

The Village Act, 1960. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, once again there are a number of amendments to this act and I feel that these can be dealt 

with more readily when they are before the Committee of the Whole. 

 

There are amendments relating to village elections and accounting procedures, which are needed to bring this act 

up to date by curing the problems which have been encountered by the Villages and my own department. There 

are also a number of amendments which have been requested to bring this act into line with the City Act and the 

Town Act. In all I don't think that there is anything controversial or contentious here, most of the amendments 

have been discussed with the Urban Municipal Association and certainly a good many of the amendments have 

been suggested by that association. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to direct a question, and perhaps the hon. 

minister when closing the debate will deal with it. I note that the act and equally true of some of the other 

municipal acts, deal with the procedure for municipal elections, and I wonder whether the minister can advise 

whether or not it is the intention to bring in a separate act to deal with municipal elections, a code for municipal 

elections as it might be phrased. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Do you mean in this session or in the future? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must draw to the attention of the house that the minister is about to close the debate. If 

anybody wishes to speak, they must do so before the debate is closed. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — My question was, either at this session or perhaps the next session. 

 

Hon. J.M. Cuelenaere (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I understand that there is a committee 

of the urban municipalities association in conjunction with the Department of Municipal Affairs, working on an 

election act applicable to all municipalities. But it is not ready for this session and there will be no act brought 

down at this session for that purpose. It is quite possible that it might be ready for next year's session or maybe 

earlier if they could come to an agreement. 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I don't know whether or not this it too ambitious a project for the 

government to undertake, but I am always struck by the amount of work that goes into making up voter's lists in 

provincial and municipal elections. The city officials in Saskatoon, and I realize this is a village act, and probably 

it isn't as serious in villages, but urban municipalities employ dozens of people for weeks each year making up 

these voter's lists. It isn't a problem that admits an easy solution, but if the government hasn't got any plans to 

proceed at this session with legislation to provide a uniform election act for all municipalities, is it possible that 

the government might consider working out, or trying to work out, voting qualifications and voting procedures 

with the provincial election voter's list for the whole province and use the same one for urban and rural municipal 

elections and for provincial elections? This may be a bigger project than can be achieved in one year but I should 

think that it ought to be the aim of the government or I would hope that it would be the aim of the government to 

work toward what I think, in this regard, would be a businesslike way of dealing with this problem. I make no 

apology for its not having been done before. There are a lot of things that haven't yet been done in Saskatchewan, 

and I would comment the government, that it give serious consideration to some long term plan to make voting 

qualifications uniform between all the various elections and to make therefore, make it possible to use a uniform 

voter's list, a single voter's list, for election purposes. 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

721 

The government may not want to give an answer to a question of that kind now, but I simply commend it to the 

government for thought in the future. 

 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, could I ask the hon. minister a question? I just noticed in 

section 109 under the bill that he is presenting, where the certificate may be presented to the returning officer on 

election day. Now, does this act provide for the same thing in case a person is a candidate to have this presented 

on nomination day? I'm just wondering if this is clarified in the sections that might apply. I . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I must draw to the attention of all the members of the house that its not correct to discuss 

the clauses of a bill on second reading, only the general principle as it related to the principle of the act which it is 

amended. These are all matters that can be discussed in committee. I wouldn't want any member to think that their 

rights of free speech and privileges were being infringed upon. The regulations are laid down in the parliamentary 

guides to procedure purely and simply to conserve the time of the house and to prevent a double discussion. I 

think that we all realize that if we're going to discuss t thing twice or thrice, it will be very wasteful of the time of 

the house. 

 

Now these are matters that can be discussed, I think, in committee. 

 

Mr. Baker: — Yes, I don't intend to enter into a debate. It's just that I want to draw to the attention of the hon. 

minister that I think it does affect the principle of the section and the act as a whole. I think, in that way, Mr. 

Speaker, I was just too far off base. 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I may say that I have given this act some perusing. I don't think 

that there is anything, as far as I see, in regard to the principle of the act, with which I am prepared to take 

exception. I may say I'm very sorry I was not in the house when the hon. minister presented this act to the house. 

But in regard to comments made by the hon. member from Hanley (Mr. Walker), I believe that the department 

that has been in the process for some years of endeavouring to work out a uniform election's act for all the various 

acts, and I commend this to the department if they are proceeding along this line, I think it is a very good idea. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must call the attention of the house to the fact that the minister is about to close the debate. If 

anybody wishes to speak, they may do so now or he will be precluded from doing so. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — I would just like to say, Mr. Speaker, in reply to the member from Regina West (Mr. 

Blakeney) that some work had been done over the past summer in regard to setting up a new uniform election act 

for the urban municipalities. The Saskatchewan Urban Municipal Association felt that they would like to spend 

more time on this and as a result of that, during the fall they had meetings throughout the different districts in the 

province, and the information that I have, at the present time, is that they would like to discuss this further and 

maybe next summer sometime, they would draft in a uniform election act. I just wanted to bring that to the 

attention of the members of the house. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 35, An Act to amend 

The Municipal Public Works Act. 

 

He said: Once again, Mr. Speaker, this is not a controversial amendment but a necessary one in that it is required 

to bring this act up to date. 

 

The act presently provides that a municipality, which means a city or a town, or a village, can make an agreement 

with some person or corporation outside of the municipality, and that municipality will supply water to that 

person or to the corporation. 

 

The act at the present time does not permit this being done with respect to sewers, whish today are, of course, a 

necessity, as much as water is, in some of these areas. The present amendment will therefore allow 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

722 

the municipalities to supply persons or corporations, outside the municipality, with sewer services as well as 

water services. As I have said, this is a necessary amendment but it is not controversial and therefore I will move 

the second reading 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

EXPROPRIATION — IMPLEMENTATION OF COMMITTEE REPORT 
 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North) moved the following motion: 

 

That this assembly urge the government to give consideration to introducing a bill providing the procedure for 

the acquisition of land and the determination of fair and equitable compensation, as a contained in the 

unanimous recommendations of the report of the special committee of the Legislative Assembly, appointed by 

resolution of the assembly, dated April 4th, 1963. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, on April 4th, 1963, a committee of this legislature was named to study expropriation 

procedures in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

This legislation, Mr. Speaker, did me the honor of naming me as chairman of this committee. The committee held 

its first organization meeting on May 28th, 1963, and the hon. member for Maple Creek, (Mr. Cameron) now the 

minister of mineral Resources was named vice-chairman of the committee. 

 

The committee held thirty-five meetings. The committee worked diligently and studied the problem of 

expropriation. In may humble estimation every member from both sides of the house participated in the 

discussions fully. Members on the committee are listed in the report, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. J.W. Gardiner, 

Minister of Public Works; Mr. Staveley, then the representative for the constituency of Weyburn; Mr. Thurston, 

who was the member at that time for the constituency of Lumsden; the hon. member for Hanley, (Mr. Walker) 

who is in the house; the hon. member for Kinistino, (Mr. Thibault); the hon. member for Melfort, (Mr. Willis). 

 

After interviewing citizens and organizations and after examining some sixteen research papers and twelve study 

papers, ten government submissions and a number of representation from the general public, the report was 

completed and presented to the legislature at the last session. I recall the last discussion of the committee very 

well, regarding the wording of one or two of the final paragraphs. It took place by means of a special arrangement 

whereby, at a given time, three members of the committee and the secretary were engaged in a round table 

discussion through four telephone connections. 

 

I will not go into detail regarding the report or the legislation proposed, Mr. Speaker. The report is available to all 

members and it is called the Report of the Special Committee on Expropriation, dated December 1963. 

 

The report deals with the problems of entry, acquisition, compensation and so forth. After careful consideration of 

the briefs from individuals and organizations, provincial and municipal governments, research papers, and 

discussions in committee, the result is this report that I hold in my hands. 

 

The report was unanimously adopted by the committee and contains recommendations which the committee 

believed would be fair to all residents of Saskatchewan; recommendations we thought would be fair to all 

residents whether they lived in rural or urban areas. These recommendations were also unanimous. It was my 

impression that the committee, Mr. Speaker, in careful and diligent study, had taken into consideration that many 

problems of expropriation occurring in the modern day development of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was proud of the committee's work. It proved to me that legislative committees are worthwhile, 

that they can be effective and they can produce solutions to problems. 

 

I place this motion on the order paper, Mr. Speaker, to precipitate discussions in this assembly and to insist that 

the government introduce 



 

February 26, 1965 
 

 

723 

legislation proposed by the special committee on expropriation. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I don't have the seconder on this motion. I didn't catch the name. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — The hon. member for Hanley (Mr. Walker). 

 

Hon. A.C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I have one or two observations I would 

like to make on this. I rather regret that the member moving the motion didn't see fit to outline the terms of 

reference of when this committee was set up by the legislature. 

 

I'm speaking form memory, but it seems to me that the terms of reference setting up the committee and its work, 

were to do two things. It was to look into this whole matter of expropriation and make recommendations. In 

addition to this, it was charged with the responsibility of outlining and drafting a draft bill that would incorporate 

these findings and submit this draft bill to the government. That draft bill, as I recall was submitted to the 

government and the government, in its wisdom at that time, chose not to act on that draft or that draft bill could 

have been brought in and been dealt with in the session last year. So the responsibility for the bill not coming 

before this house rests directly on the shoulders of the former government. 

 

I regret too, and probably the member doesn't know, certainly I don't, what objections the government had to the 

bill as it was drafted. Why did they not proceed to bring the bill into the legislature so that it could be proceeded 

with? 

 

I want to make this observation because I'm speaking from memory but it is interesting to note that the chairman 

of that committee is now appealing to this new government to do something which his government when they 

were in power, refused to do on behalf of the work of this committee. 

 

Mr. Walker: — I don't know whether we want to get into a lengthy debate. I would certainly like to say 

something about this and another matter at some length. I should therefore adjourn the debate. But if I could have 

leave to just say this to my hon. friend, (Mr. Cameron) who just sat down, the draft bill which was presented to 

the government was not in the form which was drafted by the legislative counsel. You know, Mr. Speaker, bills 

are introduced in this house, only after they have passed through the office of the legislative counsel. There just 

wasn't time for the legislative counsel to go over the bill and put it into shape before the 22nd of March last year 

when the house was dissolved. I can assure him that there was no decision by the previous government not to 

proceed with the bill. It was simply a matter of expiration of time. 

 

I would like to say something however, about this resolution, when it comes next before the house and I would 

therefore ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The assembly adjourned at 5:29 p.m. o'clock. 

 


