



















































Hansard: February 15, 1965


231 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

8th Day 

 

Monday, February 15, 1965. 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mrs. Merchant (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like the house to take 

note of the fact that we have the first of very many groups of school children who will be visiting in the assembly 

in the course of the session. Today we have two grade seven classes from John Lake School in Saskatoon. They 

are under the leadership of their teachers, Mr. Robinson and Miss Marshall. They have come to visit the 

legislature on a very historic day, a day about which they will tell their grandchildren, and the day on which the 

new Canadian Flag flew for the first time over this Legislative Building. I am sure that the house would want to 

welcome them today. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

WELCOME TO HAROLD WORTH CURLING RINK 
 

Mrs. Merchant: — While I am on my feet, I would also like to draw the attention of the house to the fact that we 

have with us the Harold Worth Rink curling out of the Hub City of Saskatoon, the Saskatchewan Champions, who 

will carry our colors, I hope with equal success, into the Brier Champion ship. 
 

MRS. MCNIVEN'S RINK — CURLING 
 

Mrs. Merchant: — I think it is interesting to know that while we drew attention the other day to Mrs. McNiven's 

rink from Delisle, it is interesting to know that we have, I think for the first time in history, a brother and a sister 

skipping rinks that go into the national championship in both ladies' and in men's curling. Mrs. McNiven and Mr. 

Worth are brother and sister. Mrs. McNiven's husband curls on the Worth rink and they, of course, as we 

mentioned on Friday are from Delisle. We at Saskatoon take some credit for the Delisle people, but we can, I 

think, take a good deal of credit for the Worth rink in that they are curling out of the Hub City and there are two 

members of the Worth rink, Gary Stevens and Murray Armstrong, who do come from the city and I know that, 

wherever they come from, we all wish them success at the beginning of March. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

BRANCH LINE ABANDONMENT 
 

Hon. Gordon B. Grant (Acting Minister of Industry and Information): — Before proceeding with the Orders of 

the Day, I have an announcement that I would like to make. The very important question of the future of the 

branch rail lines in Saskatchewan has been before this house on numerous occasions and concern has been 

expressed on various aspects of it, dealing with rationalization and line abandonment, handling of rate structures, 

subsidies, etc. I am pleased to announce that the committee established to study the proposed federal bill C120 

has completed its examination in detail and has heard presentations from various interested organizations. I feel 

the government, in presenting this report, is presenting a positive approach, to the subject of interest to local, 

provincial and national bodies. Other provinces and organizations are vitally interested in the report in order to 

assist, them with their representation. Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure in tabling herewith the report of this 

committee. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE CULTIVATED FARM LAND 
 

Hon. A.H. McDonald (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make an announcement in 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

232 

which I am sure all members will be interested and in which I am sure the farmers of our province, generally, will 

be interested. I am sure that the members of the assembly are aware that it has been the expressed intention of this 

government to allow those farmers who need cultivated crown land to buy this land. I am very, very pleased to 

announce the terms under which they will be able to purchase this land. 

 

First of all, under eligibility, any lease, consisting of a quarter section or a parcel of land of forty acres or more 

that is under cultivation will be put up for sale. Any lease holder or lessee, that is a bona fide full time farmer will 

have the opportunity of purchasing these lands. He must have farmed or held this lease for a minimum of five 

years. The reason for this, Mr. Speaker, is to make sure that speculators could not profit from the sale of crown 

lands. 

 

Crown lands will be withheld but only those, that in the opinion of the department, may have borrowed much in 

excess of the present agricultural value at some future date. 

 

The price of the lands will be the price that was set by a formula in the Department of Agriculture on April 1st, 

1961. The only change being made under this formula is that the minimum price, rather than being $10 an acre 

has been increased to $16. 

 

I would like to draw the attention of the house that, since 1961, land prices have increased by approximately thirty 

per cent, but it is the belief of the government and the department that it is in our interest to see these farmers 

established on economic units rather than endeavouring to extract every last nickel in his pants. 

 

The formula that I indicated to you will be a firm price until March 31st, 1966. Any unpaid rentals or any 

indebtedness that the present lessee has to the Department of Agriculture will be added to the purchase price and 

can be financed aver a period of time. In other words, .we are giving the lessee the opportunity to re-finance his 

holdings. A special bonus will be offered of $50 a year to a minimum of ten years, or a maximum of $500. We 

will be credited to the purchase price of the land. 

 

There is one other matter that I perhaps should point out. In those cases where the value of the land is very small, 

we do not intend to give credit to the maximum $500. We will be paying in all cases, or giving credit in all cases a 

maximum of ten per cent of the appraised value of the land. 

 

We expect that this policy will cost the Department of Agriculture and the people of Saskatchewan something in 

the neighborhood of $2,000,000. 

 

The credit of $50 a year to a maximum of $500 will assist lessee in finding sufficient funds to make his down 

payment. It would also offer some compensation to those people, especially in northern Saskatchewan, who had 

put in a good deal of work and in some instances of money, to bring difficult land under cultivation. The terms of 

sale will be ten per cent down of the total price, including any indebtedness of the lessee to the Department. The 

lessee will have up to the maximum of thirty years to pay for this land and the only basis where thirty years will 

not be the term of the lease are those cases where it would take the individual to an age of seventy or over before 

the purchase agreement was fulfilled. The interest rate will be five per cent simple interest. There is provision for 

the postponement of principal and interest in those years of crop failures. 

 

There will be a provision for those lessees who would like to pay out their entire indebtedness and reduce their 

paying time during the agreement. I would like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the main difference between the 

policy that I am announcing today and the policy that has been in effect up to this moment, is that the down 

payments are thirty per cent rather than thirty-five to fifty per cent, that the lessee need not have his taxes paid up 

and need not have all his indebtedness clear to the Department, and that we are giving him the privilege of 

re-financing. We think that this will be of great benefit to many of our farmers, especially in the north and 

north-eastern part of the province. It was our experience that the former program was not meeting the needs of our 

farmers and that they were not taking advantage of it and we sincerely hope the present holders of crown lands 

can become land owners in the immediate 



February 15, 1965 

 

233 

future. We realize that this will give them an asset that they can use to better their farming activities and I think 

both the province and the country could benefit because of this policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, I am very glad that the Minister of Agriculture has at last come 

out with a policy with regard to land because there was a great deal of uneasiness throughout the country among 

the farmers who had crown lands, and this policy will set them at ease. I know in some cases they actually sent in 

their money, the full price to purchase land, and this was sent back to them. They did not know what was going to 

happen to them. I am glad also, I am very glad to see that the government has adopted a policy, which we 

instituted, the postponement of interest and principle, in the event of a crop failure. This is very important and I 

am very glad that we got that started and that it has been adopted by the present government of Saskatchewan. I 

hope, Mr. Speaker, that the government will clear up a whole lot of uncertainty about the leasing of land in the 

very near future because there is a great deal of uneasiness in the country in regard to this matter. People who . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, in the opinion of the member for Kelsey (Mr. 

Brockelbank), there may be some uneasiness. I would like to point out that, for the first time in twenty years, the 

Department of Agriculture . . . 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Twenty years to do . . . 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, this is not a point of order . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, the hon. minister was interrupting me. This is not a point of order. 

There is still a great deal of uneasiness. A great many people to whom commitments were made haven't got it 

cleared up and they do not know . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — On a point of privilege, if the hon. member will take his seat. The hon. member 

has said that there were commitments made. There were no commitments made that were not accepted, not one, 

and if my hon. friend thinks there were, he has a recourse that he can use. If he wants to use it, it is okay with me. 

If he doesn't, then don't make these statements in this house. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, this is no point of privilege. He is just rising to take part in this 

debate, and I do want to make a point of order, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — Nuts. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — . . . that allowing this kind of an announcement of policy and the argument 

justifying policy is wrong on the orders of the day, at least to debate it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! A minister of the crown has made a statement of house and I think it is only 

reasonable to allow the Leader of the Opposition to make a very brief statement thereon. This cannot lead to 

debate. Anyone who wants to debate this can do that by substantive motion at a later time. This is the correct 

method to have this proceed. We don't want a disorderly debate in the house and, I am sure, hon. members would 

not wish it. We have had a succinct statement from the minister and a brief reply from the Leader of the 

Opposition and there the matter is going to end. 

 

I do wish to apologize to the house for having inadvertently passed over the introduction of bills and proceeding 

immediately to the orders of the day. I want to apologize for having done this and I now 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

234 

call "introduction of bills." 

 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 

The assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Guy (Athabaska) for an 

Address-In-Reply and the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey). 

 

Mr. Ian H. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, as I adjourned the debate on Friday last, I was about 

to thank the people of Souris-Estevan for the vote of confidence they gave me in electing me to represent them in 

this house for another four year term. 

 

I might say that they saw fit to give me one of the highest majorities in the province, both percentage wise and 

numerically, and thank them for this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDougall: — I should like at this time, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate the Premier and this new government 

for the progressive, forward-looking plans outlined in the Throne Speech. After twenty long years of socialist 

stumbling, this outline of policy, this, plan of progress, this blueprint to lead Saskatchewan out of the wilderness 

should gladden the hearts of the majority of the people of Saskatchewan. I expect it will gladden the hearts of all 

but the Socialist who sit to your left, who left us so far behind other provinces. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have no startling letters to read today, but I will tell the house that, only recently, the Premier 

revealed that Saskatchewan had taken every possible step to have a heavy water plant located in Estevan. He said 

that every possible incentive had been offered to firms which had a bid for the plant on the basis of building it in 

Estevan. 

 

Now, as a result of the incentives offered by the government, prospects today appear good to excellent should this 

plant be built in Saskatchewan. If it is, we will be in on a $50,000,000 project. We will see 500 men employed 

during construction and 200 highly skilled persons employed permanently thereafter. This will be the largest plant 

of its kind in the world, and, Mr. Speaker, to Saskatchewan this means jobs. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. MacDougall: — this will be a massive shot in the arm of the economy of the south east corner of the 

province. Equally important, such a plan would mean heavy use of an important natural resource, lignite coal. 

About 370,000 tons of coal would be used every year by the plant. This would be of immeasurable value to this 

failing industry. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan also sought the first heavy water plant built by the federal government, but all 

indications were that the administration of the day simply pleaded with Ottawa to put it in this province. By 

following the usual socialist method, they seemed to think that simply wanting the plant was enough. They were 

unable to realize that, in a day of intense competition, more than wishful thinking is needed to win such a prize. 

Because of the lack of real action by the Socialists, the plant went to Nova Scotia. The new government 

recognized that more than crying was needed to get such an important industry. It felt that the benefits to be 

gained by having a heavy water plant near Estevan were so great that every possible incentive should be offered 

to try and get this project. 
 

Because of these incentives, two other firms seeking the contract with the Atomic Energy of Canada, on the basis 

of a plant in Saskatchewan, were able to submit comparative bids and the prospects of one of them being 

successful are very good at the present time. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. MacDougall: — This, Mr. Speaker, is an example of good government in action. It is a government that 

understands the value of free and competitive enterprise and is willing to do something about it. It is a 



February 15, 1965 

 

235 

government that sees the needs of its people and acts on the matter. It is a government that gets results rather than 

dreaming socialist, dreams. It is a government that will, continue to work for the people, one that will have 

Saskatchewan catch up and even pass its neighboring provinces. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDougall: —: Mr. Speaker, for example, we, in Souris-Estevan, tried for many years to have highway no. 

47 either oiled or black topped, only to have been met time and time again with frustration and defeat. Three 

months after the Liberal government took power we got action. No. 47 was oiled to Benson and plans are it the 

making to have it completed to Stoughton next year. Oiling of no. 9 was started last fall to be completed in the 

spring. Highway no. 9 was in great need of dust control because it is a main tourist artery to the Kenosee Lake 

resort. Contracts have been awarded on the construction of eight miles of no. 9 south to the United States border. 

This necessary piece of road work is long overdue but the former administration could not see the value of such 

re-construction as tourist necessity, much less its value to the local citizens. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are five border crossings in my constituency, but the former government saw fit to revert 

ten miles of no. 50 highway from Torquay to the Fortuna Crossing into a municipal grid road system. This 

worked a great hardship on the municipality of Cambria, no. 6. I happened to accompany one delegation to see 

Department of Highways' officials, point pointing out that this was a mistake in view of the fact that there was 

new oil field construction and development going on in the area, but again to no avail. They still -proceeded with 

their plans. Indeed, the people who were forced to carry the extra financial burden to maintain no. 50 as a grid 

road were hostile. They realized that the road was built only a few years ago and they did not have the equipment, 

the manpower or the finances to maintain the road. The new Liberal government has indicated that this road will 

be taken back into the highway system in the near future. 

 

I have constantly urged the government to consider oiling no. 1 highway west of Estevan. The steady increase in 

traffic due to the increased oil activity in the Oungre area has made this a necessity and I am hoping that the 

Minister of Highways can see fit to find finances to complete this servicing in the coming year, because, if he 

doesn't, this road will deteriorate rapidly in the future. 

 

The Estevan Chamber of Commerce has also pointed out that Estevan loses a considerable amount of business 

from south west of the city because of the dusty conditions of this road. Traffic has tended towards Weyburn 

because they had an oiled road from the Oungre area to that small city to the north west of us. We, in Estevan 

would like to see this flow of traffic corrected, Mr. Speaker, and this can be done by making 18 highway dust 

free. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is apparent to me that, during this session, we will see the opposition, headed by the Acting 

Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Brockelbank), the member for Hanley (Mr. Walker), and the member for Biggar 

(Mr. Lloyd), if he ever gets back to the house, in their frustration at finding themselves in the opposition, and also 

in their frustration at the plans outlined in the Speech from the Throne, indulge in obstruction and delaying tactics 

which will make the obstruction tactics of that great Canadian divider, John Diefenbaker, look like a Sunday 

School picnic. We all know of John's insatiable thirst for power, his personal desire to become the Prime Minister 

at any expense even at the expense of dividing Canada, and we also all know of his inability to keep his party 

together. So, too, the CCF, Mr. Speaker, who were such poor losers after the stunning Liberal victory last spring 

left them almost unable to conceive of such a turn of events. It took a whole month for the Liberal victory to sink 

in. Eventually, however, they turned the reins of power over to the new administration, and now the defeat still 

does not rest lightly with the old CCF, Mr. Speaker. I noticed even the letters to editor in the various newspapers 

throughout the province are even more venomous than they were prior to April 22nd, 1964. I foresee speaker after 

speaker attempting to delay our efforts of fulfilling the blueprint for progress outlined in the Speech from the 

Throne. 

 

In the first seven days we almost saw as many standing votes as we have seen in an entire session in years gone 

by. Now, Mr. Speaker, if they do delay, if they do vote against the Throne Speech, then each and 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

236 

every member of the opposition would be voting against an increase in the minimum wage. Surely, Mr. Speaker, 

the labouring people of this province will not like that. They will oppose increased highway construction, the 

entire population will be opposed to that. They will oppose assistance to retired teachers and government 

employees. Often I see members of the opposition get up and cry big crocodile tears over what the Liberals are 

going to do to the poor people of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if these people vote against the Throne Speech, they will be voting against pensions to old people 

who have no other source of income. They will be opposing the sale of colored margarine, Mr. Speaker, and there 

are many housewives in this province who will feel very hostile about that. They will be opposing expansion of 

provincial parks and regional parks, but I am sure that the majority of the people of the province will approve of 

these expenditures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suspect that some members on the opposite side of this house can vote against the Throne Speech 

because of the clause in it pertaining to wire-tapping. But I am sure that some of the members over there can 

support the Throne Speech because of the rest of the good things we have in it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I see it, everyone in this province will welcome changes in the Election Act. It is unreasonable for 

a province to be kept in doubt for a whole month after the election as to who will be the government. The 

absentee ballot was considered almost useless. Many of them were never counted. At any rate, changes are long 

overdue and when these changes come in, those in the Armed Services in this province will again become first 

class citizens. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDougall: —: Now, Mr. Speaker, it would appear that Estevan is on the verge of another boom. It would 

appear that a new government building in that city is in order. The existing facilities for the Departments of 

Health, Agriculture, Natural Resources, Mineral Resources, are very inadequate. Over-crowding and lack of 

parking facilities add to our problems. A new liquor store is badly needed and parking space is practically 

non-existent. On more than one occasion members of the Estevan Chamber of Commerce have urged me to bring 

these matters to the attention of the government. I am hoping that these facilities will be improved within the next 

four years. 

 

I am an advocate, Mr. Speaker, of increasing the speed limits on our improved and widened highways. Again I 

urge the Attorney General's Department to proceed with plans to increase the speed limits at the earliest possible 

date. I suggest that most traffic already travels at sixty-five miles an hour on these widened highways right now, 

so we might just as well make it legal and, at the same time, consider increasing the night time speed limit to 55 

miles an hour. I am in a position to travel these roads often, and it seems to me than an increase in the speed limit 

is justified at this time. 

 

Mr. M.P. Pederson (Arm River): — . . . speed tickets . . . fines . . . 

 

Mr. MacDougall: —: I haven't had any tickets lately, Mr. Speaker, but I want to avoid this. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I see that the time allotted to me on radio is now up, and I should like to say that I will not 

support the amendment as offered by the opposition but I will support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, I have had the opportunity to observe you in action for 

a few days as Mr. Speaker. Before rising to address this assembly, I am impressed with the thoughtfulness of your 

decisions and I am satisfied that you sill endeavor to be fair. This is most reassuring to me, because I will require 

your assistance far more than you will need mine. 

 

I would like at this time to compliment the lady member from Saskatoon (Mrs. Merchant) on the seconding of the 

Address-In-Reply. I note that she passed her test of loyalty to the liberal party with flying 



February 15, 1965 

 

237 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon City): — To second that grotesque aberration, since identified as the 

Address-In-Reply, the speech of the hon. member for Athabaska, (Mr. Guy), took real mettle. My constituency, 

Saskatoon City, is the third fastest growing city in Canada. We in Saskatoon expect to be the largest city in 

Saskatchewan in the not too distant future. I would hasten to add that the citizens of Saskatoon do not regard 

physical bigness as a prime requisite to the exclusion of more important qualities. Saskatoon is a beautiful city, a 

growing city, a city beginning to flex its industrial muscles. Saskatoon is, figuratively speaking, a warm city. 

Saskatoon people are justifiably proud of the recognition they have earned, far and wise, as a centre of education, 

medicine and research. 

Coming from the fastest growing city in Saskatchewan presents the opportunity for some observations as to why, 

where, and how we are advancing. First, let me deal with the 'why'. Why are we growing at such a pace? Farms 

production has undergone a technological change and automation with all the mixed blessings that go with them. 

With modern equipment, one farmer can now do the work of many. Subsequently, some farmers will move to the 

cities in an attempt to find employment. In addition, an excellent highway system and road system draws 

consumers to a few larger rural towns and cities like Saskatoon. 

 

Where we are going is not so simple to outline. However, I suspect we shall see larger farms, fewer rural villages, 

and larger cities. The relative trend in farm size would tend to support this statement. The average farm size has 

grown from 400 acres in the year I was born, to almost 700 acres today. How we advance into the future will 

require careful thought and responsible action of all the constituency representatives gathered here. I say, without 

hesitation, that, we in the CCF will be guided by careful thought and responsible action. 

 

As I followed the Throne Speech and deliberations of this assembly one year ago, I was sure that we were 

advancing fairly, with measured speed, in the administration of the province. However, it was widely advertised 

at that time that we were stagnating. The advertising promised a new deal for virtually everyone in Saskatchewan. 

In the words of a defeated liberal candidate from Saskatoon constituency, "more freedom, less taxation, more 

security, more jobs, more of everything except misery". I might add a note about that defeated candidate. Having 

been turned down by the public of Saskatoon, he was forthwith appointed by this Liberal government as a public 

representative on the Labour Relations Board. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have never been overwhelmed by modern advertising and promotion but apparently some of 

the citizens of Saskatchewan were taken in. Since that time, an examination of the first months of the Liberal 

government has caused many voters to doubt the honesty of the promotion job done by the Liberal party at that 

time. 

 

Upon reading the most recent Throne Speech, I was struck by the lack of body and total disregard for an 

accounting to this legislature of the events that are normally part of each Throne Address. I have taken the time to 

read through five of the most recent Throne Addresses. I have found these documents presented material about the 

past, present and future in much the same manner as the president of the United States would present the state of 

the union message each year. The five recent Throne Speeches cited the establishment each year of new records in 

such varied fields as tourism, resource development, non-agricultural production, retail sales and social 

legislation. Problems of the day were noted and future plans were presented. Considering the buoyant condition of 

Saskatchewan's economy today, I submit the people of Saskatchewan deserve better. As a representative of 

Saskatoon City, I say the Throne Speech leaves much to be desired. In fact, this Throne Speech will be the first in 

twenty years recognized in the main, for what was not included. 

 

Let me illustrate, Mr. Speaker. Prior to the delivery of the Throne Speech, the party opposite indulged in some 

flag flying. They ran up their colors on the Trade Union Act in an attempt to see who would salute. In order to 

create as much support as possible for their position, certain provocative actions were taken toward labour at that 

time. The reason was obvious. These actions were an attempt to cause union members and their leaders to commit 

irrational acts that would put them in an embarrassing public position. To the everlasting credit of the working 

people and their leaders, they proceeded to deal with these situations in an orderly and legal manner. The end 

result was no change in the Trade 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

238 

Union Act at this time. If they had been successful in goading the working people, the results would have been 

completely different. For instance, one of the changes reported in many newspapers would have unions made 

legal entities. At this time, each single member of a union is responsible before the law for an illegal act he may 

commit. The question then arises, why is it necessary to make all union members responsible for the actions of 

any single member, who as I have already pointed out, is legally responsible for his own actions. 

 

We must keep each point of this argument in its proper perspective. The average person who does not pay more 

than passing attention to the issues of the day can be led on by a fallacy, repeated continually from some quarter 

within our society. The fallacy or misrepresentation is most usually stated as follows: 

 

Companies arid corporations are responsible before the law for their actions so why aren't unions? 

 

A simple distinction can be made between the two. On the one hand, corporations are responsible before the law 

for their employees. They have the right, and they exercise it, to select employees. They have the right to 

terminate their employment. Therefore, they exercise economic control over their employees and by that very 

simple means deter employees from acting in a manner that could bring the corporation into disagreement with 

the law. 

 

On the other hand, unions are not obliged to be responsible for illegal action of individual members because they 

are unable to select or discharge members. They thereby, exercise only as much control over the individual 

member as that individual is prepared to accept. 

 

If legal entities were made of unions, you could be sure that unions would soon cease to exist as effective voices 

of the working people. The question follows, why does the Liberal party in Saskatchewan maintain such a 

negative fascination about making unions legal entities? The answer is again very simple, Mr. Speaker, and can 

best be stated in the words of the sitting member from Morse, the hon. Premier (Mr. Thatcher) who says, time 

after time, that he intends to make Saskatchewan a haven for private enterprise. The words 'private enterprise' are 

the current substitution for 'capitalism'. 

 

Many years ago I was indelibly impressed by the events of World War II. I can recall, as a young boy, listening to 

the periodic news reports in which great battles, mass bombings and untold human suffering, were recounted. I 

shed many tears of compassion. I decided that I would attempt to find out what factors caused the German people 

to be in such an undesirable position. It became clear, as I grew older, that there were many elements contributing 

to the overall situation. First came political apathy; then came a demagogue leading a scapegoat. The demagogue 

then neutralized free organizations that could be capable of interfering with his plans. The neutralization took 

many forms but two very significant actions taken by Hitler were the curtailing of civil liberties and the 

harassment of legitimate organizations, such as the trade union movement. Consequently, Mr. Speaker, each time 

I observe someone in the act of curtailing civil liberties and harassing legitimate organizations in a free society, I 

am on my guard. I am especially alert when no bona-fide evidence has been produced to show that the said 

organizations or individuals have pursued actions that would necessitate an interruption of their civil liberties. The 

destruction of political freedom is an action striking at the very roots of democracy. 

 

I have taken the time, Mr. Speaker, to visit some of the voters in my constituency since the election and I have 

recorded their answers to a number of questions. For instance, they were unaware of any more freedom than they 

had enjoyed previously. As a matter of fact, a considerable number of them expressed concern about their 

security. They fear if they take part in any political activity, they will be subjected to some form of pressure which 

they are not equipped to withstand. 

 

When the CCF formed the government, we would have considered a situation of this type intolerable in 

Saskatchewan. Up to this point, the Liberal government has done nothing to dispel the fears they have created in 

the minds of many Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

In speaking of the people of my constituency, I have also found a general dissatisfaction with the present 

government stemming from the 



February 15, 1965 

 

239 

increase in the tax burden. The increased medical and hospital premiums was a most frequent matter to draw 

comment. Mr. Speaker, I promised myself and many of my electors, that I would not be critical for the sake of 

being a critic, but that I would criticize with a view to improving. I also feel that we, in this party, should offer 

suitable alternatives where necessary. The resolutions and amendments put forward by our group will 

undoubtedly contain what we feel to be suitable alternatives. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hans A. Broten (Watrous): — Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure that I rise to take part in the speech this 

afternoon. 

 

I would like to congratulate you on your attainment to such high office and I would also like to congratulate the 

people that have taken part in the debate so far and the new members. 

 

The mover and seconder of the motion to the Reply should be congratulated, the mover for doing such a good 

hatchet job and the lady member for Saskatoon (Mrs. Merchant) for making a good recovery. 

 

I would like to mention to the member from Athabaska (Mr. Guy) that this kind of speech is done well by the 

Premier also and many times, I am sure it has helped our cause on this side of the house. 

 

There has been much said about the CCF and liberalism in this house. The CCF was started in this province as a 

third party when we had liberalism for decades. The Liberal party had been shackled so closely to vested interests 

and privileges for such a long time that the people of Saskatchewan wanted to throw off the shackles in order to 

obtain the necessary leadership and receive action. 
 

The binding of the two old line parties takes place because their main source of revenue does not come fro the 

common people within their organization. They also have not enough grassroots organization within their parties. 

This allows pressure groups to apply undue pressure, both by way of finance and ideas. 
 

When the CCF came into power in 1944, they were financed and organized by ordinary people within the party. 

And what a difference this has made! There bloomed in Saskatchewan a fair chance for big and little business, as 

is demonstrated by the records which were broken in industry and resource development and by our co-ops. The 

retail trade expansion has also been phenomenal. In 1963 it reached a billion dollars for the first time. Perhaps the 

most outstanding demonstration of a free party in action is what the CCF has been able to do for the sick and 

handicapped and the aged — the first hospitalization scheme, the first medical care scheme, the first 

supplementary allowances, the first support to private housing agencies for the aged. Big business received its 

necessary assurances of fair treatment. Smaller business received help from the government finance office and 

from Sedco, the Saskatchewan Development Corporation. This help and recognition resulted in a well rounded 

program which helped our province expand to its present level. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to thank the constituency of Watrous for supporting me so well in the last election. I consider 

it a privilege to serve this constituency and I hope to serve with humility and efficiency. 
 

At this juncture, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word about my constituency. The people in Watrous constituency 

think that highway no. 2A, which runs to Manitou Beach, should be extended to no. 14 highway because of the 

potash development at Guernsey, and also because there are many cars going to and coming from the beach from 

no. 14 to the north. Another important factor is that Watrous is the only town with daily passenger train service in 

this area and the people in the north east have to go thirty-five miles around the end of the lake when the road isn't 

open. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have here a traffic count on a four-day weekend at Manitou Beach for the days of August 9th, 10th, 

11th, and 12th, 1963. The east entrance count was 1,370 and the south was 6,639 cars. The 1964 traffic count was 

2,598 from the east and 5,619 cars from the south. These counts were taken in August which is some weeks past 

the peak time. In 1959 there was a survey taken by the Natural Resources Department and the weekends were 

counted by personnel hired by the department. The weekends counted were from July 18th to September 6th. The 

number of cars entering 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

240 

was 12,009 and the number of people entering was 35,903. So there are a great many people travelling in this 

resort area. The Manitou Regional Park has requested a camping area off no, 2A highway. I believe this request 

should receive early attention. Usage by the public is much larger than in any other regional park. 

 

The town of Watrous is also one of the largest towns not served by natural gas. I hope the extension of this service 

will receive early attention. The Watrous constituency is a farming area, and the townspeople and the farmers are 

naturally concerned about the price received for all their commodities. When grade A eggs sell for 14 cents a 

dozen, when good heifer calves sell for 14 cents a pound, and the price of wheat is down 20 cents a bushel, there 

is real cause for concern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people across the way say we need Liberals to run our affairs. I say that the less chance the 

Liberals have to put their 'cotton picking' fingers into our affairs the better off we will be. When cattle prices are 

17 or 18 cents a pound, when eggs are down to 14 cents a dozen and hogs as low as they have been for years, I 

don't think we need liberalism. 

 

What is this liberalism, Mr. Speaker? On September 21, 1959, this is what the Leader Post had to say about the 

speech from the member from Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) under the heading "McDonald given ovation for free 

swinging speech". And I quote: 

 

The Saskatchewan liberal convention came alive Wednesday afternoon with a free swinging speech from 

retiring leader A.H. McDonald that covered the entire political waterfront. He blasted provincial and federal 

government policies, objected to soviet premier Khrushchev's visit to the United States, 

 

And the important thing is this: 

 

opposed any subsidies for protection for agriculture, and urged a nationwide return to principles of liberalism. 

 

Is this the liberalism that this province needs, Mr. Speaker? In 1959 the farmer received less for his wheat than he 

did the past year. In fact 30 cents a bushel less, and yet our Liberals across the way say we need no help as 

farmers. I say, "Shame", Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Prince Albert): — . . . the Tories 

 

Mr. Broten: — In the Throne Speech, the Liberals mentioned master farm awards, but that is not enough, Sir, 

when we get conditions such as we are facing now. 

 

In contrast to what the member for Moosomin (Mr. McDonald) said, I would like to read from a broadcast what 

Mr. T.C. Douglas said when he entered the federal field. He was speaking of his reason for entering the federal 

field and I quote: 

 

What influenced me most, however has been the steady decline in farm income in relation to farm costs. I went 

into politics 26 years ago because, I was convinced that the farmers were the most exploited group in our 

society. I came to Saskatchewan in 1944 because I believed we could do something to improve the lot of our 

farming population and I believe we have achieved a measure of success. However, helping the farmer get 

electric power, better roads, schools and hospitals, does not meet the problem of declining income. At the 

present time the farmers of Canada are 12 per cent of the working force but they receive less then 6 per cent of 

the total income. 

 

This is four years ago, Mr. Speaker. What a contrast! On the one hand, not even an understanding of our problems 

and no government help for solving it. On the other hand, a man left a successful provincial career to 



February 15, 1965 

 

241 

go into the federal sphere on behalf of the farmer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what has been the government's overall attitude to their responsibility? A phrase which we have 

heard, I think aptly describes their conduct and approach. It is the meat-axe approach. Cut off services without too 

much regard for need. Embury House was the first. Probably the smallest number and weakest in our society 

suffered. The A.M.A. was cut off, another type of service which the Liberal government does not think necessary. 

Mr. Speaker, the Agricultural Machinery Administration provided a testing service which was invaluable to the 

farmer and which was appreciated by the farmer. 

 

But Sir, the meat-axe fell. Why? Because the government is shackled, as I have mentioned before, to the whims of 

big business and privilege. Services were cut in many areas, even transportation was curtailed and government 

employees were embarrassed in not having adequate transportation. 

 

This meat-axe conduct reminded me of the thirties. I have heard much, as a young man, about Liberal conduct and 

their approach to problems. I thought at the time that perhaps the people were a little hard on the boys, but the acts 

of the last few months have shown Saskatchewan why our party, the CCF was started. It was started to give the 

electorate a humane approach to the workings of government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, coming from a farming constituency, and realizing the hard line attitude of the government to 

farmers, I think I should mention something about cattle prices. I bought heifer calves this fall for 14 cents a 

pound. The average 1935 to 1939 cattle price was 3.6 cents a pound. Taking into consideration the value of our 

dollar now, the 14 cents would be 4 1/2 cents in comparison to the 3.6 cents, So in reality the farmer is getting 

only 4 1/2 cents for his fine heifer calves. 

 

Grade A eggs have been 14 cents a dozen the last two or three months, and here again in the light of the dollar 

value based on the 1935 to 1939 period, the farmer is received only 4 1/2 cents a dozen for his eggs, in fact less 

than any time that I know of in the 1930's. The reason I bring this up, in this manner, is to show relative prices of 

purchasing power of commodities between the thirties and now. The picture is frightening. The comparison is too 

close. But our Liberal government says nothing about it, says nothing about it in the Throne Speech. 

 

Another area in which the government is not taking any lead is the rail line problem. The leader of the opposition, 

the member for Biggar (Mr. Lloyd), was conspicuous in his fight for justice in this area and he was as 

conspicuous as the Liberals are conspicuous in their lack of action. 

 

Mr. G.G. Leith (Elrose): — At this time, I rise on a point of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Point of order. 

 

Mr. Leith: — I don't believe the member for Watrous (Mr. Broten) should be mentioning any part of rail line 

abandonment because it is on the order paper as a resolution to be discussed at a later date. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The point of order is well taken. It is on the order paper. 

 

Mr. Broten: — As my time is running out, Mr. Speaker, I will close, Sir, and I will support the amendment and 

not the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, may I join with all the hon. members of this house in 

congratulating you, Sir on your elevation to the high office which you now hold. I also wish to congratulate all 

those members who are new to this house and the fortunate ones that have been re-elected. At this time too I wish 

to thank the people of Cumberland constituency for the honour they bestowed on me. I shall, in the next four 

years, continue to speak in the interest of the people I represent. 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

242 

I have enjoyed the debate so far except for one thing. It seems that certain people in this house cannot keep their 

hands out of the dirt. This year when we should be celebrating our anniversary they are bringing up the same kind 

of stuff that we experienced about thirteen years ago. At that time my hon. friends opposite should have learned 

(or maybe they didn't learn) the lesson that playing in the dirt hurts a party and I think that the same thing is 

happening at this time, and they will only hurt themselves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — In so far as Mr. Ray Woollam is concerned, he saw the degradation of Indian people in the 

north and was roused. On one or two occasions he spoke to me. He told the government of the day and the 

ministers and the other people what he thought of the problems, and what the answers were. It is very unfortunate 

that the Premier of this province tried to take something out of context leaving the impression that. Mr. Woollam 

had suggested something that the CCF should do, but had never done and would not do, but which is not the 

record of my friends opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — In the last election, Sir, in my own constituency, the Liberal party used liquor. They used 

money to get votes and I can prove it if I am asked to do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Those statements, the hon. member knows very well, are unorderly and unparliamentary and I 

am going to ask him to withdraw, and withdraw forthwith. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I will withdraw. Insofar as political alignments of civil servants is concerned and support of 

the C.C.F. — I know, and hon. members on the opposite side know, that there are a number of Liberal civil 

servants that have worked with the previous government and are still working with this government. I have had 

some personal experience of this kind, and at no time did the former CCF government try to make it an issue as 

has been done in the past few days in connection with Mr. Woollam. 

 

I think, Sir, there is inadequacy in the Throne Speech, I find nothing here that would give hope to farmers such as 

I represent in Cumberland. I see no hope for the Indian and Metis people. I see no hope for the young people. I 

see in the press that the Premier has announced that he can find $3,000,000 to give to oil companies for the 

privilege of obtaining oil underneath land which belongs to the people of Saskatchewan, but he cannot find a 

million dollars for the farmers, or a million dollars for the students of this province so they could get a free 

education in high schools. This is what I regret. There is really no constructiveness in this Throne Speech. It is not 

the voice of a government representing farmers and trappers and fishermen or small businessmen. I submit to you, 

Sir, that what we heard so far from the Premier and his ministers and from the hon. members opposite is the voice 

of big business and nothing else? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — This government is not concerned with the people of Saskatchewan, the farmers and others 

as is indicated in the Throne Speech. They are only concerned with so called development in the province and for 

big corporations. I would like to point out that, as we peruse the press, we find there are other people in Canada 

who do not agree with our Premier. Here is an article in the Financial Post. It states that incentive plans lure plants 

but that wealthy regions usually get most of them. It also points out that companies only come into a province 

when they find it possible to make money. The history of potash in this province, and the history of oil wells 

indicates just that. We got oil companies in to this province under the previous government. They came to this 

province because oil was found here. They didn't care that there was a Socialist government. When the liberals 

were in power they gave away a million acres for $1 to the Imperial Company and never got an oil well, but when 

oil companies needed oil, they searched for it and found it. As a result we now have over 5,000 oil wells in 

Saskatchewan which were developed under the CCF government. 

 

We had potash development. There has been nothing new since 



February 15, 1965 

 

243 

This government got into power, absolutely nothing new, except for the worse. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Lots of wind . . . 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I have spent considerable time in the north and I am very well acquainted with 

the Anglo-Rouyn mine. I have something to say today that will shock members on both sides of the house and 

shock the people of Saskatchewan and I hope that the Premier is prepared to listen to what I have to say. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Anglo-Rouyn mine was not the first mine in Saskatchewan, although it so indicated in the 

Throne Speech. The first base metal mines wholly in Saskatchewan were the Mandy and the Hemming mines. 

Since that time we have had the Birch Lake mine and we have had the Coronation mine, which, according to the 

Minister of Mineral Resources, (Mr. Cameron) is operating at this time. And if any mine should have been called 

a base metal mine, if he forgot about- all the others, he should have remembered that there was a Coronation mine 

which is producing today, yet he has the gall to tell the people of Saskatchewan that the La Ronge mine was the 

first base metal mine in this province. 

 

Mr. D.W. Michayluk (Redberry): — It sounds good. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — It sounds good, it was publicized just before the Hanley by-election hoping that they could 

win in Hanley by making up statements of that nature. But I would like to point out, Sir, that this is not a big 

mine, I wish it were. This mine was discovered about 1908. It was called the Hall mine. The Hall brothers had it. 

They sold it to Consolidated Mining and Smelting for $75,000 back in 1929. I knew the Hall brothers and I know 

of this transaction. After some Prince Albert, people restaked his property in 1951, there was a shaft put down. I 

think it was the year 1956. It is not the first base metal mine and Anglo-Rouyn has been working and stock piling 

for some time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Where is the shock? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — You will get the shock, just wait. And this mine, Sir, wasn't developed because there wasn't 

enough ore there and the ore wasn't of high enough grade. I have mining journals here, The Canadian Mines 

Handbook of 1964, and what does it say? That there is a potential ore body of about 2,500,000 tons of less than 2 

per cent ore. That is a small mine. An average mine in Canada, which is considered a good mine, will have to 

have about 10,000,000 tons. 

 

In comparison Flin Flon has produced 40 or 50,000,000 tons. 2,500,000 tons is just peanuts, Mr. Premier. But the 

important thing is that there has been a lot of noise made about this great mine, this first big, base metal mine in 

Saskatchewan, and I am worried about it. I am very much worried about it. Because if this ore is only 2 per cent 

ore, which means forty pounds of copper to the ton of ore, what do we have? At 34 cents a pound for copper at 

the mine at today's price, you have a gross price structure of about $13 to $15 a ton for the ore from the 

Anglo-Rouyn mine. 

 

Now, Sir, I know something about mining and I would like the premier to get up and say that this is not true. In 

order to high grade ore out of the mine, it is going to cost at least $8 a ton, and that is a low figure that I am giving 

you, Sir. The premier has not told us yet whether the Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting Company is going to 

smelt the ore from Anglo-Rouyn and at what cost. 

 

Mr. Thatcher (Norse): — It is. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — If it is as he says, then I would like to know what the cost is going to be. I estimate the cost 

will be at least $4 a ton, that makes $12 a ton so far. Now, Sir, they haven't got a road to the mine. They need to 

build about one-hundred . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher (Norse): — We are building. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — . . . miles of road. Well the government will build it 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

244 

though they haven't got the money. If they can't get it from the farmers and others, they will borrow another one 

or two million as the Anderson government did for roads, and they assure me they will. I am certain they will. 

They will build it at no cost to the company but it is still going to cost the company to transport the ore from La 

Ronge to Flin Flon and I doubt if they can transport the high grade for less than $3 a ton. Now you can't tell me 

that, if I invest $1.70 as the shares are now, I would get my money back. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You ought to have got the shares at 10 cents. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I would like to have you prove it to me. You will have all kinds of opportunity when I sit 

down . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Do you want it? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — And the fact is, Sir, this . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Three-hundred jobs, don't you want them? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — . . . that the mining company only a year ago had no . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Do you want those jobs? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — . . . had no money. Now he is talking about jobs. You can't lead me astray. The mining 

company, Sir . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Nobody did here . . . 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — . . . which had, according to the report here, about $39,000 in debts to Rio-Algom and at the 

same time had only a few hundred dollars in the treasury. Now in order to make a big blow, what does the 

Premier do? He goes out there and the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Steuart) goes out into our community and if 

that is not enough politics, they bring the head of Rio-Algom which has 2,700,000 shares or more of 

Anglo-Rouyn, more than half the shares of the company. They bring Mr. Winters to Prince Albert in order to 

induce the people of this province to buy shares . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Oh! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Not at 20 cents, Sir, like Rio-Algom, which bought them for 23 cents; 450,000 shares in 

1964 for $103,000. My people are paying $1.70. They are going to lose their shirts. Sir, I am saying this! This 

behavior by the Premier and by the Minister in bringing in other former Ministers, is going to be a black blot on 

the province of Saskatchewan when these people find themselves bankrupt. 

 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — . . . at 11 cents? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — You probably got them at 11 cents. You probably did and you can't make money at 11 cents 

on a mine that doesn't make any profit. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I would like to tell the hon. member that not only are we glad 

that we got that mine, but we have another of the same variety on the way that we will be announcing very 

shortly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I know the other mine too, at Rottenstone Lake. It has 400,000 tons, measly 

peanuts again, though it is high grade ore. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You're out of . . . 



February 15, 1965 

 

245 

Mr. Berezowsky: — . . . which is high grade ore and they will mine it out in a few months and it will probably 

cost the government a few million dollars to build roads into that area. That is another black smear on the Liberal 

government of this province. If you want to talk about good mines, then talk about potash and not about these 

peanut mines in the north. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Peanut mines eh? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Now, Mr. Speaker, another thing that worries me . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Is that all you think of . . . 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — . . . my time is just about up. I wish I had more. I would throw a lot of things at this 

government, I can't be too happy about what they are doing. This government has not dealt with the people of the 

north the way they are saying they are doing. Down at Molanosa, in my constituency, the CCF government 

provided nurses year round for these people, sometimes a weekly visit, sometimes a few days at a time. Since the 

government opposite has taken office, those people tell me they haven't seen a nurse in that community and I want 

the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Steuart) to take notice of this, and think about it when selling out the resources 

of this province. 

 

Now what about the people at Candle Lake? . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — That's as close as . . . 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — They were to have power. It is one of the nicest resorts in this province, and the CCF 

budgeted for power for this year but to save money, the Premier says, "we'll save $5,000,000 by not borrowing", 

and they created a situation where these people are now being denied power in that community. This is not saving 

money, denying something to the people that live in these communities, denying something that they are entitled 

to. You can talk all you want about all the industries you are going to bring, but when you are doing this kind of 

thing to our people, you will hear about it, and when an election comes you will get no votes, believe me. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, just one more thing. There are a lot of things I would like to say which I will 

say some other time. I see that the hon. member for Athabaska (Mr. Guy) has a lovely grin on his face whenever I 

am talking about the problems of people of the north. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Lovely? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Yes. I will come to him in due course. It is suggested in the Throne Speech that a branch of 

the Department of Indian Affairs is going to be set up. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Are you opposed? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I am opposed, if you are going to set it up so that it would be a propaganda department. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Oh no . . . 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Well, I have it here from the Indians themselves. They don't want to have anybody run their 

affairs. They want to run their affairs themselves. If you assist these people to run their own affairs, I would agree, 

but at this time, Mr. Speaker, this government can do as other governments should do. You can provide housing 

for the natives without setting up an Indian branch of government. You can give them social welfare services 

without setting up a separate branch. You can provide educational opportunities without setting up a separate 

branch! But setting up a branch is segregating these people, setting up a ghetto and I am sure the Indians are going 

to smarten up and will resent it. I don't want you to do what you have done in the Department of Education, where 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

246 

there sits a guy who is working for the Northern Education Committee and under whom the teachers are scared to 

death that he is going to be spying on them and reporting back to the government as to their activities. I don't want 

that to happen with the natives, and I don't want that to happen with the Metis. Mr. Speaker, I think my time is up 

and you can see that I will not support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. I.C. Nollet (Cut Knife): — Mr. Speaker, I wish first of all to congratulate you on your elevation to the high 

office of Speaker of this legislature. Indications are that you are going to handle the affairs of this house in a most 

impartial and, if I may say o, expeditious manner. When I came to the legislature for the afternoon sitting, I 

noticed the new flag flying, and I must say it is a lovely flag. I like it . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Nollet: — . . . and I just wonder what all the fuss was about. I wish also, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate the 

mover and seconder of the Address-In-Reply to His Honour's address to this assembly, with qualified 

congratulations to the mover, the hon. member for Athabaska (Mr. Guy) for being his old self. By contrast, the 

speech of the seconder, the hon. lady member for Saskatoon (Mrs. Merchant) was a tremendous improvement. By 

some strange coincidence, Mr. Speaker, the mover and seconder are seat mates, as a result I would hope that the 

manners of the member form Athabaska (Mr. Guy) will improve. Heaven forbid, Mr. Speaker, should the reverse 

be the final outcome of this association! 

 

The hon. member for Athabaska (Mr. Guy) made only a general reference to the Throne Speech, in part, to the 

effect that it contained more hope for the future than any presented to the legislature in the past twenty years. 

Actually, this abbreviated version of a Throne Speech reminds one more of a grocery list with half of the items 

forgotten. He then went on to build up the prestige of the Premier. Perhaps he felt he needed it badly when he 

mentioned that the Premier had the Herculean task of cleaning up the mess left by the Socialists. I will deal with 

this so-called mess in greater detail further along in my remarks, Mr. Speaker. He stated 1964 was an important 

year because the province was now freed from stagnation, etc., ad infinitum. I would think that the Liberals would 

finally realize that the people of Saskatchewan know differently and that, by continuing this hoax, they can't 

change the viewpoint of the people that the last twenty years were the best years in Saskatchewan's history. We 

are this year celebrating . . . 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — What are you doing over there, Toby? 

 

Mr. Nollet: — . . . our Diamond Jubilee and what I have said, Mr. Speaker, is beyond question to the many 

responsible and honest people of various shades of political opinion who acknowledge this to be a fact. 

 

Let us look at some of the achievements accomplished in the field of human values, Mr. Speaker. The first and 

finest hospital service plan in North America, this is a fact. Secondly, the first and best universal medicare plan in 

Canada. In fact the kind of medicare scheme recommended for all of Canada, by the Hail Commission. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Nollet: — These, Mr. Speaker, are facts and still they continue to perpetrate the hoax, that we have had 

nothing but stagnation under the Socialists. The hon. lady member for Saskatoon (Mrs. Merchant) says we 

shouldn't talk too much about it because we might create a race of hypochondriacs. The dictionary defines this 

word as one who is affected with extreme melancholy. I ask, are the people of Saskatchewan inclined to 

melancholy because they now enjoy the benefits of guaranteed medical and hospital care, with its attendant 

feeling of peace of mind and security? Far from it. The people of Saskatchewan will forever be grateful to the 

government which had the vision and the courage to implement its pledge in this regard. The facts are . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



February 15, 1965 

 

247 

Mr. Nollet: — . . . when the history of this province is written, it will be recorded that it was a humanitarian 

government which was derisively maligned as a bunch of socialists which made this possible. In addition, I know 

of no single item which reflects more eloquently and beyond question the tremendous economic progress made in 

Saskatchewan over the past twenty years, than Saskatchewan's comprehensive hospital and medical services plan. 

It proves, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan can afford it because a solid economic base supports it. Saskatchewan, 

in this regard, stands out like a shining star in the North American galaxy. Saskatchewan can afford it, Montana 

can't, even Texas, that paragon on capitalistic achievement, which is one of the states that ranks lowest in the 

Union in terms of health, educational and other social services, can't afford it either. The great and mighty United 

States can't afford it and, of course, Canada can't as yet afford it either. This, of course, has been the Liberal 

excuse for over forty-six years, Mr. Speaker, and then renewed again in 1963, forty-four year later with the same 

old excuses now being resurrected. The Premier (Mr. Thatcher) and the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Steuart) 

should be mighty proud too of Saskatchewan's achievement in this regard and admit that Saskatchewan's great 

economic progress over the past twenty years made it possible for Saskatchewan to afford it. They and all the 

Liberal members opposite should talk more about it, especially to Liberal counterparts in Ottawa to remove the 

hypochondria that exists in their own ranks in this regard. They might mention too all their socialist stagnation 

talk really has no basis in fact and that, after all, they had to have some kind of controversial political issue, so 

why not again trot out the good old socialist hoax? 

 

In proof of this, they should mention that stress on human values has advanced rather than retarded 

Saskatchewan's economic progress. My Liberal friends should admit: that revenues are now so abundant and the 

budget surplus so great, that it has become a source or political embarrassment to them, because people now 

really want their promised drugs. They want the deferred building programs continued and gone ahead with, more 

money for highways, for roads, for schools, for municipalities, for irrigation and other agricultural resource 

development, etc. In fact everyone wants the Liberals to do the things that were promised, instead of misreading 

unsigned copies of letters written by a person with errant and cavalier views on the proper ethics of public 

servants which they read to this house as a means of distracting attention away from the problems that now 

confront them. 

 

There is one big stickler, Mr. Speaker. They also promised tax cuts to all and sundry, to the property owners, to 

the consumer, to the income tax payer, to the farmers who want tax free purple gas used in farm trucks, and 

especially tax concessions for big business, Then too, in the face of this record revenue surplus, estimated at well 

over $20,000,000, they raised taxes on those least able to pay, by increasing hospital and medicare premiums by 

$20 per family for a total tax increase of around $5,000,000. Poor family-farm farmers pay it too, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Instead of a mess to clean up, as the member for Athabaska (Mr. Guy) stated, they have harvested a bonanza crop 

of revenues, summer fallowed and sowed by the CCF government. If there is any mess, the hon. Premier is 

making a mess in handling it. For example, Mr. Speaker, he addressed the Petroleum Association just recently and 

according to the Leader Post of February 12th, he said: 

 

The provincial government hopes to be able to remove the discriminatory road allowance tax paid by the oil 

industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

and according to the same Leader Post: 

 

the loss of revenue here will run from two to three millions. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Speaker, was this necessary? I say it was not necessary, and I quote from the words of the Deputy 

Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cawley) when he was addressing he Canadian Institute of mining and 

Metallurgy in Calgary. He said this: 

 

In petroleum, the present producing trend in Saskatchewan is among the most favourable in North America 

from an economic point of view. It costs only 44 cents to find a barrel 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

248 

of oil in Saskatchewan compared with the 58 cents in Alberta. Production costs have been lowered in the past 

eight years to a point where oil can be produced at 6 cents a barrel below the Western Canadian average and 8 

cents below the Alberta average yield. 

 

And I take the words of Mr. MacNicholl who, according to the Leader Post, November 27th, 1964, stated: 

 

The primary reason that there was a step up in our productions in Saskatchewan was the province's proximity to 

markets in Eastern Canada and the United States. 

 

He said: 

 

Demand has been greater than supply of as much as 13,000 barrels today, per day. 

 

He also mentioned that drilling costs are also lower in Saskatchewan, confirming what the Deputy minister (Mr. 

Cawley) of Mineral Resources said previously. So I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that there was no need whatever for the 

Premier to make a commitment that his government would give a further revenue concession or tax concession to 

the petroleum industry in this province. 

 

An Hon. Member: — A Liberal . . . 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Yes and to give away tax revenue they take all you want to give most assuredly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the former senior hon. member for Arm River (Mr. Danielson) used to say, "Now then", this 

revenue kill have to be made up in some manner. The revenue for future services is bound to fall again on those 

people who already have had their hospital and medicare premiums raised by $20 and this $20 will fall on the 

property owners and farmers are property owners too, Mr. Speaker, may I remind you . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — And they will pay. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — . . . and they will find it difficult to pay with the decline in farm prices. We on this side of the 

house, with this huge revenue surplus would have maintained the medicare and hospital premium at the same low 

figure as when we left office, twenty dollars less than it is now, and in this manner make a tax saving of 

$45,000,000 in an area where tax reductions are more fully justified. We would have pressed the federal 

government to implement its pledge for a national health plan at once to those provinces who wish to proceed, 

thus saving fifty per cent of Saskatchewan's medicare costs which savings could be used to expand our own health 

services to include drugs and reduce taxes in Saskatchewan as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I commend this approach to the government. This proposal would save Saskatchewan taxpayers 

more money than all the tax reductions promised or mentioned in the Throne Speech. Why was this not done? 

Apparently it was not done because the hon. Premier did not feel that we could afford, or that the national 

government could afford both a national health plan and a pension plan at the same time. May I suggest to you 

again, Mr. Speaker, that if this province of Saskatchewan can afford a hospital and medicare plan, certainly the 

national government of Canada can. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Nollet: — I should also remind the Premier when he is on his rampage of tax reduction promises, that his 

own federal Liberal government now requires a full eleven per cent sales tax on building materials. Farmers need 

building materials too. Maybe he should ask the government at Ottawa to make some concessions to the farmers 

on the sales tax for building materials as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the agricultural section of the Throne Speech, was 



February 15, 1965 

 

249 

most disappointing. There were only three items in it, insofar as the department of agriculture was concerned. 

They were; lease allocations, master farm awards, and colored margarine. 

 

In regard to lease allocations, it is exactly the same identical basic policy that we had before. The only difference, 

Mr. Speaker, is that numbers were added behind each point necessary to qualify. This is alright, Mr. Speaker. I 

have no quarrel with it. But may I say to you, that they promised the people of this province an independent land 

allocation committee. The government has not fulfilled that promise. 

 

Hon. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): — They certainly have. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — What we have, Mr. -Speaker, is a so-called independent committee to review allocation 

complaints made. The allocations are actually made within the administration of the lands branch itself and with 

due deference to the integrity and fairness of land branch administrators, I must again repeat, this is not an 

independent allocation committee and it could create a possible conflict between the people in the administrative 

section of the lands branch and the committee of review. 

 

Hon. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): — Not at all. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — I have made my views known before on this matter, when we were reviewing policies. I told the 

house at the last session that we would set up an independent land allocation committee. This same promise made 

by hon. members opposite has not been fulfilled, Mr. Speaker. No mention was made in the Liberal party's 

promise that a board of review would be established instead, Mr. Speaker. May I go to the master farmer plan 

awards. Of course, this is easy. It isn't going to cost very much. 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . just two bits. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — The hon. members behind me just took the words out of my mouth. If price declines continue and 

farm costs continue to go up, believe me, it will take a master farmer to survive, and I hope that more than two 

will survive in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Colored margarine! Colored margarine! Looking at the Throne Speech and seeing nothing of any importance or 

consequence for the agricultural industry, I must say, Mr. Speaker, the faces of the hon. members opposite ought 

to be colored, not yellow, but red . . . a very deep red, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Nollet: — The delta area in northeast Saskatchewan . . . no mention was made of the delta area development 

with the exception, I think, that Cumberland House, someone mentioned, was going to be taken over by the 

department of agriculture, but no reference made to further development of that vast area. 

 

Farm credit in this regard, Mr. Speaker, may I say that what the well-established farmer, or even the prospective 

young farmer who hopes to farm, needs more than anything else is a higher prove for farm commodities — a 

price equal to the cost of his production. This is what he needs. To ask any young man, under existing land values, 

and existing price relationships, to engage in farming, I think would be of little avail, no matter how generous, and 

how low the interest rates of any credit scheme would be. But, Mr. Speaker, there was one credit area where the 

province could have done a great deal of good if they had associated this credit with the rehabilitation and the 

re-establishment of many of our small farmers particularly in the northern fringe areas of this province. At the last 

session of the legislature, we passed what was called the Agricultural Rehabilitation and Development Act. Under 

that legislation we made provisions for rehabilitation credit. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we were not successful 

in the election, but had we been successful, this legislation would have been declared and the provisions under it 

implemented. We missed a good opportunity, Mr. Speaker, cattle prices . . . 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart(Prince Albert): — For years . . . 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Yes, the hon. member for 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

250 

Prince Albert (Mr. Steuart) perhaps doesn't know very much about cattle and cattle prices and all the rest of it. 

May I tell him this. There was never a better opportunity to have made use of this rehabilitation credit plan and to 

have purchased cattle on behalf of these small farmers at the lower cattle prices, than existed, last year and this 

year, in order to enable these farmers to fully utilize the pasture and fodder projects on which tremendous 

amounts of public money were and are being spent and these projects were developed specifically for the small 

farmer. His problem was to get credit to purchase livestock so that he could use these facilities, so that he could 

expand his own land resource holdings as well. This type of farmer, Mr. Speaker, cannot get credit from any other 

agency and there was provision made in the legislation passed last year, that credit would be made available to 

them. May I say to the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McDonald) and to urge him to take a look at this legislation 

and if he wants to do anything in the field of farm credit, for heavens sake, do it in this particular area where the 

need is so great. In this way, Mr. Speaker, we can achieve the objectives we have in mind in connection with the 

ARDA program and the allied community pasture and fodder programs in our province. 

 

Nothing was mentioned in the Throne Speech, I hope to hear something about it and about the hay shelters that 

were promised. I would hope and, if it comes later, I will then be critical because it was not included in the 

Throne Speech. We will look forward with interest to see whether or not this promise is going to be fulfilled. 

 

I wish to mention one more thing, Mr. Speaker, in connection with agriculture and that is, the abolition of the 

Agricultural Machinery Administration. I am not attaching the full blame on the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

McDonald) for this, because I have never heard any members opposite, who were previously in the opposition, 

suggest that the agricultural machinery testing service should be abolished other than the Premier of this province, 

Mr. Speaker, and I would think that he had some influence in this particular matter. I feel very keenly that this 

service, which was recommended to the legislature by a select standing committee, is now going to go by the 

wayside. I hope this matter will be seriously reconsidered. It cannot be said, Mr. Speaker, that the implement 

companies do sufficient testing and that there is no necessity for this service at all. The implement companies, 

without any reflection on them, have a vested monetary interest in their machines and certainly do have an 

independent agency make field tests, not comparisons between machines of one company and another, but 

practical tests to advise farmers as to the workability or the weakness of a particular machine and to also inform 

the machine company of its findings. 

 

Now I point out to you, Mr. Speaker, that agricultural products are practically all graded and inspected very 

rigidly. Why shouldn't we have some testing of machines required by farmers to produce these products that are 

so rigidly graded and inspected? 

 

There is another matter, Mr. Speaker, that I feel very sorry about — and that is the firing of the crop insurance 

board. Again, Mr. Speaker, I will not attribute the blame entirely to the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McDonald). 

Perhaps someone was looking for an excuse to get rid of these dedicated and highly qualified men at a time when 

an experienced board was greatly needed, when a new agreement with Ottawa on crop reinsurance was under 

consideration. 

 

There is one thing that wasn't mentioned either in the Throne Speech, and that is the raising of lease fees. I will 

not dwell on this now, Mr. Speaker. But I do want to point out, before I sit down, some further evidence of 

progress in Saskatchewan, and I hope, Mr. Speaker, that this continued charge that we had nothing but stagnation 

in this province under the Socialists, will be laid to rest forever. No mention has been made or reference to the 

fact that we have in this province an automobile insurance plan, still the first and finest of its kind in Canada, 

introduced by the Socialists, not to make money, but to protect people. The South Saskatchewan River irrigation 

project and its power development also could be mentioned, also water and sewage programs for towns and 

villages, and the family farm improvement branch. Is this, for heaven's sake, Mr. Speaker, a sign of stagnation? 

And if this is Socialism, Mr. Speaker, I think we should have more of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Nollet: — More expansion in regard to 



February 15, 1965 

 

251 

educational facilities than in any similar twenty year period, took place in all aspects of education, expansion of 

the university, including the university hospital, the medical college, yes, and the veterinary college, which 

members opposite should not dare to try to take credit for. Expansion of highway and grid road programs never 

before achieved. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — We will take it if you will give us the money, Toby. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — It was, Mr. Speaker, the Socialists who took Saskatchewan out of the mud to all-weather roads. 

Yes, and roads to the north too. There were no roads in the north previous to 1944. An extensive road 

development program took place in northern Saskatchewan and the people of this province know this. Don't try to 

fool them anymore. If you want to go ahead with a bigger program, I will applauds it, but, for heaven sake, don't 

pretend that you don't know that tremendous progress has been made in the last twenty years. 

 

So is this no economic progress? Stagnation? I think I have answered that, Mr. Speaker. But among all of the 

projects, I place power development in the top priority position as the key element to economic progress in 

Saskatchewan over the past twenty years. Twenty years ago Saskatchewan was notable for being the biggest 

black-out area in Canada. It is now lit up, and not with liquor either but with electricity, and it has a future, bright 

and continued economic progress and better living. 

 

Mr. McDonald (Moosomin): — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Nollet: — For all this the people of Saskatchewan will be forever grateful to David Cass-Beggs . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Nollet: — . . . the one man who had the vision, courage and know-how to make this possible. It will forever 

be a mark of disgrace to the Premier of this province who made the position of this man untenable and finally 

fired him. Regardless, David Cass-Beggs will always have a warm place in the heart of Saskatchewan people, 

particularly of its farm people who now enjoy the benefits of electrical conveniences even in the most isolated and 

remote areas of this province. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Nollet: — The Premier and Mr. Speaker, may I refer to the actions and the manners of the Premier in regard 

to this man? I have in my hand a copy of an editorial appearing in the Leader Post, after the fund raising dinner of 

the Liberal party which was held in Regina. On this occasion the hon. Premier made some very unpleasant and 

unkindly remarks about the then manager of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. So bad, indeed, Mr. Speaker, 

that the Leader Post even commented adversely on it. The editorial stated: 

 

Premier Thatcher's attack on the Saskatchewan Power Corporation at last week's fund raising Liberal party 

dinner, may have been directed at the preceding government which shaped the broad corporation policies, but 

the men and women who manned the corporation were directly in the line of fire. This is unfortunate. They are 

unable to defend themselves. Mr. Thatcher declared the SPC administration costs are unbelievably high. He did 

not document his accusation. 

 

He seldom does, Mr. Speaker, and he often gets himself into a jam because he doesn't. The editorial goes on: 

 

It is based on the confidential report by Mr. Berry, former chairman of the government Power Commission, 

predecessor of the SPC and the former owner of the Moose Jaw power system. At the best, in the short time at 

Mr. Berry's disposal 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

252 

to examine SPC operations, anything he reported was of dubious value because of the superficial nature of the 

study. Something for the new Liberal administration and Premier Thatcher to remember is that the old 

government has been defeated. They now comprise the government, as such their primary responsibility is not 

to tear down but to build up the government service and improve it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Nollet: — As for Mr. Thatcher's charge, ''the administrative costs of the SPC were unbelievable high", it was 

not supported by a comparison between SPC costs and those of the Manitoba Hydro Electric Board — a 

comparable operation in Manitoba in the electrical field. I thought I should read this into the records of this house, 

hoping that it may result in a more rational and kindly attitude being taken toward men in high places. 

 

The hon. member for Melville, and I am sorry he is not in his seat (Mr. Gardiner), when he was reading these 

unsigned copies of letters . . . 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Did you . . . 

 

Mr. Nollet: — . . . finally got them associated with David Cass-Beggs and he made this statement. He said: 

 

This man's only qualifications for his position as manager of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation was that he 

was a new democrat supporter. 

 

This is incorrect, Mr. Speaker, and people of high qualifications, regardless of their political affiliations, will find 

work with any government. If there had been a highly qualified man no matter what his political association had 

been, this administration, if it thought such a person could have done a good job, would have hired him. 

 

But let us look at David Cass-Beggs' qualifications. He occupied various teaching and technical posts in England 

during the 1930's and was professor of electrical engineering at the University of Toronto from 1939 to 1952, 

during which time he was a key person in the program to develop equipment to counteract black-out in air crews, 

a major factor in our allied air superiority in the war. He was professor of electrical engineering at University 

College, Swansee, England from 1952 to 1955. During the late 1930's and early 1950's, he did consulting work 

for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and laid out the basic designs for the rural electrification program and 

the present power production and distribution system. This is one of the reasons he was engaged, Mr. Speaker. 

Then of course, he was general manager of Saskatchewan Power Corporation from 1955 to 1964. He presented 

technical papers to important international conferences in Yugoslavia and in Austria. He was president of the 

Canadian Electrical Association from 1960 to 1961 and president of the Canadian Gas Association in 1963. He is 

now in charge of the development of one of the major themes for Exposition 1967. This man was not only 

persecuted and harassed when he was manager of the corporation but, Mr. Speaker, we have good reason to 

believe this harassment continued afterwards as well. When the Premier attempted to discredit this man of 

outstanding qualifications, he only brought discredit on himself and the government of this province. 

 

I have one more matter to deal with, Mr. Speaker, the hon. Attorney General (Mr. Heald) when speaking to the 

Address-In-Reply, mentioned that, comparatively speaking, fewer people resigned, were dismissed or were fired, 

in 1964 than 1944. He further stated that most of those who resigned or were dismissed in 1944 were non-senior 

employees. There is a very good reason for this. Everyone in Saskatchewan in 1944 knew that most every class of 

applicant for government employment required a political blood test and that employment in many categories 

depended, not on qualifications, but on whom you knew to obtain a job. 

 

Mr. Steuart (Prince Albert): — The breathalizer test as well? 



February 15, 1965 

 

253 

Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, one of the first acts of the CCF administration after they were elected in 1944 . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart (Prince Albert): — . . . fired them all. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — . . . was to put an end to this healer-type situation . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Ho ho . . . 

 

Mr. Nollet: — . . . with the exception of certain, key personnel. I ask the hon. member who says ''Ho ho" to look 

up the record. Take a look at the Civil Service Act prior to 1944 and since 1944. 

 

Mr. Steuart (Prince Albert): — We have got no records. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — . . . special constables. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — . . . with the exceptions now of certain key personnel, all position are within the complete 

jurisdiction of the public service commission. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Nollet: — I recommend, Mr. Speaker, to the government members, the reading of Section 19 of the Public 

Service Act, and to also read sections 38, 40 and 41, which sections clearly outline procedures regarding 

appointments, dismissals, appeals to the commission, and yes, Mr. Speaker, appeals under the collective 

bargaining agreement. I would also recommend . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart (Prince Albert): — May I ask a question? When were those put in — what year? 

 

Mr. Nollet: — From 1947 onward. 

 

Mr. Steuart (Prince Albert): — What year was the appeal? What year was that put in? 

 

Mr. Nollet: — I think all of them were put in in 1947 — the Act was amended again in 1948, and again in 1949. 

But if you will take the statures and look at them, and I would ask you to do so, and look at these sections, then 

you will know why and the public knows why there weren't wholesale firings among employees who came under 

the collective bargaining agreement or are under the public service commission. 

 

I would also recommend to the hon. member for Prince Albert (Mr. Steuart) that he read section 59 which grants 

full power to the civil service union to enter into a collective bargaining agreement with the government, its 

employer. This, Mr. Speaker, was the first time that this provision was made in any similar jurisdiction in Canada. 

Again it was a first for the province of Saskatchewan. Government-employee relations have been excellent. No 

minister can arbitrarily fire a man in the classified service anymore. And he can't hire them other than through the 

public service commission. 

 

These provisions in the Civil Service Act to remove civil servants form the political arena and to enter freely into 

a collective bargaining was another first for the province of Saskatchewan. And these are the fundamental reasons 

why more people weren't fired in 1964 than were dismissed. Mr. Speaker, I think it becomes self evident that I 

will support the amendment and vote against the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Frank K. Radloff (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, members of this legislature, it does give me a great deal of 

pleasure to rise and speak on the Throne Speech and to say a few words about the Nipawin constituency and 

about the needs of my constituents. 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

254 

Now, today, I, like the member from Cut Knife (Mr. Nollet) was proud to see the new flag of Canada above the 

legislative buildings. Today is a very auspicious occasion for the people of Saskatchewan and the people of 

Canada, and I do want to support the remarks of the Premier and of the member of the Saskatchewan university 

campus which they made at the most impressive ceremony which we took part in this morning. 

 

Now, I would again offer my congratulations to the mover of the Throne Speech and to the seconder of the 

Throne Speech. Their remarks were excellent and very informative and I think they did themselves and their 

constituencies a great deal of honor, in the way they made their remarks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — Now, today before I move into my general remarks, I would like to bring to the attention of this 

legislature, that a man who sat as the MLA for the Melfort constituency, which is now part of the Torch River 

constituency, Mr. J.D. MacFarlane, who sat as an MLA for the district from 1934 to 1938, This man has been 

honored by the University of Saskatchewan, and I would just like to read into the record a few of the remarks 

made at that time. 

 

At a meeting of the Saskatchewan Agricultural Graduates' Association, held in Saskatoon, at the farm and home 

week, J.D. MacFarlane of Nipawin, received a honor reward in recognition of having been a member of the first 

class of 1912 in the College of Agriculture at the University of Saskatchewan commemorating Saskatchewan's 

Diamond Jubilee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — Now, I am sure that the majority of the members in this legislature find it most refreshing to hear 

of some of the accomplishments of my Liberal government or the government of Saskatchewan since its election 

and taking office of last May. It should have been April, but they had to wait until May. Now I am equally sure 

that the broad legislative program which has been outlined, will rebuild the image of Saskatchewan people as a 

vigorous and progressive people and that it will cause Saskatchewan to become known as a land of ever 

increasing opportunities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year, 1965, is our Diamond Jubilee year, the sixtieth birthday of Saskatchewan as a province 

and the sixtieth year as a land which is going to develop into something all the people of Saskatchewan can be 

proud of. This is a year that all citizens must plan together, must work together and must play together to establish 

a record of achievement in all fields of endeavor. 

 

This is the year that the people of Saskatchewan, regardless of political beliefs or religious faith, or nationality 

differences, should join hands to create an historical event that will remember the past, consider the present and 

plan for the future. 

 

Today, in this legislative assembly of the province of Saskatchewan, I would like to express the appreciation and 

the thanks of the people of my constituency to the pioneer citizens of the Nipawin constituency and to the pioneer 

citizens of Saskatchewan and . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — . . . to thank all these pioneers for their tremendous contribution to the general welfare and to the 

well-being of all the people of this province. 

 

We can do so little, after receiving so much. We must be ever thankful for the sacrifices made by the pioneers 

who laid the foundations of the substantial, solid economy that we enjoy today. 

 

I have listened with interest to the remarks of many members of the legislature and I must compliment them, 

especially the members from 



February 15, 1965 

 

255 

this side of the house. Members of the cabinet are making excellent marks with the legislation outlined from time 

to time. I must say that I have been somewhat disappointed with the remarks from the opposite side of the house, 

remarks that sometimes are very indefinite and indecisive and inconsistent and that emphasize some of the 

irregular policies of the NDP party and of the past government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — I am surprised at the remarks of the member of Swift Current (Mr. Wood) when he was asked 

about Mr. Woollam. He said he asked Mr. Woollam to leave the department because of his unorthodox 

procedures, then turned around and signed a contract with him and his associate to make surveys. Such surveys 

would enable Mr. Woollam to carry on and cover up further political activities. I heard one remark: "You would 

almost think that the NDP were honest. But it seems hard to believe all they say." 

 

Now, I am sure all the members of this legislature are sorry to see that the member for Hanley (Mr. Walker) is not 

in his seat. On Wednesday and Thursday he was looking very pale and peaked and I am sure that the members on 

the opposite side of the house, like the members on this side of the house, were somewhat worried about his 

health, but I imagine he will be back one of these days to take his place again in this legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — I imagine the member for Regina East will be too. 

 

Mr. Radloff: — I am somewhat amused by the remarks of the member for Cut Knife (Mr. Nollet) and the 

remarks of the member for Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank), and also of the member for Hanley (Mr. Walker), 

regarding the fair-minded policies of our past NDP government. 

 

I know something of the methods and the procedures that they used to purchase land for the Squaw Rapids 

Reservoir. As of April last year, there were claims, several years old, still unsettled. I know of one family who had 

their land expropriated and who lost their equipment and buildings and who had to live on social aid until a 

satisfactory settlement could be made to enable them to re-establish in a new location. The kind of government 

action outlined and the oblique and nefarious statements made by the members of the opposition only confirm the 

opinion of thinking and considerate people, that we, the people of Saskatchewan, are indeed fortunate to have the 

hon. Ross Thatcher as a Premier of our province in this Jubilee Year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — Now I would like to remind this legislature that Mr. Thatcher has outlined a very progressive and 

solid legislative program and that he has put special emphasis on the greater development of our economy, and on 

the free enterprise system. It is a program that will make Saskatchewan the industrial centre of Canada, and that 

will provide the jobs and the opportunities which our young people need, and that will fulfil the hopes and desires 

of the pioneers who built this province. One cannot help but be impressed by the sincerity, the honesty, and the 

ability of the New Premier and his cabinet. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — I know that the Premier and his cabinet are dedicated to fulfilling their election promises and to 

providing the kind of government the people need and desire. And I can say to this legislature that the people of 

my constituency are daily voicing their appreciation of the changed atmosphere and the changed attitudes which 

are becoming prevalent throughout Saskatchewan since the shackles of socialism were thrown aside. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — Mr. Speaker, it is very apparent that new vigour and new vitality are reviving Saskatchewan's 

economy and solving the serious problems which have accumulated under the previous administration. 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

256 

No longer are confusion and resentment rampant in municipal and urban circles. Mr. Speaker, let the members of 

this new legislature cast aside their bickering and join their hands and their hearts and their minds to formulate 

policies and legislation needed to make Saskatchewan progressive and prosperous. Let us all join together to 

preserve individual happiness and confidence by recognizing the need individual freedom and opportunity. 

Monopolistic and preferential treatment cannot and must not be the policy of the government of Saskatchewan. 

 

The citizens of our province and the citizens of my constituency ask only for an opportunity to work toward and 

benefit from the increased economic growth that will surely take place under this administration. Let us make 

Saskatchewan an outstanding example of responsible enterprise and development with the maximum utilization of 

our resources for the benefit of all the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — I would encourage the government to develop and utilize the tremendous natural resources of the 

Nipawin constituency. We are blessed with a great potential but, under the former government, we had very little 

activity in this field. We have rich resources of forest, wildlife and water. There are deposits of oil shale, granite, 

marble, and iron ore. My constituents would be grateful if the present government would press for the 

development of these resources whenever and wherever possible. Construction of another large power dam in the 

vicinity of Nipawin would guarantee adequate supplies of power and should assist the ministers in encouraging 

large concerns to consider seriously the great potential of North Eastern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, implementation of the Liberal party's platform and policies would do a great deal to alleviate many 

of the serious problems confronting the people of my constituency. I would like to review some of the particular 

problems to which the former government turned a deaf ear, and which I would ask my party to consider. I mean 

consideration of financial assistance for snow plow clubs and the return to a one-only moose hunting season. I 

would also like this legislature to consider a reasonable and practical policy for the distribution of electric power 

to the people living on Indian reserves, and for the re-adjustment of telephone costs so that encouragement can be 

given to the extension of rural telephone lines. I would also like to ask the Power Corporation to consider the 

extension of a gas line to the village of Choiceland. I would ask this legislature to consider an educational and 

rehabilitation program for those living on social aid and unemployment insurance, to consider increased 

accommodation for the mentally retarded, and with it better educational opportunities for the blind children of this 

province. I would also like to ask for the provision of hostel accommodation for elderly citizens, and for the 

organization of some type of consulting service to assist people in the establishment and operation of small 

businesses. 

 

Last, I would like to ask the government and the Department of Education to consider establishing a vocational 

and technical training school for the young people of the Nipawin constituency and of north-eastern 

Saskatchewan. I would like to say to this house that we have something like four thousand students in the 

Nipawin School Unit, and something like one thousand children on the reserves of Greterd, Shoal Lake, and 

Cumberland. There was a committee set up to make recommendations to the government regarding the 

establishment of a regional vocational and technical school and this committee decided that a regional vocational 

and technical school located in any other area than in Nipawin would not meet the requirements of north-eastern 

Saskatchewan. The committee felt that there would be a tremendous saving, not only for the people and the 

parents of north-eastern Saskatchewan but also for the government in the development of this program. Now 

Nipawin has a really tremendous location. It has an excellent site for a technical and vocational school. I would 

also like to remind the Minister of Education that Nipawin should be considered as the site of the third university 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Need a high school first. 

 

Mr. Radloff: — I have a brochure about Nipawin and will have one placed on the desk of each member. I would 

just like to mention some of the industrial developments of the Nipawin constituency that have been 



February 15, 1965 

 

257 

brought about, not by the provincial government of the past, but by the people in the Nipawin area, and by the 

natural resources which are located there. I would like to tell this house that Nipawin is the centre of a tremendous 

seed growing industry. This industry not only supplies a wide market with certified grass and grain seeds but with 

seed for industrial purposes. We have a large honey industry which has something like ten thousand hives located 

in the constituency during the summer time. We also nave some of the finest potatoes in western Canada, for 

which there is an increasing demand. We also have a dehydrating alfalfa industry, which operates three large 

plants located near Nipawin. We also have a large livestock feeding industry which is rapidly expanding. We also 

have a forestry, lumber and pulp wood potential which has not been developed, if it is developed and properly 

regulated, we could have three pulp plants in continuous operation. There are also two possible locations for peat 

moss industries. The Nipawin farming industry produces over some thirty-five different products. Again I would 

like to remind this legislature that we are possibly going to have a large iron ore mining development. 

 

I would like to remind this legislature that we need and must have maximum development of our tremendous 

natural resources which are lying in the north-eastern part of Saskatchewan, in the Nipawin Carrot River area. 

Manitoba, under Liberal and Conservative government has fully developed an area similar to this one. The delta 

we have in Saskatchewan, known as the Sepanick triangle is perhaps the last frontier of Saskatchewan. It is a vast 

area, studded with attractive lakes and marshes teeming with fish and fur-bearing animals. There are hundreds of 

acres of oil shale awaiting exploration and development. I am told the Sun Oil Company is moving into this area 

and that they are preparing to go ahead with exploration work. We have forests that will produce something like 

sixty million board feet per year in perpetuity and there are thousands of acres of fertile soil that can provide 

prosperity for hundreds of farmers in the north-eastern part of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now it is imperative that a bold, imaginative program be adopted by this government — a program which the past 

government has somewhat ignored. I would recommend to the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McDonald) and to the 

members of this government that they give full attention to this project so that development can be proceeded 

with. 

 

Now there are many aspects for consideration, when you are discussing a development of such magnitude as the 

Cumberland River Delta. It is utterly impossible for me to deal with all of the details today, but one of the most 

important considerations is that the rights of the native people of the region be protected for the present as well as 

for the future. I know that my government intends to protect these rights and that they intend to give full 

consideration to the native people. Their well-being calls for immediate agricultural and industrial development to 

provide them with a better standard of living. 

 

It is with much pride that I note that the Throne Speech gives every indication that the Premier and his cabinet 

will move into this field with all haste and with the necessary consideration. By opening up this new land we can 

make our agricultural economy even stronger. An immediate push to develop this immense region will bring new 

hope to the people of north-eastern Saskatchewan that their sons will have an opportunity to stay on the soil. It is 

almost impossible to estimate the financial return which the development of the Cumberland River could make to 

the economy of Saskatchewan. I am sure that the estimated cost of the development, something like twenty 

million dollars, will be returned many times over to the people of Saskatchewan. Some years ago, the 

development of this delta was considered to be almost impossible, but such is not the case today. Water control by 

the Squaw Rapids Dam and the South Saskatchewan Dam has made full utilisation of this region possible, 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — There has been some suggestion that there is a danger 

of flooding in the area, but the experts say that the probability of serious flooding is about one in a thousand, less 

than in many other heavily populated regions. Some time ago, a committee was appointed to make a study to 

determine whether the development of the Sepanick triangle was economically feasible. I can say now that the 

committee's preliminary studies are very encouraging and indicate that such a development could fulfil the needs 

of many people and should be proceeded with at once. The possibility of opportunity for youth, for more 

abundant living for the Indian and Metis people, for increased agricultural production, for 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

258 

increased returns from mineral and timber resources, would indicate the need to proceed with all haste with the 

development of this region. 

 

Development of the Sepanick triangle would also give new impetus to the extension of the railroad from 

north-eastern Saskatchewan to The Pas, Manitoba. Such a railroad would affect substantial savings on grain and 

potash shipments from central and north-eastern Saskatchewan, through the Port of Churchill to Europe. This 

development should also include the building of an all weather road from highway 23 through the Smoky Burn 

district and the Delta area to connect with the Otosquen road, running from Hudson Bay to The Pas. There is 

every indication that such a road could be completed at a very reasonable cost. This road should have been 

completed many years ago, considering the immense service and important communications it would provide to 

the people of northern part of
 
Saskatchewan. Today I would forecast heavy road traffic from Manitoba to all 

districts in north-eastern Saskatchewan. I would ask the Minister of Highways (Mr. Grant) to give this his 

consideration. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let us now leave the Delta region and take a glance at the other parts of the Nipawin 

constituency. I would like the members of this legislature, who have not already done so, to visit this part of the 

province and to travel highway 35 through Nipawin to Snowden or Choiceland, and up the Hansen Lake road and 

on to Creighton. The hon. members would certainly enjoy the many opportunities for fishing, hunting and 

swimming and to see the beautiful lakes and the lush parkland. Mr. Speaker, the hon. members will certainly 

realize the need for the expansion of our highway program. The program is proposed by the hon. member from 

Regina, gives every indication that the people of the Nipawin constituency will receive further recognition of their 

needs. Expansion of our highway program as proposed by the minister, will encourage and bring more and more 

tourists into this northland, to enjoy the outdoor fun and relaxation to a degree not found anywhere else. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am highly pleased that my government recognizes the need to encourage the tourist industry. I 

might mention that only a few days ago I was informed that the new regional park for Nipawin had been officially 

constituted by an order-in-council, and will be receiving substantial development funds from my government. The 

park is in an area of four hundred acres of pine and birch on the shores of Tobin Lake, just north of Nipawin town 

site. I can assure the members of this legislature, that this will be one of the finest and most attractive parks in 

Saskatchewan and it will provide excellent boating, fishing and other recreational facilities. I want to thank 

personally the members of the Department of Natural Resources, who are co-operating with the new regional park 

board, in planning a camp site for tourist accommodation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately many people in the northern part of the Nipawin constituency had poor crops or 

crop failures last year. These people need the opportunity for additional employment. I must compliment the hon. 

Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Cuelenaere) for coming to their assistance, by having the Forestry Department 

issue extra timber cutting permits for over-aged timber, of which we have a considerable amount. I can assure the 

Minister that the people of my constituency appreciate the consideration which he has given to them. If it had not 

been for this extra work many families would have faced financial hardships. This particular situation 

demonstrates what the development of our natural resources can mean to a community. 

 

I have already made some mention of the highway requirements of the people of the Sepanick triangle and I 

would like to take advantage of this opportunity to remind the Minister of Highways of the need for additional 

highway construction and improvements in the other parts of my constituency. Mr. Speaker, there is need for 

relocation of the first fifteen miles of highway 106, adjacent to highway 55, to make the Hansen Lake Road more 

accessible to the people of the eastern part of the province. There is a need for rebuilding and hard surfacing of 

highway 23 from Nipawin to Carrot River and south to Crooked River. I would also ask the Minister of Highways 

(Mr. Grant) to give consideration to the extension of highway 23 or highway 35 to the north-east to join the 

original highway 35 at Amisk Lake. This is not an immediate need but I would ask that this particular 

construction be kept in mind in future highway planning. 

 

Many of the problems that I have mentioned are common to all parts of Saskatchewan. Many of them should have 

been dealt with by the previous administration. The hon. Premier and his ministers are to be complimented for 

recognizing the need to do something with these problems. 



February 15, 1965 

 

259 

With the successful administration of their departments, they are moving forward in a manner of which all people 

of this province can be proud. The NDP government's actions in my constituency have cone a long way to retain 

support for the present government. I must especially compliment and congratulate our hon. Premier for revealing 

to this legislature and to the people of Saskatchewan the holier than thou attitude of the past NDP government, 

that the CCF government was not perhaps so holy and that irregular procedures were becoming somewhat 

constant policy of the NDP administration. In my own constituency there have been many such cases of 

administration, particularly in the method of lease land allocation, contrary to the statements of the member from 

Cut Knife (Mr. Nollet), the member from Hanley (Mr. Walker), and the member from Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank). 

 

One glaring example of the way the lease land had been a political reward, is the case of a veteran who became a 

member of the famous Smoky Burn Co-op Farm. In this particular government venture, veterans suffered all the 

inhumanities of a Siberian Prison camp. When the farm could no longer operate under commune principles, the 

remaining members were allocated the land under a lease land agreement. I can say, after the disillusion and 

hardships inflicted by the commune arrangement, this veteran had his wife and family leave him, consequently he 

suffered a nervous breakdown. Despite all this persecution, this veteran accepted his share of the land and made 

an honest effort to bring it into full production. Many people do not perhaps understand the farming methods used 

on the burnt over land of the Smoky Burns farms. The land, after being cleared, was to be sown to alfalfa in order 

to return nitrogen and fibre content to the soil. Now the veteran, about whom I am talking, cleared his land and 

sowed it to alfalfa and was all prepared to go ahead and break the land and take off a tremendous crop. I am sure 

that most people here will know what happened to him. As he was about to plow up this land and put it into 

production, his lease was cancelled. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No lease . . . 

 

Mr. Radloff: — I can say without contradiction that this man had paid his taxes. Why did the government cancel 

his lease? Because they didn't think that he was making a big enough return to the government. This man who had 

spent some fifteen difficult years on the land, lost his wife and his family and his health. When he should have 

had full consideration he was kicked off the land on which he had toiled so hard, and this land was reallocated to a 

strong supporter of the government. Here, the man who did nothing on the land but was able to receive an 

allocation and turn around and reap a tremendous crop while the man who had toiled so long for the land, was put 

out to pasture you might say. In no way can the past NDP government and the people on the opposite side of the 

house justify the action taken in the case outlined, and I can say there are many cases of a similar nature. I am told 

that not one lease was ever made until it was okayed by the contact man in the district, a contact man who saw 

that the land . . . 

 

Mr. I.C. Nollet (Cut Knife): — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege, I completely refute the statement made 

by the hon. member. It is not correct. 

 

Mr. Radloff: — Well thank you, Mr. Nollet. There might have been the odd case in which this man was not 

contacted but I know in general principles that there was very little land allocated without full political 

consideration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Withdraw . . . 

 

Mr. Radloff: — And I sincerely hope that never again will veterans and other trusting people be taken advantage 

of by a Saskatchewan government. Now I must commend our new Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McDonald) for 

the way in which he has proceeded to allocate lease land. I can say that he is being most successful in solving very 

difficult problems created by the previous administration. It will now be possible for hundreds of lease land 

holders to make arrangements to purchase their land and to become independent of government control. They say 

"Happy Days". 

 

Now I know many of the hon. members are waiting for the opportunity to speak, but I do want to express to the 

people of my constituency my appreciation of their support and to thank them for making it possible 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

260 

for me to represent them in the legislature. I want to assure them that I will serve them to the best of my ability 

and with fairness and equality to all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — In conclusion, I would suggest to the members of this legislature and the people of this province 

that apathy and apprehension no longer be a part of our way of life. Let us all co-operate and work with the new 

government in charting a new course dedicated to providing a more satisfactory and rewarding future for all the 

citizens of this fair and abundant land. 

 

Need I say more? I propose to support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North): — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to congratulate you on your appointment as 

Speaker of this legislature. Since you are a diligent and industrious person, I predict that you will be an effective 

speaker of this assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Our group is concerned with facilitating the good management of this assembly. As the Whip of 

our group, I wish to say that you have met with us promptly and have dealt with us objectively and fairly. May I 

say, on behalf of this group, that we appreciate this very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — I would like to congratulate all members who have been elected or re-elected. I would like to 

congratulate all that have taken part in the debate thus far, particularly the new members of the house. I would like 

to express my thanks to the voters of Regina North, who elected me with a large majority and I can tell them 

sincerely I shall attempt to represent them energetically and faithfully at all times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to congratulate the mover and the seconder of the reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

Each did a commendable job. My congratulations are extended for different reasons however. In the case of the 

seconder, the hon. lady member for Saskatoon (Mrs. Merchant) I felt that she had studied all of the precedents for 

Throne Speeches and followed these precedents to the letter. While I did not agree with the point of view 

expressed, the material was presented properly. I should like to congratulate the mover although I thought he was 

completely off the beam. The type of speech he delivered was without precedent for the mover of this motion. 

When I was campaigning in Hanley, I found that the neutral public was very critical of vindictive Liberal 

speeches. The speech by the hon. member for Athabaska (Mr. Guy) was the kind of speech that irritated the 

general public who expressed themselves so well, so accurately, and so strongly in the Hanley by-election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — I should like to speak to this assembly for a few moments under three different headings. First, 

the political image of the government, secondly, the items that were not included in the Throne Speech. Thirdly, 

representation on behalf of the people in my riding. 

 

First, the political image of the government. After the waste-paper basket episode, I find, over the weekend in the 

city of Regina the public image of the government is the rear view of a man bent over a refuse receptacle, his 

arms deep in the waste paper basket, crumbled notes and papers around him on the floor. I met a man who said to 

me: "When I 



February 15, 1965 

 

261 

was in Jasper Park last summer on a vacation, I saw a large black bear going through litter and it reminded me of 

the same sort of thing". I replied: "I don't think that is fair, I don't think it is fair to the bear because he was 

looking for food." All hon. members particularly those opposite, will recall a code of ethics that was issued to all 

cabinet ministers at Ottawa. One individual has suggested a code of ethics has been issued for the Liberal cabinet 

in Saskatchewan. Now, some of the items that he has suggested to me, I would like to quote to the assembly: 

 

Ethic no. l. Memo to all cabinet ministers: 

 

It is considered good practice to use all material that you find in wastepaper baskets or garbage cans to the best 

political advantage. You might facilitate matters if you have all wastepaper baskets delivered to the Premier's 

office for examination . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — 

 

and if he is busy, they might be delivered to the hon. Minister of Public Works (Mr. Gardiner). 

 

Ethic no. 2. Memo to all cabinet ministers: 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, what is this member quoting from? 

 

Mr. Whelan: — 

 

Cabinet ministers who are directors of private companies may continue in this position even if the company 

does business with the government, because we may not be here very long and ministers might have difficulty 

being re-elected directors of the particular company if the government is defeated. 

 

Ethic no. 3. Memo to all cabinet members; 

 

I am making some suggestions Mr. Speaker. It is part of my speech, I hope that they listen very carefully, I am not 

quoting from anything. You should have been listening carefully. 

 

Ethic no . 3 . . . 

 

This is one I think you all should be interested in: 

 

Make whatever irresponsible statements you like, even to annexing us to the United States, because the hon. 

Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McDonald), and I am sorry he is not in his seat, has been thoroughly briefed and 

he will be prepared to tell the public on your behalf that you shouldn't be taken seriously. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — I have some more, but I can see that the members on the government benches are a bit disturbed 

and I would not want to add to their discomfort. I am flattered that they are listening so carefully. 

 

This is the public image of my hon. friends opposite, Mr. Speaker. I say that the members opposite have learned 

nothing from the Hanley by-election. Because of the current farm income situation, there are at least fifteen seats 

on the government side that are in desperate trouble, and they couldn't get re-elected even with the help of the 

high powered publicity firm from Toronto. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! That's right! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — They know it, they know it, Mr. Speaker, because they had this expert in Hanley and they know 

what happened to them in Hanley. And I remind members on the opposite benches, Mr. Speaker, that this by- 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

262 

election in Hanley was before the farm crisis. Why did the Liberal party in this house introduce the wastepaper 

basket findings? Well, they didn't want to talk about Hanley. They are loath to mention the farmer's plight. 

 

An Hon. Member: — We . . . 

 

Mr. Whelan: — They couldn't brag about calling a session last fall. 

 

An Hon. Member: — We don't . . . 

 

Mr. Whelan: — They had to create a lot of noise about nothing in order to distract attention from the 

predicament that their senior leaders are in at Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Now, just think of the furniture deals, just think of them. Nothing down and about six years to 

make the first payment. Just think of the convicted thug, who gives orders to have a man's arms and legs broken 

and who was allowed to skip bail and flee to the United States. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They brought him in. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, constant headlines, if you get papers other than the Leader Post, the headlines and 

the coverage are more complete, particularly if your read the Globe and Mail, about bribery charges, perjury 

charges, capital murder charges, interlaced with references to Cabinet Ministers, parliamentary assistants, even 

the chairman of the government caucus who resigned yesterday. The political face of the government at Ottawa is 

smudged and its political hands are dirty. This is easily the most blackened government, black in the public eye, 

that has occupied the treasury benches in the House of Commons in ninety-eight years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — These are the reasons . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Liberal characteristics. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — . . . these are the reasons for all the smoke and all the noise about nothing. The political 

predicament that exists at Ottawa reflects on every Canadian in public life. In the face of the unbelievable 

developments involving people in high places, I challenge the Liberals to explain what goes on in Ottawa. The 

public, Mr. Speaker, is entitled to an explanation. 
 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Minister of Public Health): — . . . twenty years. 
 

Mr. Whelan: — The social aid policy of this government in Saskatchewan is exasperating beyond words. Mr. 

Speaker, by reading the headlines one day, you would conclude that the hon. Premier, the hon. Provincial 

Treasurer, slept on a mattress stuffed with $50 bills. 
 

Mr. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — They haven't . . . 
 

Mr. Whelan: — There is so much money that there must be some floating around in the air. If you read the news, 

never was the economy more buoyant, never was there so much money available, never was the Provincial 

Treasury in better shape. All this they inherited. 
 

Then I ask yon, Mr. Speaker, why did they raise the medical care fee by $20? Other governments raised the 

premiums but no government in the history of this province raised a head tax when we had the kind of surplus this 

government now enjoys. At no time was there a surplus when it was raised. With this kind of money, and this 

kind of surplus, with all these finances available, the province in the best possible financial shape, the Minister of 

Social Welfare (Mr. Boldt) plans to reduce the food allowance for children on social aid. This hard-hearted, 

callous, indifference to the needs of unfortunate people has found little sympathy in the city 



February 15, 1965 

 

263 

of Regina as was so ably expressed by my colleague, the lady member for Regina West (Mrs. Cooper). 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — . . . in his seat. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — I protest-, Mr. Speaker, in the strongest terms this tight-fisted policy and this mistreatment of the 

less fortunate, this antisocial attitude towards people in our community, when we are supposed to be in such good 

financial shape. 

 

Mr. C.G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — . . . his job. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — There seems to be some criticism of the manner in which social aid is being handled in the city 

of Regina, Mr. Speaker, and in the city of Saskatoon, It seems to me if there is dissatisfaction, full payment of the 

costs of administration of social aid by the provincial government might be a practical solution. Plans could be 

worked out whereby the services could be improved, abuses could be resolved, a program of improved planning 

for employment could be worked out ahead of time, and the money spent now on administration should be 

increased. I think this money, Mr. Speaker, if it were spent, would be repaid in many ways. First, by helping 

people and renewing their confidence in themselves, and second, by providing employment opportunities for 

people who are now on social aid. The public image of the Thatcher government, Mr. Speaker, is not 

representative of the people. This is to be regretted. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn to the Throne Speech itself. The Throne Speech has its shortcomings and 

these are quite evident. Young people of this province are still looking eagerly for the eighty thousand jobs that 

they were promised. During the past summer it was more difficult for a university student to get a job than it has 

been for the past ten years. With the cost of living rising, the low income people sought relief hoping that they 

would have payments made through medical care for eye glasses and dental care. They believed the Liberal party 

would give it to them. I think they actually believed this. I interviewed a good many of them who felt that this 

would happen. Many of them have told me since, Mr. Speaker, that they were badly fooled. They apologize for 

being taken in by the high-priced and the high-powered propaganda of the Liberal machine. 

 

I challenge the members opposite to come up now with some of the eighty thousand jobs, with that portion now 

overdue on the books if you add up and tabulate by the month. I challenge them to provide dental care and optical 

care for citizens now. I challenge them to provide the answers and to make representation on behalf of farmers 

with low incomes. I challenge them to look after these things, instead of searching through wastepaper baskets. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — There was nothing in the Speech from the Throne to indicate that the government is aware of the 

problems of automation or that steps are being taken to alleviate it. There was nothing to indicate the number of 

jobs that had been provided thus far. There was no assurance that the Government Insurance rates would he 

maintained and the office operated as usual. There was no indication that the Trade Union Act would not be 

tampered with. There were no details as to the savings that would be made in the operation of the government. 

The only evidence we have had proposed, is the taking of $2 per month from the mouths of children, Mr. Speaker, 

and the dismissal of charwomen to save money. There is no evidence of how the tourist bureau would be 

operated. The Throne Speech, presented with sub-headings, reminded us of an index for newspaper clippings. 

 

The Throne Speech calls for electoral reform. Members of the government should be extremely cautious in this 

regard, I suggest. After all, they have benefited by the present electoral legislation. Let us look at the facts. With 

forty per cent of the votes, take or leave one per cent, they have fifty-five per cent of the members. With one 

hundred votes less than the opposition, they have six more seats in the house. Now what's wrong with that kind of 

election system? We are the people who should be complaining. I would say that if there is anything wrong at 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

264 

at the present time, the member opposite should not complain. As a matter of fact, members sitting on this side of 

the house represent sixty per cent of the voters in the province of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — . . . sixty per cent. But you would never guess it, if you listened to the noise being made by 

members opposite and furthermore, Mr. Speaker, they would have been even more vocal and more boastful if it 

had not been for the shellacking that they got last December in the Hanley by-election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to turn for a moment to some of the items that should have been 

contained in the Throne Speech, items that would have benefited the people who live in Regina North and people 

across this province. First, as I have already indicated, the Throne Speech should have included optical and dental 

care as part of the medical care services. Mothers and fathers in my riding find it extremely difficult and 

extremely costly to pay for these services out of their pay cheques. 

 

The senior citizens have made representation to me, Mr. Speaker, to have the cost of burial included under the 

medical care insurance program. I don't think this should be unloaded on municipal governments. I think it should 

be borne by the medical care insurance program. When we mention this proposal, the first question usually is, 

"What will it cost?" Well, using the 1962 statistics for the province, the number of deaths occurring at age 

sixty-five and over was 4,558. For simple calculation, if we can take 5,000 as a figure and using a funeral 

allowance of $250, cost for a year would be under $1,250,000. This measure, if implemented, would remove the 

fear that often haunts these senior citizens, the fear of leaving funeral expenses for their relatives. These are the 

men and women who built this country and made great contribution to the development of Saskatchewan. I 

suggest that this is a valid and reasonable request. Perhaps we should not ask for this kind of service because 

people who ask for extension of services of this kind, Mr. Speaker, might be called "hypochondriac". Well I 

challenge the members opposite to show how the elderly person who would receive burial benefits under the 

medical care plan could be classed as a hypochondriac after he has received the service. 

 

Young people in my riding, Mr. Speaker, feel that it is not enough to go to school and get the ordinary instruction 

whether it is in high school, or in technical school. They feel there should be more information given about 

occupations and professions and careers and opportunities that are open to them. This information should be given 

to them in order that they may make a choice. It is my hope, Mr. Speaker, that the government will consider 

establishing counselling seminars and subsidizing these seminars. Such counselling seminars would give the 

young people an opportunity to interview representatives of various trades and professions and occupations, in 

order that they may have an opportunity to talk with people who are in these occupations. I understand that this 

type of seminar has been organized in other parts of Canada and I recommend that we consider an expenditure for 

counselling seminars in the province in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech holds out the possibility of expenditures in the tourist industry. I think this is a 

good idea because I believe that the tourist industry could develop and could provide increased income for the 

people of Saskatchewan. Promotion of the tourist industry is impractical unless facilities are provided for the 

tourists when they arrive. The way to guarantee such facilities would be to provide loans at a reasonable rate of 

interest that would be designated for construction and development of motels, and other facilities. I have talked to 

people who have come to Saskatchewan, who liked the scenery, who liked the people they met, and wanted to 

stay in the province longer. They were family groups but they were unable to locate facilities for their families. 

Now the last government built many parks and campsites but we must have more camps, motels, restaurants and 

accommodation for families. Our investment in equipment and in the tourist industry are just as necessary as 

putting money into industrial expansion. 

 

On the order paper of another legislature in Canada, in a province where the tourist industry has been developed 

to a far greater degree 



February 15, 1965 

 

265 

a resolution at the present time asks for loans for this very purpose. I urge this government to consider making 

loans available for the expansion of tourist facilities of all kinds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the number one problem facing urban residents is the high rate of taxation on their homes. In Regina 

North, it is not unusual to find taxes per year of $350 to $450, on a moderate sized piece of property. Many of the 

people who live in my riding have limited income. The constant increase in the cost of schools, streets, sewer and 

water and other services has driven taxes up. In addition these people are paying a high interest rate on mortgages. 

They pay for their home twice over, because of the high interest rate. I would urge the government, and frankly 

they have ignored this problem completely in the Throne Speech, I would urge the government to introduce or to 

consider a policy that will reduce taxes on homes and reduce, perhaps by a subsidy or some other way, the interest 

rate on mortgages. This is a very serious situation. Taxes and interest payments in my riding are not merely a 

hardship, they are threatening the ownership of homes. 

 

There is a need for complete re-assessment of taxes at regular intervals in all cities of Saskatchewan. While 

assessment is paid for by the provincial government in communities of 15,000 or less, the same assistance is not 

available for larger municipalities. If some of our citizens have the cost of assessment paid for, I think it is 

realistic to request the provincial government to pay the cost of re-assessment of property throughout the entire 

province. Of course, the present staffs in the cities should be utilized for such a program, but the complete cost I 

suggest should be borne by the provincial government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in the year 1963 and 1964, thirty-seven per cent of our population lived in the cities, 13.9 per 

cent in the towns and 9.2 per cent in the villages. This indicates that approximately sixty per cent of our 

population lives in urban areas that are constantly experiencing new and different problems as the province 

develops. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I call it 5.30? 

 

The assembly recessed until 7.30 p.m. o'clock. 
 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, when we left the assembly at 5.30 I was pointing out to the hon. members that 

statistics for the year 1963-64 show that thirty-seven per cent of our population lives in the cities, 13.9 per cent in 

the towns, and 9.2 per cent in the villages. This makes up approximately sixty per cent of our population. This 

portion of our population is constantly experiencing new and different problems as the province develops. The 

urban section of our population needs careful and continuous consideration of these problems and I would suggest 

that in order to give intelligent and continuous consideration that a separate section within the Department of 

Municipal Affairs be organized and be properly staffed with people fully conversant with urban development, 

with urban finances, and other urban administrative problems. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I am extremely happy that the hon. Minister of Highways (Mr. Grant) of Regina South is in his seat. 

As the city of Regina grows and as cross-country traffic on our highways increases, we must consider building 

arterial and ring roads that connect these highways and this certainly applies to Regina, particularly the 

connections that are being made through the city with highways no. 1 and no. 11. In my riding for instance, 

Pasqua Street connects highway no. 11 and highway no. 1. Widening the north end of it at provincial expense 

would only funnel traffic into a narrow bottleneck and worsen a situation that is already hazardous. I suggest to 

the hon. minister, Mr. Speaker, that the only realistic and practical approach is to build Pasqua Street at provincial 

expense on the old railroad bed, complete with its overpass at the C.N.R. tracks right through all the way from no. 

1 to no. 11. I think I can prove to the minister that the payment of gasoline taxes by Regina citizens justifies the 

expenditure. 
 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Highways): — That is pretty old stuff . . . 
 

Mr. Whelan: — . . . even though the hon. minister thinks this is old stuff, or whoever suggested it, I think it is 

necessary, if we are going to preserve the lives of people who live along this road and who use it. Whether it is 

old or not, it is in urgent demand right at the present time. 
 

Mr. A.H. McDonald (Minister of Agriculture): — . . . twenty years . . . 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

266 

Mr. Whelan: — I realize that the previous government was expanding payments rapidly to cover cost of main 

arteries, but the city is increasing rapidly in size and the traffic situation is rapidly becoming worse. The Pasqua 

street problem should be solved without delay. The only reasonable solution is to take this arterial road into the 

provincial highway. 

 

There is a reference to grants for education in the Speech from the Throne. I shall reserve comment until I find out 

the actual amounts that will be allocated to the city of Regina. The continuous expansion, the cost of new schools, 

the increased expenditure for education facilities have become a heavy burden on the taxpayer and I would hope 

that the government grants will provide some relief in this respect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the city of Saskatoon there has been removal of rail lines from the heart of the city, and as I 

understand it at the present time, there is a committee made up of representatives from the provincial government, 

the federal government and the city of Regina, that is meeting with the railroad companies. They are planning, on 

a long-term basis, the removal of rail lines from the city of Regina. The savings to be realized in building 

by-passes on highway no. 1 would justify immediate action and initiative by the provincial committee to remove 

some of the many railways entering the city, and the ultimate removal of tracks as well in the heart of the city of 

Regina. I would certainly urge the provincial government, Mr. Speaker, to initiate and to bring about leadership in 

this field. I think that they can use their influence to initiate action, similar to the action that has already taken 

place in the city of Saskatoon. 

 

This year the province of Saskatchewan is celebrating its sixtieth anniversary. There is one project that I think we 

should undertake as a province. I should like to see trees made available, small trees that can be transplanted, 

made available to villages, hamlets, towns and cities, on the same basis, Mr. Speaker, as they are made available 

to people living in the rural areas. I think the charge there is 1 cent per tree. When one travels to Saskatoon, one 

realizes the value of trees as you go through the town of Davidson in the constituency of Arm River and other 

towns and villages where local people have taken the initiative and planted trees. There are many communities 

where there are no trees to speak of. I should like to see a special project undertaken, perhaps with the federal 

government supplying the trees, or a program worked out jointly between the federal and provincial governments, 

so that there would be trees planted in all the cities, towns, villages and hamlets in this province in the year 1965, 

or make it a Centennial Project and initiate this program at least by the year 1967. 

 

Hon. J.W. Gardiner (Minister of Public Works): It has already . . . 

 

Mr. Whelan: — I see the hon. Minister of Public Works, the hon. member for Melville (Mr. Gardiner) bowing 

his head and I am pleased to see that this has been undertaken. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — It has been done . . . 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Good, thank you very much. I have tried to give the government some idea of their true image in 

the eyes of the general public. I have tried to criticize their programs objectively and fairly, and I have made 

representations on behalf of the residents of Regina North. These representations I maintain, Mr. Speaker, are in 

step with representations that have been made by other members from other ridings on this side of the house. 

 

Frankly, Mr. Speaker, I don't think the public, generally speaking, is satisfied with the activities of the present: 

administration. An old timer who was born in this country, in 1885, made a comparison the other day. He said: 

"This is a rough winter. The weather is as rough as any I have experienced but there is one thing worse that has 

happened to us and that was the election of the Liberal government, April 22nd." 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, I will support the amendment and I am opposed to the motion. 



February 15, 1965 

 

267 

Hon. George J. Trapp (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, as I rise to speak for the first time, I want to 

congratulate you on your new office as Speaker. After spending a day in your constituency last summer, I learned 

the high regard in which you were held by your constituents. I am sure you have obtained an office and an honour 

which was well deserved. I would also like at this time to congratulate the Premier of this province on his victory 

at the polls in April. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trapp: — We all know that much credit for the Liberal victory belongs to him for his dynamic leadership. I 

am certain that the people of the Morse constituency are justly proud of Premier Ross Thatcher. 

 

Today we saw the hoisting of a new flag for Canada. This is the sixtieth birthday of Saskatchewan this year, and I 

think, with the new government, we are today ushering in a new era of prosperity for all the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

At this time I would like to oppose the sub-amendment and the amendment and I support the motion strongly. I 

also want to say that I am proud to associate myself with the contents of the Throne Speech. I say so because this 

Throne Speech is not cluttered up with self-praise and platitudes. What it does is to assure the people of 

Saskatchewan that the new Liberal government is sincere in fulfilling its pledges to the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trapp: — What clearer evidence could you have than the carrying out of half of their promises in their first 

year of office? Let me remind the hon. members of the opposition that they continually harp on the good 

government they gave this province over the last twenty years. Let me tell you gentlemen, it failed to be 

recognized by the people of this province and if you keep on harping the way you do, you will antagonize them 

even more, because you are saying in effect, "we do not agree how you people have voted in the election". 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trapp: — I want at this time to congratulate all those who have been elected to this assembly. I take it, it is 

an honour for all of you. Especially would I like to congratulate His Honour the Mayor, the hon. member from 

Regina East (Mr. Baker). You may not all be aware but we grew up together at Lipton and for a time attended 

school together. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trapp: — I am certain that I cannot tell you at what point in his career he went astray politically. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trapp: — In more serious terms I would like to express my sorrow at the illness of the hon. member from 

Biggar (Mr. Lloyd). I am certain that we all wish him a speedy recovery. We may not all be aware that he and I 

have had similar careers in education, but diverged when it came to politics, but we all wish him a speedy 

recovery. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trapp: — I wish at this time to thank the people of the Touchwood constituency for the confidence they 

have placed in me, I can assure them that I will do my best on their behalf and for all the people of the 

constituency and for all the people of Saskatchewan. Particularly, would I like to dedicate my services to the 

young people of Saskatchewan who have heard much in years past about equal educational opportunities. 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

268 

As one who has taught for thirty-four years in this province, I can say that it is idle talk. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trapp: — Is there anyone here who is so naive as to as to believe that if you offer the same school program 

to all children that you have offered them equal opportunity of education? 

 

We all know that offering the same program to all is not equal opportunity, because children differ both in their 

abilities and in their interests. We must offer different courses to different groups of children. 

 

Some of my best friends have wondered why I got involved in politics. I can tell you it is because after thirty-four 

years of teaching that I became convinced that something better can be provided for all of our boys and girls in 

our schools. When you think that less than twenty per rent of the students who enter grade l ever graduate from 

university, then you begin to wonder what happened to the other eighty per cent along the way. In all fairness, our 

schools do a reasonably good job in preparing young people for university and the professions in general. This 

they have done for many years. It does a deplorable job for those who have neither the ability nor the inclination 

to enter the professions. We must devise programs that will give to each child the kind of instruction from which 

he can best profit. The previous government allocated $91,000 for upgrading classes for the current year. We will 

spend more than twice that amount in this fiscal year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trapp: — This upgrading is a fine program for picking up many young people after they have dropped out. I 

can tell you many, many of them would never have dropped out, if we had had courses suited to their needs. 

 

I hope at a later date in this session to outline the program we have in mind for all the boys and girls of this 

province. Mr. Speaker, I want to say something at this time about pensions for teachers who retired prior to 1963, 

and civil servants who were pensioned before 1952. 

 

I am proud to be associated with a government which doesn't keep repeating that it put people ahead of dollars. I 

am proud to be associated with a government which does indeed, and in fact, put people before dollars. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trapp: — It is most commendable that the present government should in its first session rectify an injustice 

that to these people who have served this province well in some of its most trying years. Oh, I know it will not 

give us great political gain. It affects probably less than fifteen hundred people, and most of them are old, and 

many of them may be dead before the next election, and so I say it will not profit us much politically, but it is a 

human act of kindness with which I am glad to be associated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trapp: — May I also say something in connection with private schools. I think I am in a position to judge 

both the private school system and the public school system. I took part of my high school course in a private 

school and part in a public school. There is something radically wrong with the school system that cannot stand 

another school system within it, to have some basis for comparison. It is good for both the public school system, 

and for the private school system to have more than one school system. 

 

I think many of us look to the English school system that had many, and still has, private schools. This school 

system has been good for education generally. 

 

1 think most of will agree that, where we have uniformity, we 



February 15, 1965 

 

269 

also nave mediocrity. Private schools serve a need that public school cannot always provide. Many rural people 

live in areas where there are very small church groups, and parents and the church cannot provide religious 

training, the kind of training the parents want for their children, the kind of training that will lead them into the 

paths of their fathers of old. This is one of the thing that private schools can do. In my own school where I have 

taught for years, many students would go to St. Joseph's, or Luther, or Campion, or some of the other private 

schools for a year, so that they might get some of their religious training and some of the background of their 

fathers. I have great pleasure in being Minister of Education at a time when these private schools, which have 

found it most difficult to operate, will be given some assistance in a tangible way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trapp: — I have noted in the days that I have been in the house, Mr. Speaker, that members of the 

opposition have chided us for trying to cut down on expenditures. They don't want us to stop needless spending. I 

ask, "When has it been wrong to spend the taxpayers money carefully?" They have offered dozens of suggestions 

for more spending at every level and after twenty years, they ask us to do all the things they neglected doing. 

Speech after speech has been on what should be done. I feel it is a great honour, gentlemen of the opposition, that 

you have so much confidence and faith in the ability of a Liberal government to administer the funds of this 

province so that they can cut taxes and do all these extras. 

 

I thank you for the compliment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trapp: — I am sure that the opposition will feel sick at heart when the tax cuts are made in this session. I 

come from a rural constituency. There is no town area that has a population of over fifteen hundred. My people 

will welcome tax cuts. They know how to spend their money. Just leave them some to spend. Many of these 

people hacked a farm and a home and a living out of bush and stone. They will appreciate the use of tax-free gas 

in their farm trucks, I can assure you. 

 

The opposition, the other day, tried to belittle the reductions. My people will be glad of them. The sales tax 

reduction will be appreciated also. The opposition has mentioned, time and time again in this session the raising 

of the hospitalization premium. You would think from what has happened in years past that it was something like 

a pair of braces that you slipped up and down and you slid it down just before election time and you slid it up 

after election time. Gentlemen, you can say what you like, but this is a matter of dishonesty. It is a matter of 

disrespect to the people of this province to think you can fool them by lowering their premiums just before 

election time and then putting them up again. I have more respect for the people of this province than that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trapp: — Again I want to say that I cannot agree with the sub-amendment, or the amendment, but I wholly 

and heartily endorse the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Walter Smishek (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with all those from both sides of the house, 

who have extended to you their congratulations and best wishes on your elevation to the important office of 

Speaker. I am certain that you will preside over this assembly with fairness and with impartiality and with 

decorum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am indeed pleased to be able to take part in this day of special significance, the day, when in 

Canada and throughout the world, our new Canadian Flag is being raised and recognized. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — I would urge this assembly and all governments in 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

270 

Canada to make this, our new Flag, a symbol of Canada's dedication to the cause of Bread, Peace and Freedom, 

not only in Canada, but throughout the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — It is my fervent hope that this new Flag will be as a pillar of Canada's unity. I would like to ask 

this assembly to dedicate itself from this day as we raise our new flag, to declare war on poverty, wherever it may 

exist. Let us declare that in this province no child, no adult, will be in need of good food, the best of shelter, the 

best possible education, and the hest of health care. Let us pledge from this day forward our purpose shall be to 

remove injustices wherever they may exist. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Let us make this new flag a people's flag, a flag of purpose, one of which we, and those who 

follow us, will be truly proud. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to extend my congratulations to all members on both sides of the house who have been 

elected to the assembly and a special congratulation to the newcomers. I hope that all of us will exert our energies 

to serve the people of the province in the best of ways. I want to thank the people of Regina East and express my 

appreciation to them, for making it possible for me to sit in this legislature. 

 

Even though my colleague and I had larger majorities than many Liberal members who were elected, including 

the Premier, the Liberals tried desperately to prevent us from being seated. First, they chose to challenge hundreds 

of declared ballots. Secondly, they opposed our application for a recount. Then they made an application under 

the controverted elections act to upset the election. They dragged us through two courts. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Low morality. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Finally, justice prevailed. The controverted application was ruled to be improper and the 

Liberals were ordered to pay both the court costs and the legal costs — their own and those incurred by us. 

 

I have one regret, Mr. Speaker, in the fact that some four-hundred ballots still remain uncounted. It is very 

unfortunate that the Liberals chose to disfranchise that many citizens in our district. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — You did it. 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — We are going to change it. It won't happen again. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech does state that there will be amendments proposed to the 

Election Act, to do away with the declared ballots. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if anything, the question of 

declared ballots should be extended, not reduced. Certainly people should not be disfranchised but the franchise 

should be extended. I submit that there is room for amending the Election Act and I would hope that consideration 

be given, first that the Election Act be amended to declare election day a public holiday with pay, to all people, 

and that no person should lose pay on election day. We should made this "democracy day", to enable all citizens 

to participate fully in the selection of their government. I would also suggest that consideration be given to 

amending the Act by increasing the pay of D.R.O's, poll clerks, returning officers, election clerks and 

enumerators. In the changing society in which we are living, there are increasing difficulties in getting qualified 

election day workers. We used to depend, a great deal, on the women folk to run our elections. Many women, 

particularly in the urban centres, have gone to work in industry and in the field of commerce, the result is that 

there are fewer and fewer able people to man the polls on election day. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the urgency of 

declaring a public holiday on election day is becoming more important. 

 

In the case of enumerators, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that both the basic amounts should be increased and the 

per name enumerated amount be increased. Also, I think that enumerators who miss names in their polls that they 

are to enumerate, should probably be docked double 



February 15, 1965 

 

271 

the amount for each name that they have missed. I think, Mr. Speaker, that this would help to lessen, to an extent, 

the number of declared ballots. Such amendments I would be prepared to support but certainly I am not prepared 

to support amendments which would disfranchise more people. 

 

In expressing my thanks to the electors of Regina East, I want to say that it is my intent to serve them to the best 

of my ability; to take up their grievances, problems and complaints. My home and my office will always be open 

to them for me to render any assistance that I can. 

 

Regina East, I suggest is one of the most exciting and versatile constituencies of any in the province. It has also 

the largest population of all constituencies in the province, after one excludes Saskatoon, where there are five 

representatives at large. It is a constituency which can probably be described as an area similar to that of United 

Nations. We have, in Regina East, a multitude of people who have come to this province from various lands and 

who have settled in Regina East. On looking at the statistics for 1961, I note that we had about 13,500 people 

from the British Isles, about 1,500 French Canadians, about 10,000 of German extraction, about 225 Italians, 

approximately 600 of Netherland origin, approximately 1,500 people of Polish background, about 500 Russians 

about 1,300 Scandinavians, about 3,000 of Ukrainian ancestry and about 6,000 from other European countries. 

We also have about 500 Asiatic people, residing in the Regina East constituency. These people, as I have stated 

before, came from many lands to brave the wild west. They have come to build a new future for themselves and 

for their children. They brought with them their culture, songs, dances, art, language, sports, music, drama, and 

their famous dishes which so many of us enjoy. 

 

In Regina East, almost all ethnic halls of culture are located within its boundary. People from the entire Regina 

region, and Regina city participate in the activities that take place in these halls of culture that are located in the 

Regina East constituency. Their performances are enjoyed by all people of Regina, people of Saskatchewan, and 

for that matter of Canada. Many of the people have been recognized as professionals, and have been recognized 

and have played on CBC and other national networks. 

 

Like myself, many of these people have farm backgrounds. In the past twenty years, during the CCF 

administration, many of the people in Regina East have been able to build better homes for themselves. They are 

very proud of their belongings and their homes. They are particularly proud of their children, especially those who 

have had an opportunity for better education. I am glad to see that the Throne Speech suggests that there will be 

increased spending in education. This is consistent with the policy of the CCF. The previous government 

consistently increased its budgetary expenditures to improve the standard of education throughout the province. 

As I have said before, the people in Regina East have a great interest in improved education. 

 

I am also glad to see the proposal that grants will be available for art and culture. The people of Regina East are 

very interested in the promotion of arts and culture. I am also pleased, Mr. Speaker, that the former government 

recognized the importance of enhancing and furthering the cultural activities in this province by establishing a 

committee on biculturalism. The committee is continuing its work, I understand. 

 

I am somewhat uncertain as to the proposal contained in the Throne Speech, that there will be created a Youth 

Agency for promoting culture and recreation. More details are needed in order to pass proper judgment. But I do 

hope, Mr. Speaker, that this branch does not become a place for the indoctrination of our young people in the 

Liberal doctrine. There is also a danger of possible duplication. When one considers the Arts Board in the 

province and the Committee on biculturalism, I do hope that if this department is established, that steps will be 

taken to ensure that there is no unnecessary duplication and no unnecessary expenditure of public funds. I also 

hope, Mr. Speaker, that this agency will not become a place for the appointment of defeated Liberal politicians. It 

has been rumoured that this is the place that the Liberal candidate for Regina East might fit in. One of them has 

been taken care of already but the other one is apparently still on the loose. 

 

I, as one of the members of an ethnic group, have a special affinity and kinship with the people of Regina East, It 

is perhaps for this reason that they bestowed this important honour on me to represent them. As I have said 

earlier, I propose to represent them to the best of my 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

272 

ability. 

 

Regina East has other important attributes. It is the largest industrial and commercial complex in the province. It 

is the centre of Regina's cultural and educational institutions. Within its boundaries are included the main 

department stores, the theatres, the university, collegiates, three hotels, apartment blocks and many parks. Much 

credit is due for the development to the city administration, and in particular, to my colleague (Mr. Baker). 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to extend a word of congratulations to the largest and leading newspaper in the province, 

which just a few months ago opened its large, new building. I do hope that the Leader-Post, in its new location 

will be able to serve the community of Saskatchewan much better from this new building. We certainly welcome 

it in Regina East. I know that the building was started long before this administration came into being. 

Apparently, the Regina Leader Post, which used to warn us about Socialism, did not fear Socialism at all because 

of the large investment it was willing to make in Saskatchewan. 

 

There are other very important projects located within our constituency. The Saskatchewan Power Corporation 

building will stand as a monument of progress of CCF administration for a period of twenty years. Oh yes, many 

of us will recall that when the building was under construction, the members opposite used to suggest that this 

was going to be a palace for the civil servants. Mr. Speaker, I was particularly glad to see that after December 

16th, the lights in the Power Corporation Building went on again. 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — . . . blackout. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — You will remember that shortly after the new administration took over there was a blackout but 

as of December 16th, it seems that they saw the light. 

 

Also within the boundaries of our constituency is located the Museum of Natural History, enjoyed by the people 

of Regina, by the people of Saskatchewan and by those who come to visit our fair city. Here again, I can recall 

that the Liberals referred to it, when it was proposed, as the place for dead gophers and stuffed crows. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Waste of money. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — So you can see that the CCF administration did much in the promotion of culture, in the 

promotion of beauty, in the promotion of art, as well as doing things for practical value. 

 

Another important, feature within the Regina East constituency is the Wascana Centre. It is admitted by architects 

throughout Canada, that this is the most imaginative program ever undertaken by any government. I am indeed 

proud that the previous administration saw fit to take this action. 

 

This is Jubilee Year, Saskatchewan is celebrating its sixtieth birthday. I was advised a few days ago by the Regina 

Labour Council that it is their intent and wish to start the construction of a trade union centre. I hope that it may 

be located within the boundaries of Regina East but I am not going to quarrel if they locate it in Regina West. But 

I would appeal, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Public Works who is also the minister in charge of the Jubilee and 

Centennial Corporation, that his department give consideration to making the Regina Labour Council a substantial 

grant in recognition of the workers and trade union people in this province. 

 

Mr. Nollet (Cut Knife): — Come on. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — When the Throne Speech was presented, I listened to each sentence, as it was read, with 

attentiveness and with anticipation, hoping upon hope that the next sentence or paragraph would contain 

something new to meet the problems that our province and our country are facing. When the last sentence was 

read, "May divine providence continue to bless our province and guide this legislature in all its deliberations", U 

knew then that this was the end of the Throne Speech. My heart sank low with grief. I felt sorry for my province 

and for our people, because of 



February 15, 1965 

 

273 

the lack of imagination, the lack of thoughtfulness and the lack of concrete proposals, that this Throne Speech 

contained. It must be remembered that this document was in incubation for a period of nine months. One would 

not be too critical had this Throne Speech been presented to us in August, as we were originally led to believe it 

would be. One could have excused the government for its inadequacy because the period was short, but after nine 

months, I am afraid no one can excuse the administration for the inadequacies of this document. After all these 

months, Mr. Speaker, I submit, that the only thing we have is a rededication to monopoly enterprise, this time 

basted with coloured margarine. 

 

Oh yes, there are further promises of possible tax cuts but it must be remembered that this is after a $5,000,000 

tax increase. The budget will give us a chance to talk about taxes. However. I think it is important to draw to 

public attention, in case there are those who have forgotten, some of the statistical figures that have been 

appearing in the last nine months. Firstly, it has been reported that the previous administration, at the end of 

March, 1964, left a surplus of $9,300,000, Then there was a report that this year we will receive $3,000,000 more 

from the federal government. The Premier stated that we will receive $4,000,000 more from the sale of mineral 

rights and mineral taxes. We know that retail sales last year were approximately 10 per cent higher than the year 

before. Here, the province will derive between $4,000,000 and $5,000,000 more in revenue. We have been led to 

believe that the government reduced expenditures by so-called economies, by something like $6,500,000. Adding 

the $5,000,000 tax increase, this totals approximately $32,000,000. But it is suggested now that we will get a tax 

cut of approximately $12,000,000. Where is the other $20,000,000? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Give it away. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — What happened to the promise that we will get a $20,000,000 tax cut? Has this been forgotten? 

What about the promise to reduce municipal taxes? Oh yes, here is their election program. It contains the proposal 

that municipal taxes will be reduced. I see no proposal for the reduction in municipal taxes. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You will. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — As I meet and talk to people throughout my constituency and the province, it seems to me that 

the main concern that the people have is first, steps to be taken by governments to increase the standard of living, 

particularly of those in low income brackets, including those on social aid, set pensions, not only of teachers and 

civil servants. I agree that they need some help, but there are others as well, such as those on unemployment 

insurance and other groups in the low income categories. The second area of deep concern is the assurance that all 

citizens shall have full citizenship rights, often referred to as civil liberties. The third area of major concern to 

people is that governments have a responsibility of meeting, in a positive way, the age of automation and 

cybernation, which is displacing thousands of people in this country every year. The fourth area, I would suggest, 

is breaking the power, control and influence of monopoly capitalism, particularly foreign control of Canada's 

economy. The fifth area of major concern is the question of world peace. I was disappointed, Mr. Speaker, last 

Saturday, when government members refused to meet a group of students who came to the legislature to present 

their petition because of their concern about world peace and their concern about the most recent conflict that 

exists. I was glad that my colleague from Regina West spoke to the students. I was also pleased, Mr. Speaker, that 

the honorable member from Carrot River (Mr. Pederson) at least saw fit to write a letter to the student body, but 

there was no one, and no communication from the government side. 

 

Mr. Snyder (Moose Jaw City): — It must be free enterprise. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, I recall, I believe it was in 1961, that the Liberals, who were then in opposition, 

made a great to do about Premier Douglas not being able to meet a delegation on a particular date. All kinds of 

charges and accusations were hurled at him. He did not refuse to meet them. He only said he could not meet them 

on a particular day. In this instance, members of the government even refused to meet a delegation. 

 

Mr. Grant (Regina South): — . . . not right. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — They certainly weren't there. 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

274 

The report from the student body was that no one from the government wanted to appear. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that the Throne Speech cannot be considered on its own, it must be considered in 

concert with the election promises and the speeches made today, and I propose to discuss them in that context. 

 

I would now like to refer to the remarks of the mover of the Throne Speech, the hon. member from Athabaska 

(Mr. Guy). It seemed to me he was working very hard for a promotion. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — He is already northern minister. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — After he got started, he stepped back for a moment, he straightened himself out, he faced the 

Premier, and I thought for a moment he was going to bow, but I guess he missed his line. Then he proceeded with 

this eulogies, "Oh my glorious, almighty, gracious, brilliant leader. I love you. You are great, omnipotent. You 

have lead us out of wilderness in which we wallowed for the last twenty years, and therein lies our destiny." 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy (Athabasca): — Thanks Walt. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, he might have consulted some of his colleagues, his friends who are sitting in the 

cabinet. I hear that some of them are now referring to the Premier as J.C. He then proceeded to quote a number of 

editorials which praised the Premier, Mr. Speaker. I have some editorials written about the Premier too, and they 

are not very complimentary. Here is one from the Globe and Mail, dated August 11, 1964: "Mr. Thatcher's 

Laboratory of the Goldwater West". I do not propose to read this editorial, I know the people here and elsewhere 

have read it. And then he proceeded with his vile and violent attack on the workers and their unions and their 

leaders. I am sure that these attacks on labour will hold him in good stead with the Premier when he is considering 

cabinet promotions. This has been traditional with Liberal spokesmen. Anyone who attacks Trade Unions and 

Labour is certain to receive a promotion. 

 

Hon. A.H. McDonald (Moosomin): — What are you working on now? 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Working on you. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Thank you. I recall, Mr. Speaker, a member who used to be very critical of the trade union 

movement and who used to make some very disparaging speeches and violent attacks on the trade union 

movement and who got his reward. He became Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre). Another, Mr. Speaker, after he 

crossed the floor and attacked the trade union movement, ran as a Liberal candidate in the same constituency I 

did. He was appointed chairman of the Workmen's Compensation Board. Another one, who after his defection, 

attacked the trade union movement became the Federal Liberal organiser for Saskatchewan. Well, Sir, there are 

others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the mover of the Throne Speech criticised the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour regarding the 

treatment the Minister of Labour received at the October Federation Convention. The words, I believe he used, 

were "ignorant" and "disgraceful". I challenge the member from Athabaska (Mr. Guy) to prove his case. And if 

the Minister of Labour, (Mr. Coderre) suggests that he got unfair treatment, and I have not heard him say that, I 

will challenge him too. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre), who addressed the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour 

Convention received a most courteous hearing, not a single person interrupted his speech and he received warm 

applause at the conclusion of his address. In fact, Mr. Speaker, a newsman, who was there, expressed surprise at 

the courteous hearing the delegates gave him. I suppose the reason he expressed surprise was because he was 

aware of the kind of attacks the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) used to make on the trade union movement. 

Surely the Minister didn't expect a standing ovation from the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. After all, we do 

remember the constant attacks the Minister 



February 15, 1965 

 

275 

resorted to on the trade union movement, similar to those made by the member of Athabaska (Mr. Guy) and 

which were apparently concurred in by the Premier. Well, Mr. Speaker, as one looks through the newspaper 

reports at some of the speeches that the Liberal spokesman used to make, I wonder really whether they deserve to 

be in government. It used to be popular sport for Liberal spokesmen to associate all the labour leaders with Hoffa 

and Banks. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Poor Banks. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — I think that the members on the other side of the house know full well that the Canadian Labour 

Congress, the centre of Canadian Labour and the A.F.L. - C.I.O., across the border, rejected and condemned the 

tactics of Hoffa and Banks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to read into the records a statement that I made a little better than a year ago in respect 

of Mr. Banks, when I spoke to the Saskatchewan Farmers' Union convention. This is what said: 

 

On the S.I.U. question, I feel compelled to say that the Liberal federal government must assume a significant 

share of responsibility. They issued a special order-in-council permitting Hal Banks' entry to Canada. The 

Labour movement also made a mistake in accepting him. However, as is well known, the S.I.U. was expelled 

from the family of labour by the Canadian Labour Congress in 1960. The labour movement of Canada has 

condemned Hal Banks and his hoodlum empire without qualification. There is no room for people like Banks 

within the ranks of organized labour. He is a menace to society and . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — 

 

. . . and a blight on the labour movement. The position of the Canadian Labour Movement in this respect is 

absolutely clear. We also feel that certain shipping companies are not innocent of the explosive situation at the 

Great Lakes. Banks could have not maintained himself in control of the union without the collusion of the 

shipping interests. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is kind of interesting to note that while the members opposite used to attack labour leaders, to 

label them as agents of Hoffa, etc., and to associate every labour leader with the shenanigans that went on in the 

Teamsters' Union, the government has appointed two Teamster representatives to government boards, to the 

Labour Relations Board and the other to the Minimum Wage Board. The Teamsters' Union in Saskatchewan is a 

very small organization of about five hundred people, yet in comparison, the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour 

which represents about 36,000 workers, only warranted one member on the Labour Relations Board and no one 

on the Minimum Wage Board. Certainly the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) should not have expected a 

standing ovation at the Federation Convention with such a background. Certainly, he should have not expected a 

standing ovation because of the kind of treatment he gave to the former deputy. Mr. Elkin was a public servant of 

this province for a period of nineteen years. A day or two after the new Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) took 

office, the deputy (Mr. Elkin) went to see him to discuss with him what might be his future. I understand that the 

Minister said there were great pressure on him to have him dismissed. No further conversations took place. About 

a week later when Mr. Elkin was having lunch at home, he heard on the news that he had been fired. Is this the 

way to treat people who have given 19 years of public service? This is exactly the method that was also used in 

dismissing the Labour Relations Board. The members of the Labour Relations Board were notified by the public 

news media of their dismissal. Similar tactics were used in discharging other public servants. 

 

Hon. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — Pin your ears back. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Oh, I notice the courageous 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

276 

noises being made in the background by the Minister of Public Works. It is interesting to know of how brave and 

courageous he was when he dismissed Albert Watson, the director of the Jubilee and Centennial Corporation. He 

had the chairman and the secretary of the Corporation, on Dominion Day early in the morning, deliver a letter of 

dismissal to him. It s interesting to note the method that was used in dismissing Mr. David Cass-Beggs. When the 

latter was dismissed, the news media wanted a statement from the Premier and from then the Minister of Industry 

and Information (Mr. Pinder). They were told that the Premier had gone to his ranch and the Minister of Industry 

and Information to Waskesiu. He ran for the bushes. After dismissing the Labour Relations Board, it is interesting 

to note that when the new minister asked for nominations and the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour submitted 

nominations, the Minister refused to accept them. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Well, he is boss! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I went through some of the speeches that the minister used to make when he 

was in opposition. Here is one in which he discussed the Labour Relations Board. He said: 

 

My suggestion, Mr. Speaker, to the government would be that in effect the Labour Relations Board would have 

a representative, 

 

This was his idea of the board. 

 

say for example, a member from the Ministerial Association which would concern itself with the moral aspects 

of the decisions handed down by the Labour Relations Board. Then from there it would have a representative 

from the Labour Unions, and a representative from the Employers' Association, a representative of the 

government and a representative from other organizations which are directly related with the case, and you 

would have a true Labour Relations Board which would look at all aspects from a point of view of fairness and 

justice to all. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I notice after the new Labour Relations Board was appointed, there was no member from the 

Ministerial Association. Oh, yes, they took account of other organizations, they sure did. As the public 

representatives on the board, they appointed a defeated Liberal candidate, and the leading member of the KOD 

organization. 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . democracy. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, you know the Liberal spokesmen have quite often said to labour, "Judge us by our 

actions not by what we say." Well, I think the labour movement by now had had a chance to judge them by both 

their actions and their statements and really there is no difference. As I look through these speeches made by the 

Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) in the past, it is interesting to note what his source of authority is, his bible on 

labour matters. He states on February 31, 1961: 

 

I received a little bulletin known as the L.R. Bulletin. I read it, and I shall quote from it, December, 1960. This 

L.R. Bulletin is the Labour Review Bulletin, the organ of free Canadian labour. 

 

Then he goes on to say: 

 

It is the official organ of the free Canadian labour, the C.F. of L., and is published I believe by the B.L.E. Now 

what that means I don't know, but I think it is "Brotherhood of Locomotives and Engineers." 

 

Well, the Minister is certainly mixed up there But I can tell him what the C.F. of L. is. The C.F. of L. is an 

organization formed and sponsored by employers of this country. It is a company dominated union and this is his 

source of authority on labour, Mr. Speaker. 



February 15, 1965 

 

277 

Now the member from Athabaska (Mr. Guy) proceeded to accuse the labour leaders of being "power hungry", and 

"rabble-rousers", and he then suggested to the Trade Union Movement that they should get rid of their leadership. 

I hope, Mr. Speaker, that this was not a veiled threat, to do what a Liberal Premier of Newfoundland did. First, as 

we will recall, he tried to discredit the labour leaders. When this failed, he then proceeded to decertify a legitimate 

union and then to establish a company union and appointed one of his MLAs to lead it. 

 

I hope, Mr. Speaker, that this was not a threat to the Trade Union Movement. We will recall when Hitler came 

into power in Germany, he didn't like what the Trade Union Movement was doing. First he tried to discredit the 

labour leaders and when this failed, he put them behind bars and then he did away with the Trade Union 

Movement. Certainly this connotation seemed to have been there in the remarks made by the member from 

Athabaska (Mr. Guy). Mr. Speaker, who are these power hungry, rabble-rousing labour leaders? Well, I will name 

them. 

 

Mr. Guy (Athabasca): — One of them is talking now. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — In the province of Saskatchewan, there are between three and four hundred local unions, each of 

them elects a president, a vice-president, a treasurer and a secretary. They elect approximately 2,000 stewards and 

they elect guards and warden, trustees and other local officers. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Well, Guy belongs to one of those trade unions. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Who are these people? Well they may be your barber, or your baker, or . . . 

 

Mr. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — . . . member from Regina East? 

 

Mr. Smishek: — . . . or your plumber, or your milkman, your telephone repair man or electrician, the grocery 

clerk or the janitor, your hospital attendant, yes, he may be the man who collects your garbage, the bus driver, or 

train conductor, or the power line man who braves the storms whenever the power lines are torn down . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . keep his mouth shut politically. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Yes, and he might even be your school superintendent. Yes, or one of those power-hungry 

labour leaders, may be your neighbour . . . 

 

Mr. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — or a school teacher. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — a son of a farmer, or a daughter of a farmer, your boy's scout leader or an elder in your church. 

These are the trade union leaders of this province. It is true that the Trade Union Movement does employ in this 

province about forty full time union representatives. I tried to look into the background of these people, and I find 

that all but four are Saskatchewan native sons. Of the other four, one is an Ontario born man, one from 

Newfoundland, one from British Columbia, and one from Manitoba. Yes, these labour leaders are the sons and 

daughters of our Saskatchewan farmers, and Saskatchewan workers, like yourself. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, I was born and raised on a farm, I know what farm life is all about. Yes, I 

remember picking stones at the age of twelve. I remember going out stooking at the age of 14 for $3 a day, and 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — You're lucky! 

 

Mr. Smishek: —. . . and I remember at the age of fifteen working on a threshing crew with a team for the large 

sum of $5 as day. I know something of farm life in Saskatchewan. In fact, my parents are still farming 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

278 

and so is my brother, and so is my brother-in-law, and I suggest, Mr. Sneaker, that most of the trade union leaders 

that we have in the province are the sons and daughters of our farmers and workers. They do not deserve the kind 

of an attack and abuse that the hon. member from Athabaska (Mr. Guy) hurled at them the other day. 

 

I had hoped, after the liberals took office, and after their shameful record of attacking the Trade Union Movement 

over the years, that they would have said "well, this is the past. Let us start anew. Let us try to get along with the 

people of this province", but no, their attacks continued. The spots of a leopard never seem to change. 

 

One other feature in the address of the hon. member from Athabaska (Mr. Guy), to which I would like to refer, is 

the way he tried to misinform this house on the resolution that was adopted at the convention of the Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour. Mr. Speaker, I would like to read into the records, the resolution that was adopted: 

 

Be it resolved that the Federation devote its talents and energies to political education and action, until we have 

again elected in Saskatchewan, a government that will serve the best interests of the people, and not a 

government in the interests of private enterprise and profit. 

 

This was the resolution that was adopted. Does this resolution say that the federation is dedicated to overthrow 

this government? It certainly does not. 

 

Mr. Guy (Athabasca): — It certainly does. There is no use playing on words. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — I am not playing on words, Mr. Speaker. I am reading. The member opposite was playing on 

words. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy (Athabasca): — A person of any common sense knows the intent of that resolution, and all you say will 

never change it. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — If this government, Mr. Speaker, if this government is not dedicated to the gods of so-called 

free enterprise and profit, they have no fear from labour and the resolution that was adopted last week, when we 

played host to the students from the university. I think the speakers from both sides of the house urged upon the 

students to play an active part in the political life of our country. I agree, that every citizen should be active in the 

field of politics. This is the way we will make democracy work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — It is interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite never refer to the political position of 

the Chamber of Commerce. I have here a booklet called "A Political Participation Program", a manual for public 

affairs committees, of boards of trade and Chamber of Commerce, and what do they say? Let me read into the 

records: 

 

A political participation program is based on the belief that a system of government functions most effectively 

in the best general interest of everyone when all individuals and all groups including labour, farmers, business, 

professional and many others, play an active role in the political process. 

 

Certainly I do not disagree with this statement. I think that it is good for everyone to play an active role in the 

political life of our country. But then it goes on: 

 

The Board of Trade and Chamber of Commerce can, through their public affairs committees develop a political 

participation program 



February 15, 1965 

 

279 

aimed at (1) stimulating membership activity and political affairs, and (2) stimulating citizenship activities in 

political affairs, and (3) stimulating activity by business and industrial firms in political action. 

 

The Chamber of Commerce program, I submit, calls on business and industry to take political action. If business 

does it, as far as the members on the other side of the house are concerned, it is alright. But if labour tries to take 

political action, then this is wrong. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — The program continues, Mr. Speaker, and I quote again from the Chamber of Commerce 

booklet: 

 

Here is a suggested program or outline of suggested activity in connection with the vital program of political 

participation. One of the points is to organize a speakers' bureau, provide speakers on economic and political 

education to civic, fraternal, church, educational and other groups. 

 

The political program of the Chamber of Commerce even leads to the doorstep of the church. Mr. Speaker, I do 

not deny the right of the Chamber of Commerce to be active in the field of politics. They are a legitimate 

organization and in our country they have the right to be active in politics, but I submit, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Trade Union Movement equally has the right and the responsibility to play an active role in politics. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, have made on many occasions attacks on the Trade Union 

Movement because unions participated or have made contributions to political campaigns, and to political parties. 

 

I have here an article which appeared in the Leader Post, of Friday, November 6th. It is as follows: 

 

S.I.U. Funds Said Given to Liberals. Toronto Canadian Press Report. 

 

The Toronto Star says, Hal Banks, Seafarers International Union, issued cheques for about $1,000 each to the 

political agents of five Montreal area Liberal candidates just before the 1962 federal election. And that they also 

contributed $1,000 to the 1957 campaign of a former Liberal member of parliament for a New Brunswick 

riding. 

 

You know the Liberals are not averse to taking money from unions. They are only more choosy from what union 

they take it. Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to pay tribute to the hundreds of trade union leaders in this province. 

I know many of them personally. I know many local union presidents and treasurers and recording secretaries and 

shop stewards. I think they are doing a magnificent job in serving their members and in helping to raise the 

standard of living of their members. I also want to pay tribute, Mr. Speaker, to the Trade Union Movement in 

general. I have a statement here which states: 

 

It would be no exaggeration to say that if there were no unions, there would be no democracy, no free 

education, no public medical and hospital care, no workmen's compensation laws, no rights for workers to vote 

in general elections, no unemployment insurance. Wages would be much lower, hours of labour much longer. 

There would be no vacations or statutory holidays with pay. 

 

With this statement, I certainly concur, Mr. Speaker. I submit that the Trade Union Movement in this province has 

done much 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

280 

to raise the standard of living for the people and has contributed much to the social, economic, and political life of 

our country. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to refer for a moment to some other aspects of the Throne Speech, and some of 

the promises made by the Liberal party. 

 

I notice in the election campaign, the Liberals promised that they would maintain and improve workers' wages, 

vacations, hours of work, compensation, trade union rights and security, and that they would create 80,000 new 

job opportunities. The interesting thing is that that the Throne Speech is almost naked with respect to the 

improvement of labour laws. There is a proposal in respect to the minimum wage. I do hope, Mr. Speaker, when 

important decisions are made, that the government will establish the minimum wage at least at $1.25 per hour, as 

provided in Bill C-126, the National Labour Standards Code. I do hope that the Liberals will not establish 

sub-minimum wages. That is, that there would be one higher minimum wage and another lower minimum wage 

for the so-called inexperienced. This has been a popular proposal of members of the opposite side of the house in 

the past. I hope that they have discarded this notion and that we will not have any sub-minimum wage laws. 

 

I would ask the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) to consider sincerely and seriously the establishment of a 

minimum wage of $1.25 per hour, as suggested in Bill C-126. 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — You had twenty years, why did you not do it then? 

 

Mr. Smishek: — I was not in the government, Sir. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — . . . you had your influence inside and outside. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, in respect of the Workmens' Compensation Act, there are some amendments 

suggested and I am sure, when the bill comes up, I will have a chance to discuss them. So far, as I see it, there is 

nothing really exciting. There is a proposal to increase the minimum from $30.00 to $32.50 That certainly is not 

exorbitant and I would ask the minister to give consideration to make it at least equal to the minimum wage. 

 

There have been a number of attacks made on the Trade Union Act. There is a mention in the Throne Speech, that 

many amendments are forthcoming. I do sincerely hope, Mr. Speaker, that the government will not amend the 

Trade Union Act, but will keep it in its present form. I know that is the wish and the desire of the Trade Union 

People in this province. 

 

I would like to make a comment or two in respect, of the promise of 80,000 new jobs in a four year period that 

was made by the Liberal party during the last election campaign. This means 20,000 jobs a year. I noted also with 

interest that no specific proposals are contained in the Throne Speech of how the government will create 20,000 

jobs a year. The government has now been in office for a period of nine months. By now they should have created 

15,000 jobs. I asked the minister a question the other day as to the number of unemployed last year at this time. 

The latest figures that are available that he provided me with is that at the end of December there were 17,713 

persons registered with the National Employment Service offices as looking for work. I would suggest that by 

now, Mr. Speaker, there are between 21,000 and 22,000 people registered with the N.E.S. offices as looking for 

employment or twice the number the government took office. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — What a comparison! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — The proposal of 80,000 jobs in a four year period, if anything, Mr. Speaker, was mischievous. 

Surely the government must know, or they should have know, or they should have taken the trouble to find out, 

what kind of investment is required these days to create employment in this age of automation. 

 

In the manufacturing and mining industry, capital investment of $80,000 to a $100,000 is required these days to 

create one job. The I.M.C. mine at Esterhazy invested $40,000,000 and created between 400 and 500 



February 15, 1965 

 

281 

jobs. Kalium at Belle Plaine invested $50,000,000 and only 225 jobs were created. Members might be interested 

to know that in the period 1951-63, 12 years, private and public investment in new plants, machinery and repair, 

in the province of Saskatchewan was $7,430,000,000. The labour force during this period increased from 302,000 

to 328,000 an increase of 26,000 new jobs. 

 

In this age of automation, Mr. Speaker, I would submit that what is needed is some sober, thoughtful and 

deliberate planning to create jobs. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I don't think . . . 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Not callous and irresponsible promises. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Don't believe in planning. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — One of the areas that I am certainly interested in is improving the technical training program in 

the province. There is a proposal that extension of technical school facilities will be made. I regret that the 

government chose to cancel the construction of two technical schools, or start construction of the two schools 

proposed by the previous government. We will, as a result be one year behind. 

 

Among the things needed in developing a better technical school program is an increase in living allowances. The 

federal government is now prepared to pay ninety percent of food and living allowances up to $50 per week for 

those taking training and re-training. I would ask the government to give immediate consideration to that offer. 

 

I would suggest that consideration be given to providing leave of absence from employment for people who want 

to take increased training and re-training. There should be established a thorough system of counselling. There 

should be established a compulsory certification program. I would ask the government to work in co-operation 

with other provinces for the establishment of national standards regarding training and tradesmen qualifications. 

A further request I would like to make, Mr. Speaker, is that a law be made that wherever and whenever 

automation is introduced, its introduction shall be preceded by consultation and negotiations on training and 

retraining between employers and their unions. Training as a matter of principle should be during the day time. 

Adult training, particularly academic upgrading, should be designed for adult students and equivalency 

certificates should be granted to graduates. 

 

Consideration should be given to the establishment of industry or in-plant training under the supervision of the 

government. Immediate steps should be taken for the establishment of a research division to forecast educational, 

occupational and training needs. The apprenticeship program should be revamped and extended. Consideration 

should be given to the establishment of a special training program for the handicapped. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I noted with interest the proposal to establish an Indian and Metis branch within the government. As 

I understand it, there are approximately 36,000 native Canadians in the province. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, 

that rather than establishing an elaborate department and, in view of the healthy economic position of the 

province, that a program be instituted immediately for a large housing program for the Indian population. I would 

suggest that the next thing that should be undertaken is the construction of a technical school in the northern area 

and that every employer be required to employ a given percentage, say three to five per cent, of native Canadians. 

I would think that this would go a long way to helping meet the needs of our native population. 

 

One other area, Mr. Speaker, that I would like to comment on is the control of monopolies over our industries by 

foreign companies. This is an area that requires immediate attention. In 1935, between thirty-seven to forty-five 

per cent of our industry was foreign controlled. By 1959 this had increased to sixty-three per cent and today we 

find that over seventy per cent of Canada's industry is foreign controlled. For instance in the rubber industry — 

ninety-seven per cent is foreign controlled. The transportation industry is seventy-three per cent foreign 

controlled. I think, Mr. Speaker, that this assembly would do well to give encouragement to the hon. Minister of 

Finance in Ottawa. I noted with interest what was reported in the Star Phoenix. Let me quote: 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

282 

Mr. Gordon is steering some significant new legislation through the Canadian House of Commons and Senate 

in an unrelenting pursuit of Canadian economic sovereignty. He is reported to have said: 'No other 

economically advanced nation has such a large proportion of its industry controlled from outside its borders. No 

nation can pretend to be independent politically if it surrenders too much economic power to the residents of 

other countries. 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . in Brazil . . . 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, when we take a look at some of the things that are happening and the people who 

are taking control of our industry, it is indeed frightening. 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . look at Cuba . . . 

 

Mr. Smishek: — In an article in the New York Times of November 19, 1964, the following appears: 

 

Probably no United States industry has fared better overseas than the oil business. Ira H. Cram, Chairman of the 

Executive Committee of The Continental Oil Company, noted this yesterday. In recent years, earning in oil 

ventures have brought an important return, Mr. Cram said. From 1957 to 1962, he noted, American oil 

companies spent $4,200,000,000 in foreign nations and brought home earnings of $7,600,000,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think there is reason for us, as Canadians, particularly, on this day when we raised our new flag, to 

take all steps necessary to retrieve our industry from foreign control and foreign domination. 

 

The last point, Mr. Chairman, that I would like to make, is in respect of the proposal contained in the Throne 

Speech on "night opening of retail establishments". I note with interest that in 1963 in Saskatchewan, 

co-operatives and independent owners did 77 per cent of retail business and chain companies did 23 per cent of 

the retail business. I wonder whether this is not one of the significant reasons why the government' is now 

proposing night shopping. I talked to merchants and in fact had representations from them and certainly the 

independent merchant does not want night shopping and certainly the co-operatives do not want it. The farmers 

are not advocating any change in the shopping hours and labour is not interested in it. 

 

What I am afraid of, Mr. Speaker, is that this proposal for Friday or Saturday night shopping is the thin edge of 

the wedge. Next year it will be Thursday and the following year it will be Wednesday. We know that with night 

shopping will come split shifts for employees unless the government is prepared to take steps to prevent it, and 

employees will be on call from twelve to thirteen hours a day. Family and social life of the employees will be 

affected. Certainly the consumer will be affected because he will have to pay for the additional costs of keeping 

the retail stores open. 

 

There has been a proposal that retail sales volume will automatically increase if you permit stores to remain open 

for longer hours. Mr. Speaker, I cannot be convinced that somehow the volume of business will increase because 

the period of time the stores are open will be lengthened. I submit that business volume is dependent on the 

economic conditions, not the length of hours stores remain open. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — If the volume of business depends on the hours the stores are open, then surely in the dirty 

thirties we should have had tremendous prosperity because most of the stores remained open until 12 o'clock 

every night. 



February 15, 1965 

 

283 

Another thing that I am afraid of, Mr. Speaker, is that many of our towns and villages, particularly in communities 

closer to the major centres will become ghost towns. I am wondering who really is asking for the night opening 

other than some of the large chain companies. I wonder whether this is something that the government is prepared 

to do in order to pay some of its political debt. Mr. Speaker, I am opposed to the proposition of night openings 

and I urge the government to give this matter further consideration. Certainly the people of Saskatchewan are not 

advocating the extension of retail shopping hours. 

 

There are many other areas that I would like to discuss, Mr. Speaker, and I will be discussing them at a later date. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Save them up . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, no . . . 

 

Mr. Smishek: — I would like to urge the Minister of Public Health that immediate consideration be given by his 

department to the building of a Provincial Hospital in the city of Regina. I know that this is something the people 

of Regina are very much concerned about. I would also ask the government to reconsider their position in respect 

of drugs. I know that they all voted against the provision of free drugs the other day, even though it was part of 

their political promise. 

 

I certainly hope that there will be some proposals to relieve municipal taxes. And I hope that some consideration 

will be given to the development of a public housing program in both urban and rural communities. 

 

There are many areas, Mr. Speaker, in which, I submit, the Throne Speech is deficient, and I would hope in the 

days ahead that the government will take some advice from this side of the house and do some positive things for 

the people of this province. 

 

As you will have gathered, Mr. Speaker, I will support the amendment and I will oppose the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, to rise and endorse the first Speech from the Throne of the 

new Liberal government is at once a thrill and a pleasure that is surely the goal of every Canadian, — every 

Canadian that is conscious of his responsibilities in a free society. 
 

I have listened with interest, with awareness, and with enthusiasm, to the presentations of my colleagues on both 

sides of the house, and particularly those new members, who like myself are venturing forth in their first baptism 

of parliamentary life. 
 

As the member for the constituency of Milestone, I take pride in representing a constituency that is symbolic of 

rural Saskatchewan. Its boundaries stretch from no. 13 highway to the south to no. 1 and no. 33 highways to the 

north. It stretches on the west to the doorsteps of Moose Jaw and on the east to the doorsteps of Weyburn. Its 

farms include those that are the real breadbasket of Western Canada, the Soo Line. They .are the epitome of 

progress and efficiency in Canada's adaptation to modern methods. It is made up of people of every national, 

cultural and religious background that make up the Canada that we are so proud of. 
 

In viewing the Throne Speech itself, I find a change from Throne Speeches of the past, a change that is refreshing, 

a change that is clear and distinct, a change of substance, a change of kind, not of degree, a change that clearly 

indicates of change of government, that repudiates Socialism and speaks out with the strongest convictions of the 

superiority of free, responsible enterprise and the management of our affairs. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. MacDonald: — It is a scathing indictment of the policies of the previous government and of their failure to 

keep Saskatchewan moving in the current of national progress. Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne 

established with clarity the basic differences between the NDP government of the past and the new Liberal 

government of the day. It has critically 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

284 

examined the records of the past. Some of the records, Mr. Speaker, sifted the good from the bad, offered positive 

solutions to past failures. It has recognized that over the past twenty years progress has been made in many fields. 

It also recognizes that Saskatchewan has a long and difficult road ahead. It recognizes that in many areas the NDP 

has neglected, ignored, and shunted them aside. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before going on I would like to comment for a few moments on the political repertoire of this house. 

First of all, I regret that the member for Arm River (Mr. Pederson) is not in his seat because I enjoyed his 

recommendations on the behavior of the house and somehow I feel that on his mission of mercy to eastern Canada 

last weekend, in all probability his national leader, and his national executive, passed those recommendations on 

to him. They are fast gaining a reputation for harmony and good fellowship. 

 

I also enjoyed the caustic wit and the venom of the tongue, of the member for Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank). I must 

say that even though the entertainment was good, I was certainly not impressed by the ideas presented. 

 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Acting leader of the Opposition): — . . . didn't expect you to be . . . 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — I noticed also that in chastising the members of this side of the house for 

reading their speeches, he failed to look down the aisles at his own members, and I might also say that I thought 

he was a pretty good reader. He read something close to the neighborhood of one-hundred press clippings. I regret 

that he passed on no ideas of his own. 

 

I would also like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I was rather embarrassed by the ridicule handed to our good neighbors 

to the south, not only by the member from Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank) but the member from Regina East and other 

members opposite. I come from a constituency in southern Saskatchewan and, let me tell you, I am proud of the 

association with our neighbors in Montana. And I hope also that this good neighborhood policy will continue. I 

was rather proud that the Premier of Saskatchewan was invited south to speak to two houses of the parliament of 

Montana. I pass on, for the information of the members opposite, that Goldwaterism in Montana is a strange 

animal, because both houses of parliament in that State are democratic. I would like to also suggest that I was 

under the impression that they had rather a great love for democracy or the democratic party. A couple of years 

ago, they stole their name. 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . didn't do them any good. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — I would also like to mention, Mr. Chairman, that there has been a great number 

of references to the past and continually referring to the depression of the 1930's. Well, I can suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, that the members on that side of the house might well notice if they look at this side of the house, there 

are many of us here that do not remember, that we are young, we are optimistic, and we are filled with hope for 

the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — And I would also suggest, Mr. Speaker, that I hold no animosity for the past, 

for the contribution of my father, or my relatives, or my neighbors, in building up the province of Saskatchewan 

over those long and difficult years. 

 

I cannot help but refer to some of the comments of the member for Regina East (Mr. Smishek) who just sat down. 

I would like to make one correction in a statement he made. The lights in the S.P.C. went on on April 22, not on 

December 16th. As I listened to his dissertation on monopoly, monopolistic enterprises, and his vicious attack on 

investment, I could not help but think of another chap, that made another speech in another assembly, the only 

difference was he took off his shoe and pounded the table. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — Birds of a feather. 



February 15, 1965 

 

285 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — I might also suggest. Mr. Speaker, that in his reference to the Chambers of 

Commerce and the encouragement of all organizations and individuals to participate in politics, I would suggest 

to him, that we on this side of the house agree with him. And we would encourage all students, all organizations, 

all classes of society, to participate in every way, shape and form. But I would also like to point out that we on 

this side of the house do not believe that we should tell them how they should participate or that we should tell 

them how much we should contribute to that organization. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Hit them over the head, Cy. Keep . . . 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — I would also like to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that I did not appreciate the reference 

to J.C. — not only to the Premier or to any member of this house. I have a particular pride in my Premier, I have a 

particular pride for sitting in this house, and I have a particular pride for belonging to this assembly, and I hope it 

is the last reference of that kind that we will hear in this four-year period. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — I would also like to point out that we do not attack trade union members, or do 

we attack the workers of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — But, Mr. Speaker, we do believe that governments and political parties have a 

responsibility to every group and every class in our society. And when labour union members stand up and speak 

on behalf of one party, and viciously attack a member of any government, it is no wonder the minister has 

reservations in relation to his trust and his co-operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I certainly would not like to throw this verbatim back and forth for the rest of the evening. I would 

like to suggest that if this has been an example of what is expected of labour union leaders in co-operation with 

government, then I can certainly understand the reservations made. 

 

I would also like to suggest that I would honestly and sincerely believe that any organization, whether it be 

labour, or whether it be business, or whether it be agricultural, would give an opportunity for any government, 

and any minister, to take action, before they were judged and criticized. And despite the play on words of the 

member from Regina East (Mr. Smishek), I would point out that the intent of that resolution was understood by 

every citizen of the province of Saskatchewan. Shortly after the election, the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, 

suggested to the people of Saskatchewan, that they would give this government and this minister an opportunity 

to act before they were judged. There has been no change in labour laws. There has been no legislation against 

labour. Where is their patience? What is their problem? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also find that I was rather interested in the comments of the member for Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank) 

when he took exception to the statement by my good friend on this side of the house, the member for Athabaska 

(Mr. Guy), that business and industry had been threatened and, as you recall, he said that he would like very much 

to have Mr. Winters sit on this, in this assembly, so that he might question him. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if I 

repeated the quote . . . 

 

Mr. (Kelsey): — On a point of privilege. He is not quoting Mr. Winters. I would like to see him appear before 

this assembly so we could question him, not to sit in this assembly. We've got too many Liberals now. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, if the member for Kelsey has a guilty conscience and he feels that 

the shoe fits, it is his privilege to wear it. 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

286 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! Hon. members have the right to be heard in silence from this house and not to 

have their speeches interrupted, particularly when they are maiden members giving their maiden speeches. When 

the member has been in this house long enough, he is the dean of this house and he knows that. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — On a point of order. I think a member has the right to rise . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Provided that the point of privilege isn't just to interrupt a member's maiden speech. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — No, I didn't do it for that purpose. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — With the member from Kelsey's permission, I will now carry on. I wonder . . . 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — On a point of privilege. The hon. member has no right to insinuate that he has to 

have my permission in this house to carry on. He should withdraw that remark. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — I will withdraw it. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Alright. 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, in referring to the fact that the member for Kelsey would like to 

have had Mr. Winters appear before this assembly for questioning, I wonder if he would like to have had Mr. 

Sproule, who is as you know, a consulting geologist with offices in Calgary, and a former employee of the 

Imperial Oil during the late 1930's and early 1940's. Speaking at the third international Williston Basin 

symposium in Regina, he gave credit to the past government. He said: 

 

Imperial Oil abandoned its exploration efforts in Saskatchewan in 1945, moved into Alberta as a result of the 

expropriation clause that was added at that time to the mineral resources regulations and to attempts of the 

newly elected government to expropriate healthy industries in Saskatchewan, including Imperial Oil. 

 

I wonder if Mr. Sproule could be present. I wonder also, if the manager of the box factory, and the woollen mill, 

and the tannery, would like to be present also. In fact, I wonder, if it was made voluntary, if we wouldn't have to 

move this assembly to Queen City Gardens. 

 

Perhaps one of the most disturbing features of the NDP is their complete acceptance of the status quo. In typical 

socialist fashion, they portray the Saskatchewan of the past twenty years as the Utopia of the western world, a 

province that has reached perfection in every field of political, social and economic development. Even more 

disturbing, is that some of them even believe their own assertions. 

 

Saskatchewan had developed its own type of socialist. He might be described as a man with one deaf ear and one 

blind eye, who is so possessed by his own ideas that he is unteachable by anyone but himself. A man who only 

half hears and half sees the world around him, because for half the time he is absorbed listening at the keyhole of 

his own mind, examining with fascination his own dream. From this dream comes his readiness to make use of 

everyone, to serve his own ends, his insistence on reshaping everything, that he only half sees and half hears to 

the model of his own ideas. They refuse to accept reality. They have not been disturbed, Mr. Speaker, over the 

loss of hundreds of thousands of our people over the past twenty years. The great majority of them are young and 

are talented people, our doctors, our engineers, our teachers, our accountants our skilled technicians, the very 

lifeblood of our province. They were not disturbed over the lack of industrial development. They were not 

disturbed that the great wealth of our natural resources was untapped and not used to build highways, schools and 

hospitals. They were not disturbed 



February 15, 1965 

 

287 

by the fact that revenue was spent on mineral resources that virtually dried up. They were not disturbed over the 

fact that Saskatchewan's people were the highest taxed people in Canada. 

 

They have been shut up in the shelter of their own snail and narrow portals and I suggest, Mr. Speaker, the first 

test of any government is the recognition of its own weakness and its own failures and its willingness to correct 

them when they become apparent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Socialists failed to realize that private enterprise is free enterprise. Free enterprise does not only 

mean freedom from government expropriation, government regimentation and government control. It means 

freedom to locate or not to locate, freedom to invest or not to invest, freedom to choose one province and not 

another. It is free to go where it is needed, where it is wanted and where it will be fairly treated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — The attitude of the NDP was the basic factor in destroying the confidence of 

private enterprise in Saskatchewan. It ignored the necessity of establishing faith and confidence and further 

undermined it by unwise actions. Indeed in Saskatchewan, where investment was most needed, we fell furthest 

behind. 

 

As a Liberal party, we were elected to the government on the promise of incentive and opportunity. Incentive to 

industry and opportunity for our people and in the first few months of operation, Saskatchewan has become 

known across the dominion of Canada as a good place to come to, to look at and to invest in. Mr. Speaker, this 

Speech from the Throne expresses the firm belief that free enterprise can and will do the job. We have heard in 

the past few days of this debate, great insinuations as to loss of services, and that we, as a government and as a 

party, are putting dollars before people. The Speech from the Throne states confidently that Saskatchewan's hope 

for expansion of schools, roads and hospitals of all kinds, depends upon the expansion of industry and the 

development of our resources. 

 

It recognizes for the first time in over twenty years, that the expansion of benefits and services is directly 

proportioned to the growth of the economy. It squarely faces the fact that taxation in Saskatchewan has reached 

the level that no longer can solutions to our problems be found by adding to the burden of taxation. New sources 

of revenue must be found. Population and employment must grow. Resources must be developed. Taxes that stifle 

the economy must be cut. 

 

Much has been said about this subject by our good friends opposite. In fact, I think, that the results of the last few 

months must have shaken even their most ardent admirers. Their only answer has been a camouflage of abuse and 

accusations, in hopes of covering up the failures and shortcomings of twenty years of socialism. They have tried 

to evaluate and equate economic progress with materialism. Our desire to broaden our tax base has been termed 

by the sophisticated theorists of Socialism as a greater interest in money than in people. 

 

The former Premier appeared on television with a balance scale, a doll and a pile of silver dollars and accused the 

Liberal government of putting dollars before people. I wonder that during the past twenty years, if dollars from 

people, hasn't been the guidepost of the NDP. Yes, Mr. Speaker, we are interested in dollars. Not dollars from the 

taxpayers pocket but dollars from gas, oil, coal, potash, lumber, pulp, paper, copper, lead, zinc, uranium, gold, — 

dollars to provide for the needs and the requirements of the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — It is most amazing how conveniently the NDP has 

forgotten to mention what use has been made of this increased revenue. They have ignored the fact, the fact that 

roads have been built, schools have been constructed, water and sewage facilities have been installed, grid roads 

have been expanded, bridges have been built. This is our interest in expanded revenue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, much has also been said in this debate about the problem of health in the province of Saskatchewan. 

I have been rather 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

288 

disappointed in the criticism of the opposition. No attempt has been made to grapple with the real problems facing 

health in the province of Saskatchewan. Up until this time, the only reference to the health services in the 

province of Saskatchewan has been a reference to the increase in the medicare premium and the possibility of 

including drugs in medicare. 

 

I want to take a few moments to comment on health services in this province and to discuss briefly some of the 

problems that have faced this new government. One of the major promises of the Liberal party, during the 

campaign of 1964, was that we would retain the medical care plan, expand it and improve it. Despite all that the 

former minister of health and that the leader of the opposition have said, despite all they have claimed in the past, 

despite their campaign of fear during the election, despite their claims of destruction, despite their distortion of 

fact, this has been done. As a party, we have always been in favor of medical insurance. We advocated it in 1960 

and again in 1964. We have, never-the-less, Mr. Speaker, been outspoken in the method of implementation. 

 

We have always felt that it was not necessarily the rules of the game, they could be adjusted to needs and to 

circumstances. What needed to be changed were the referees. We were dismayed at the hate, the division among 

our people, the disregard of individual rights, the deliberate malignment of an honored profession, the coercive 

methods used, the mistrust generated in the implementation of this plan. With an attitude akin to arrogance, the 

NDP considered opposition to any aspect as opposition to principle, any other plan as no plan, any proposed 

improvement as destruction, any criticism as adulteration, any modification as reduction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let our performance to this date be the criterion of the integrity of our word and the sincerity of our 

promise. There is no need for me to expound upon the advantages of medical insurance. All of this assembly 

recognize the advantages and benefits to the lower income groups. All of us recognize the peace of mind and the 

security that follows from every kind of insurance, and particularly in the field of health. But, Mr. Speaker, I want 

to point out to you, that the Saskatchewan Medical Care plan is now operating better than ever before. Our 

activity in this field has been directed to solving some of the problems faced when we took over on May 22. Our 

job has been to iron out the wrinkles, smooth out the problems, and place this program on a solid, firm, solvent 

foundation. 

 

Here are some of the problems the government faced on May 22. No. 1. The need to restore the partnership in 

health care between the doctors, on one side, and the government on the other side. We are convinced that the 

medical profession has a sincere desire to fulfil its responsibilities in the best interests of the public. The problem 

of controlling the increasing costs of the plan and this problem is located in two areas. A. The medical problem of 

over-servicing, where doctors are offering services not required by the patient. All of us can recognize, with the 

individual freedom within the plan, that this is a danger and that some method must be found to check and 

eliminate that danger. B. The common problem of over-utilization. The medical care plan is like a credit card with 

no responsibility to pay at the end of the month. It might be compared to a man who walked into one doctor's 

office, didn't like the doctor, went to another doctor's office, didn't like that doctor, went to a third doctor's office 

and with no one to check and supervise his personal conduct. It might also be compared to a man that entered 

Simpsons to buy a refrigerator and because he liked the color, he bought three, because he didn't have to pay the 

bills at the end of the month. 

 

I point out that these two problems are related. They go hand in hand and it is important to remember that the 

medical profession can curb over-servicing, but not over-utilization. The hope in this regard is a well-informed 

and conscientious public. And I would hope that every effort will be taken by this government to inform and to 

put before the people, the problem and the responsibility on their behalf. 

I would also like to say that in this session of this legislature, we will be asked to approve changes in the Medical 

Profession Act which will make it possible for the medical profession to curb over-servicing. 

 

I would like to say also that the third problem in medical care is the problem, or was the problem of community 

clinic doctors. 

 

When we took office we found a situation that was unbelievable, 



February 15, 1965 

 

289 

a situation in which the medical profession and the Department of Public Health viewed each other with 

suspicion, with distrust, and with complete animosity, like two enemies held at by only by the barbed wire of 

public opinion. An iron curtain had fallen over health between the medical profession and the department. 

Imagine the government on one side, whose responsibility it was to supervise and regulate the plan, and on the 

other side the medical profession, whose responsibility it is to provide the services. Those on the outside, of 

course, were the people of Saskatchewan. And Mr. Speaker, what was the cause of the separation? I have here a 

clipping from the Leader Post, which is under the heading, "Walker declares medicare none of doctors' business". 

It stated: 

 

Speaking at a political rally in Borden Wednesday night, Mr. Walker said, that as far as the doctors are 

concerned, the medicare plan is really none of their business. 

 

Well, I am a school teacher, Mr. Speaker. Is education part of my business? I wonder in the legal profession, is 

justice part of their business? Mr. Speaker, I would glad to table this so that everybody would have an opportunity 

to look at it. 

 

If any single factor, Mr. Speaker, is significant in the field of health in Saskatchewan today, it is the fact that the 

Department of Health and the doctors of Saskatchewan must be partners, not enemies, in the administration of 

medical care. Instant co-operation between the medical profession and the Department of Health and, of course, 

Saskatchewan's people are the beneficiaries. The medical care crisis disappeared as if by magic on May 22. 

 

All of us have read the article in the Regina Leader Post two days ago. "Medicare Shifts please the Profession". 

Much of the credit for this new spirit of trust and co-operation must be given to the hon. Dave Steuart, Minister of 

Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — With patience, with understanding and with firmness, he set out to destroy the 

suspicion, the distrust and the bigotry that existed in Saskatchewan over the past two and one-half years. The 

peace that now reigns over medicare in Saskatchewan is due to his dedication and his determination. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new spirit of co-operation is carrying very tangible results for the benefit of Saskatchewan 

citizens, in the quality of service, the cost of administration, and the recruitment of doctors. The government and 

the medical profession have agreed to sit down together to discuss with one another and work out the problems 

that face medical care. Many exploratory meetings have already been held between the college and the 

government, with many positive suggestions put forth by both sides. 

 

The No. 1 and perhaps the most significant development in medicare in the past two and one-half years is that a 

professional review committee has been set up by the doctors themselves, not by the government, to study and 

evaluate patterns of utilization, patterns of cost, and patterns of administration. It is gratifying to see the interest 

and concern of the medical profession itself, and the problem of getting the best possible results from the health 

dollars spent in Saskatchewan. It is gratifying to realize that after two and one-half years of conflict, abuse, and in 

many cases, personal persecution, that these men are co-operating in every possible way to improve the standard 

of health care in Saskatchewan and to bring the cost within reason. 

 

They, as a profession, hope that this professional review committee will come forth with many positive 

conclusions and practical suggestions for immediate implementation to assist in the control of rising costs of 

medicare. It is their hope, Mr. Speaker, to tackle at once the problem of over-servicing. It is their firm conviction 

that, by their efforts, close to two per cent of the increased costs of medicare in Saskatchewan in 1965 can be cut, 

with no loss of service or of benefits. We, as a government, are most impressed with the real effort on the part of 

the medical profession in accepting their public responsibilities. 

 

We are also finding a marked change in the attitude of both the general practitioner and the specialist, in regard to 

coming into Saskat- 



February 15, 1965 

 

 

290 

chewan and hanging out their shingles. We are still far below the national average, as to the ratio of physician to 

population. In Saskatchewan, the ratio is one doctor to every 973 people, as compared to one doctor to every 857 

for Canada as a whole. According to the Registrar of the College of Physicians and Surgeons, at the present time, 

we have 998 doctors registered in Saskatchewan as compared to 881 during the 1962 crisis. Of those, 595 are 

general practitioners and 258 are specialist. 

 

The second major concern of our government is that the costs of medical care and hospitalization are continuing 

to rise at an alarming rate. It appears, Mr. Speaker, that the costs of medicare in 1964 will be close to 

$23,500,000, as compared to $21,443,000 in 1963, a rise of close to eight per cent even when adjusted for 

expanded benefits. 

 

Hospitalization costs are estimated to be close to $49,000,000 in 1964 as compared to $43,466,000 in 1963. If 

they continue to rise at an estimated six per cent, medicare will cost in 1965 close to $25,000,000, and 

hospitalization will cost close to $53,500,000. The cost of medical and hospital care is expected to continue to 

rise. The extent to which it will rise is determined, of course, by how effectively we utilize the resources at our 

disposal. 

 

With the advance of medical science and knowledge, the gap in the application of that science, and the extreme 

difficulty in automating these services, because they are human services, will, of course, magnify this increase. 

All these factors place an increasing responsibility on the government to obtain maximum value for the health 

dollar spent. 

 

Much has been said during this debate, Mr. Speaker, about the rise in the rates of medical and hospital insurance 

in Saskatchewan. It might be interesting to look back on the history of these rates. Let me review them for you — 

in 1947 it started off with the individual — $5, the family rate — $30. There was an election in 1948, and in 1949 

they raised the rate for an individual to $10. In 1952 there was another election and in 1954 they raised the rate to 

$15 for an individual and $40 for the family. In 1956 there was another election and in 1957 they raised the 

individual rate to $20 and the family rate to $45. Then in 1949 before the election, they reduced the individual 

rate to $17.50 and the family rate to $35. In 1960 there was another election and then in 1961 they raised the cost 

to $24 for an individual and to $48 for a family, and, of course, Mr. Speaker, we are all aware of what happened 

in 1964. Just prior to the election, they reduced the cost for the individual from $36 to $26, the family from $72 to 

$52. 

 

I might also remind you that for many months these premiums were collected without any benefits being offered. 

Is there any member of this house that doubts that in the month of May, or in the month of July, or in the month of 

August, that these rates of $52 per family would have been raised to $72? And if the past is any indication, might 

they not have been raised to $75 or $80? They have been down, and up and up, down and up and up, like the 

elevator in Simpson's the day before Christmas. The amazing coincidence is that each time they went down, it 

was just before an election, and each time they went up it was just after an election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — . . . and, Mr. Speaker, at no time during, this aerial circus were the costs of 

hospitalization going down but were continuing to rise at an alarming rate. We have heard the members of the 

opposition suggest that because of the expansion of Saskatchewan's economy, that we should never have raised 

the medical care rates last fall. I could not help but wonder what was the cause given for the rise of the rates 

during their terms of office, so I looked back in the journals of the eleventh legislative assembly in 1949. I looked 

up what Mr. Douglas (Premier) had to say about the economy, and here is what he said: 

 

I believe that the next five or ten years will see a tremendous period of expansion and development in this 

province, and that Saskatchewan may well become known to the North American continent as the centre of a 

great concentration of wealth in the form of minerals and natural gas. 

 

But what did he say about the reason for raising hospitalization rates in 



February 15, 1965 

 

291 

the same year? Mr. Douglas stated that the reason for the rise in hospital rates in 1949 were: 

 

Rising costs of hospital operation, which find a direct reflection in the costs of servicing the plan, was given by 

the Premier as the principle reason for the increase. 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — What do you think of that, Toby? 

 

Mr. MacDonald (Milestone): — In 1949, Mr. Speaker, the hospitalization cost was $7,500,000 — in 1965 it will 

cost close to $49,000,000. A rise of close to 700 per cent. I hope that the barometer of medical care premiums in 

Saskatchewan under a Liberal government will, of course, always be the costs of the plan and not political 

expediency. Mr. Speaker, I would say on finishing my speech, that I will certainly support the motion and vote 

against the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Robert H. Wooff (Turtleford): — I would like to adjourn the debate, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The assembly adjourned at 10:00 o’clock p.m. 


